                   Understanding Drawings by Compositional Analogy

                                Patrick W. Yaner    and  Ashok K. Goel
                         College of Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology
                                        Atlanta, GA 30332-0280
                                      {yaner,goel}@cc.gatech.edu

                    Abstract
    We describe an analogical method for constructing
    a structural model from an unlabelled 2D line draw-
    ing. The source case is represented as a schema
    that contains its 2D line drawing, the lines and in-
    tersections in the drawing, the shapes in drawing,
    and the structural model of the device depicted in     a
    the drawing. Given a target drawing and a relevant
    source case, our method ﬁrst constructs a graphical
    representation of the lines and the intersections in
    the target drawing, then uses the mappings at the
    level of line intersections to transfer the shape rep-
    resentations from the source case to the target, next
    uses the mappings at the level of shapes to transfer
    the structural model of the device from the source
    to the target. The Archytas system implements and      b
    evaluates this method of compositional analogy.
                                                      Figure 1: (a) A sample source drawing of a piston and
                                                      crankshaft assembly. (b) A target drawing of the same de-
1  Motivation and Goals                               vice with the piston now at the top of its range of motion.
We view the task of interpreting drawings as one of construct-
ing a model of what the drawing depicts; the model enables
higher-level (i.e. non-visual) inferences regarding the de- drawing; at best there are only ﬁrst-order spatial relations be-
picted content of the drawing. For example, in the context of tween geometric elements. Further, in this context the map-
CAD environments, the input to the task may be an unanno- ping is no longer the principal product of the analogy; our
tated 2-D vector graphics line drawing depicting a kinemat- goal is not to align two representations exactly and infer a
ics device, and the output may be a structural model of the single additional relation in the target, but to transfer an en-
device, i.e. a speciﬁcation of the conﬁguration of the compo- tire structural model of a device depicted in a drawing, which
nents and connections in the device. Current methods [Fergu- may involve many relations. What we need for this is (1)
son and Forbus, 2000; Alvarado and Davis, 2001] for extract- a method of analogically recognizing the shapes in the target
ing a model from a drawing rely on domain-speciﬁc rules. drawing, and (2) a scheme for organizing the shape and struc-
In this paper, we propose to derive a model by analogy to a tural models of a source drawing in such a way as to enable
similar drawing whose model is known. This requires (1) an transfer of the structural model based on shape-level differ-
analogical mapping from the source (known) to the target (in- ences between the target and the source drawings.
put) drawing on the basis of shapes and spatial relations, and Let us consider the task of mapping the source drawing il-
(2) transfer and adaptation of the model of the source drawing lustrated in ﬁgure 1(a) to the similar target drawing illustrated
to the target.                                        in ﬁgure 1(b) (ﬁgure 2 shows two more target drawings). If
  Structure-mapping theory [Falkenhainer et al., 1990] views we have a low-level geometric reasoner to recognize the ge-
analogy-based comprehension as a process of mapping in- ometric elements and spatial relations among them, then we
dividual relations from the source to the target. Candidate can treat this representation as a labelled graph: A contains B,
inferences about these mappings are guided by higher-order C is adjacent to D, and so on. A graph-theoretic method for
relations such as causal relations. While this works well in analogy-based recognition may then be used to ﬁnd a con-
certain domains, there are no clear higher-order relations in sistent mapping between the graphs representing the source
the geometric and spatial information explicitly encoded in a and target drawings. However, the method runs into difﬁculty

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1131    a


      b
                                                      Figure 4: The multi-level hierarchy of drawing, basic shapes,
Figure 2: (a) and (b) illustrate two additional target drawings. and composite shapes, related to the structural model on
The U-shaped cylinder in (a) is made up of three rectangles, the left with its components and connections between com-
but is a single polygon in (b), and also is thinner in (b) than ponents. Basic shapes depict components, and composite
in (a).                                               shapes, made up of basic shapes, depict connections between
                                                      components.

                                                      thus happen iteratively in a loop, working up to each subse-
                                                      quent level of abstraction.
                                                        The Archytas system implements our method of compo-
  a                                                   sitional analogy. Although analogical reasoning in general
                                                      involves the tasks of retrieval, mapping, transfer, evaluation,
                                                      and storage, Archytas presently implements only the tasks of
                                                      mapping and transfer. So, given a target drawing, Archytas
                                                      already knows of the source drawings relevant to the target.

  b                                                   2   Structural and Shape Models
                                                      The structure, shape, and drawing in a source case form an
Figure 3: (a) a sample target drawing of a two piston and abstraction hierarchy. The structural model is a speciﬁcation
crankshaft assembly, and (b) a sample target drawing with of components and structural relations, along with properties
two crankshafts and a single piston. In both cases, the source (height, width, etc.) and variable parameters (e.g. position,
is from ﬁgure 1(a).                                   angle) of each. This structural model is similar to the repre-
                                                      sentation of structure in Structure-Behavior-Function models
                                                      [Goel and Chandrasekaran, 1989]. Figure 5 illustrates the
for the target drawings shown in ﬁgure 3 with ﬁgure 1(a) as graph representing the connections among the components in
the source drawing. In this problem, the number of compo- the structural model of the piston and crankshaft device in
nents, and thus the number of shapes, is different, and either ﬁgure 1(a). In addition, for each component, the user spec-
the graph-theoretic method would have to relax the constraint iﬁes the coordinates of a basic shape corresponding to that
of one-to-one mapping, or else the analogy would have to component, and for each structural relation (or connection),
be performed twice in order to transfer a model successfully the user speciﬁes a composite shape as a composition of basic
from ﬁgure 1(a) to either ﬁgure 3(a) or (b).          shapes depicting the components involved in the connection.
  To address the above difﬁculties, our method of composi- This produces the drawing/shape/structure abstraction hierar-
tional analogy performs analogy at multiple levels of abstrac- chy shown in ﬁgure 4.
tion. Figure 4 illustrates the organization of the knowledge
in the source case. The structural model of the device in the 2.1 Lines, Circles, Arcs, and Intersections
source drawing speciﬁes the components of the depicted de- The ﬁrst step of the process is to match each shape in the
vice and their interconnections. This model is related to the source to the target drawing. We thus need a robust and
drawing via the intermediate abstraction of a shape model. canonical representation of shapes, one that is robust in face
Our method ﬁrst gathers individual lines and circles and inter- of the visual binding problem: line segments should match re-
section points into shapes, and then ﬁnds mappings between gardless of whether they are drawn in the vector graphics ﬁle
the source and the target at this level of intersections. Then, it as a single vector or as ten. For instance, the rectangle corre-
groups these mappings and transfers shapes from the source sponding to the upper half of the cylinder in ﬁgure 1(a) might
to the target. Next, it ﬁnds a mapping at the shape level, and be drawn as four perpendicular lines, or it might be six lines
ﬁnally transfers the structural model. Mapping and transfer (if the edge touching the piston is three segments instead of

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1132                                                         a


Figure 5: An illustration of the structural model, where
rounded boxes represent components and ovals represent con-
nections between components. Properties and variable pa-
rameters of components are speciﬁed in slot values for each
component frame.                                         b

                                                      Figure 6: An example of (a) a line drawing of a piston and
one); the shape must match either way. This is achieved using crankshaft with ﬁll patterns and layering ignored (as they are
the graph-theoretic notion of an intersection graph.  in Archytas), and (b) its corresponding line intersection graph
  Archytas takes each line segment and circle and circular representation: L stand for for line, C for circle, A for arc
arc as a set of geometric points in the plane, S = {1,...,k}, (edge labels have been omitted for clarity). In addition, each
     2
i ⊂ R , and treats each one as the vertex of a line intersection bounded region (or face) is represented as a separate node
graph G =(V,E,L), V(G)=S, and adds an edge e ∈ E(G)   (not shown) linked to the vertices and edges on its boundary.
between two i,j whenever i ∩ j = ∅. That is, each set (line The dotted lines indicate collinear but disconnected lines.
segment, etc.) is a vertex, and there is an edge between two
vertices whenever the two corresponding sets intersect. Each 2.2 Basic and Composite Shapes
edge e ∈ E(G) is labelled by a point L(e)=p, p ∈ i ∩ j,so
that the graph is a multigraph in general, with multiple edges Depending on the perspective of the drawing, a particular
distinguished by point labels (which is important since circles component may be depicted by an actual shape, regarded as a
can intersect lines or other circles at two points). A shape is set of connected lines or arcs, or not at all. When a component
treated as a subgraph of this representation, so the mapping is depicted by a shape, which is a subgraph Si of the intersec-
process looks for these shapes as subgraphs of the target. tion graph. Each component in the model shown in ﬁgure 5 is
                                                      linked to a subgraph of the intersection graph called a “basic
  Archytas thus represents the intersections between the ba- shape”. A connection between components in the model is a
sic elements of a 2D line drawing (line segments, circles and union of several entities, and so each connection is linked to
circular arcs) using this graph. It ﬁrst reads in a drawing; a subgraph called a “composite shape.” A composite shape is
ﬁll patterns and layering are ignored, so after pre-processing, a union of two or more “basic shapes”, forming a larger sub-
the input drawings to Archytas look like 6(a). Line segments graph of the intersection graph. This forms the multi-level
are taken as maximally connected collinear segments, and hierarchy shown in ﬁgure 4.
likewise for cocircular connected arcs, while Archytas cal-
culates all the intersection points between them. These ele-
ments form the vertices V of the line intersection graph, and 3 Analogical Mapping and Transfer
the intersection points the labelled edges. Figure 6(b) shows The goal of the mapping stage is to align shapes in the repre-
an example of a line intersection graph.              sentations of the source and target drawings by ﬁnding corre-
  The line intersection graph represents the most basic topo- spondences between the basic and composite shapes in their
logical information in the drawing. To reduce the search augmented line intersection graphs. In particular, Archytas
space for analogical mapping, Archytas augments this graph attempts to ﬁnd mappings from each basic and composite
with additional spatial information. Firstly, since each inter- shape to some subgraph of the target drawing’s line intersec-
section is a pair of line (or arc) sets, Archytas adds a ﬂag tion graph. Here the mapping must be exact: each element of
on each edge (intersection) indicating when those lines are the shape description must match, and so the algorithm is one
perpendicular. This prevents Archytas from matching, say, a of subgraph isomorphism.
rectangle to a rhombus. Secondly, each topological face in The source drawing is divided into basic and composite
the drawing bounded by a cycle of line and arc sets is repre- shapes. The drawing in ﬁgure 1(a), for instance, has the fol-
sented as a special vertex linked to the points and lines on its lowing depicted components, each of which has one basic
boundary. This represents the planar dual of the input draw- shape associated with it: (i) piston, (ii) connecting rod, (iii)
ing (regarded as a plane graph).                      crankshaft, and (iv) cylinder. In addition, the following struc-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1133Figure 7: The multi-level hierarchy shown in ﬁgure 4 is transferred onto the target by ﬁrst generating the line intersection
graph of the input drawing, and then matching ﬁrst composite shapes and then, when two composites overlap appropriately,
basic shapes. Each basic and composite shape implies a component and structural relation, respectively, thereby suggesting a
hypothetical structural model of the target.

tural relations are shown in the drawing, each of which has shape. Thus, if we chose the wrong pair, we might get two
a composite shape associated with it: (i) cylindrical joint be- pistons instead of one, with one connected to the connecting
tween piston and cylinder, (ii) revolute joint between piston rod, and the other connected to the cylinder. This is clearly
and connecting rod, and (iii) revolute joint between connect- an error of reasoning.
ing rod and crankshaft. Thus there are three composite shapes Note that the various mappings of a single shape in the
that overlap with four basic shapes. The crankcase and it’s target are symmetric. To see this, let m1,m2 : S → T be two
structural relations, recall, are undepicted.         mappings for a shape, where S =(V,E) is the source shape,
  In order to match these shapes to either ﬁgure 1(b) or ﬁg- and T =(V,E) is the target intersection graph (leaving aside
ure 3(a), Archytas ﬁrst begins by trying to compute a sub- the edge labels for a moment). In general, m1 and m2 may
graph isomorphism from each composite shape to the target map the source shape onto different areas of the target, but if
intersection graph. Upon ﬁnding these, Archytas breaks the they do not, they still may be incompatible, for instance, with
composite shape mappings into corresponding basic shape          m1(a)=xm2(a)=y
mappings, so that when two composites with a basic shape
                                                                 m  (b)=ym(b)=x
in common overlap in the mapping as well, that basic shape         1                   2
can be inferred of the target.                        If such a relationship generalizes across a pair of mappings
  Stated more formally, let’s say a composite source shape then the mappings are symmetric in a certain sense. This is
SX is made up of two basic shapes SA and SB,sothatSX = important from the perspective of transfer: the target shape
SA ∪ SB, and another source composite shape SY is made up will be identical with both mappings, so they are effectively
                       1                                                           ,      →
of two others, SY = SB ∪ SC. Thus, the overlap between the equivalent. So, two mappings mi m j : S T are symmet-
two composites is just the basic shape they have in com- ric (and, thus, equivalent from the perspective of transfer)
                                                               ( )=     (  )          (  )
mon: S  ∩ S  = S . Then, when we have two mappings    when Rng mi    Rng m j ,whereRngm   is the range of m:
      X    Y    B                                         ( )={    ∃ ,  ( )=  }
m(SX ) and m(SY ), we can look for an overlap between them, Rng m y : x m x  y . Another way of saying this is
m(SX ) ∩ m(SY ), and when we do, we should expect it to be a that the two mappings are permutations of each other.
valid mapping of the basic shape SB,thatism(SX )∩m(SY )= We can then group symmetric mappings into sets. If GX
m(SB). This may not be true, but when it is, we can infer by is a set of symmetric mappings for composite shape SX ,and
analogy that the basic shapes S , S ,andS as well as the composite shape SX is composed of basic shapes SA and SB,
                          A   B      C                                    ∈
composites SX and SY are present in the target.       then each mapping mi  GX can be divided into two map-
                                                      pings for the basic shapes, mi,A and mi,B, and that for every
3.1  Symmetric Mappings                               such division, the mi,A and mi,B will be in the same symmet-
In ﬁgure 1(a), the composite shape corresponding to the ric mapping sets GA and GB. With this in mind, Archytas can
piston-cylinder connection has four potential mappings onto compute all mappings of each composite shape in the target,
the target 1(b). The piston/connecting-rod connection has and divide them into these sets of symmetric mappings. For
two rectangles and some circles as its constituents, and there each such set, Archytas can compute the sets of symmetric
are again four mappings to the target, but not each of them basic shape mappings that each composite mapping can be
overlaps properly with each mapping for the piston-cylinder divided into, and then transfer one composite shape in the
                                                      target for each composite shape mapping set, and one basic
  1Strictly speaking, the composition of two basic shapes may con- shape for each basic shape mapping set. The algorithms are
tain additional edges not in either basic shape, and so SA ∪ SB ⊆ SX presented in the next section.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  11343.2  Shape Mapping and Transfer                          shape-analogy (B,C,T )
                                                         Input:   source basic shapes B
The goal of the shape transfer algorithm is to structure the                           C
target drawing: that is, to use patterns to divide the lines and  source composite shapes
intersections into basic and composite shapes, which inform       target line intersection graph T
Archytas of visual patterns depicting components and struc- Output: shape-level mapping M from source shapes
tural relations. It is important to compute all the mappings of   to new target shapes
a given shape so that all the relationships can be found. Each
                                                               G   = ∅ {                     }
mapping group informs a new shape in the target. The result 1: Let B    Basic shape mapping sets
                                                               G   = ∅ {                         }
is a shape-level mapping: a mapping at the level of whole 2: Let C      Composite shape mapping sets
                                                                  = ∅ {                  }
shapes rather than individual lines and intersection points. 3: Let M  Shape-level mapping
                                                                     ∈ C
From here, the transfer of structural elements—components 4: for each C  do
                                                                                            →
and structural relations—can take place.                  5:  Find all consistent mappings mC : C T
                                                                                               ∈ C
  The algorithm for shape matching is a basic backtrack-  6: for each composite shape mapping mC, C do
                                                                   ,   ∈ B
ing constraint satisfaction algorithm with one modiﬁcation: 7: Let Bi B j  be the basic shapes of which C is
all assignments of values to variables are returned instead   composed
                                                                     = {( , ) ∈     ∈   }
of just the ﬁrst one found. The variables are the intersec- 8: Let mBi   x y   mC : x Bi
                                                          9:  Let m  = {(x,y) ∈ m : x ∈ B }
tion points ep ∈ E(S) of the source composite shape, treated       B j          C       j
as edge units together with the pair of line segments or arcs 10: Find the basic shape mapping set for each of mBi ,
                                                              m   in GB, creating a new one if none is found,
that the intersection connects, ep = i j, i,j ∈ V(S).For    B j
e ,e ∈ E(S) and e ,e ∈ E(T ),wheree =   , e =   ,         adding each mapping to its respective set
 p q            r  s              p    i j q    j k                   ∈ G
e =   , e =   ,and , , ∈ V(S) are distinct, two in- 11: Find GC   C by the same procedure
 r   x y s   w z      i j k                                            ∈ G
dividual maps or assignments,                            12: for each GB  B do
                                                         13:  Let mB be any mapping in GB
                   m(  ) 
→  
                      i j    x y                         14:  Let E = {e ∈ E(T) : ∃x ∈ E(S), mB(x)=e}
                   m( jk) 
→ wz                      15:  Let V = {v ∈ V(T ) : ∃y ∈ V(S), mB(y)=v}
                                                         16:  Let TB =(E,V) be a new target basic shape
are consistent when |{x,y}∩{w,z}| = 1, that is, when they
                                                         17:  Create a new shape-level map M(B) 
→ TB
have exactly one line or arc set in common (since the source           ∈ G
intersections have exactly one such line/arc set in common, 18: for each GC C do
                                                         19:  Let mC be any mapping in GC
namely  j). For instance, if y = w, but the rest of the tar-
                                                         20:  Let E = {e ∈ E(T) : ∃x ∈ E(S), mC(x)=e}
get vertices are distinct, the two maps are consistent. Here,      = {  ∈  ( )  ∃ ∈  ( ),   ( )=  }
the mapping is actually a two-level mapping: there is the 21: Let V    v  V T  : y  V S  mC  y   v
                                                         22:  Let TC =(E,V) be a new target composite shape
edge mapping with m(ep) 
→ er and m(eq) 
→ es,andthere
                                                         23:  Create a new shape-level map M(C) 
→ TC
is the implied vertex mapping m(i)=x, m( j)=y = w
                                                         24: Return M
and m(k)=z.
  In addition to this, for m(a)=x, m(b)=y, a,b ∈ E(S),
x,y ∈ E(T ),ifa,b are both on the boundary of a common
face or region in the drawing, so must x,y in the target. Fi- Table 1: Algorithm: computes a shape analogy: a mapping
nally, there are two singulary constraints: (1) perpendicu- and transfer ﬁrst of individual shapes and, once transferred, a
lar intersections map to perpendicular intersections, but non- mapping of the source shapes to the newly instantiated target
perpendicular intersections map to either perpendicular or shapes.
non-perpendicular intersections, and (2) lines only map to
lines, circles to circles, and arcs to arcs.          Note that, in general, this shape-level mapping will not be
  With all this, we are all set to state the shape transfer algo- one-to-one, and this is part of the idea for mapping from ﬁg-
rithm. The outline of the algorithm is as follows:    ure 1(a) to ﬁgure 3(a) or (b) could be found. This algorithm
 1. Apply each composite shape, matching it to the tar- is described in detail in table 1.
    get drawing as many times as possible using backtrack-
    ing constraint satisfaction with the composite shape ele- 3.3 Transfer of Structural Elements
    ments as variables, target intersection graph elements as
                                                      Once Archytas has a mapping between the basic and com-
    values, and matching graph structure as constraints.
                                                      posite shapes of the source drawing and newly instantiated
      • Group symmetric composite shape mappings      shapes of the target drawing, it needs to transfer the struc-
 2. For each composite shape mapping, break it into its ba- tural model from the source to the target. From these shape-
    sic shape mappings                                level mappings we can hypothesize that if two shapes match
      • Group symmetric basic shape mappings          then they should therefore depict the same component, and
                                                      likewise for composite shapes and connections. The steps
 3. For each set of symmetric basic and composite shape are to begin with the mapped shapes, and transfer the com-
    mappings, instantiate a new shape in the target drawing ponents and connections depicted by those mapped shapes,
 4. Return a mapping from the source shapes to the target reconstructing the model iteratively.
    shapes that each one instantiated                   As input to the structure transfer process, Archytas has a set

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1135