      Improving Activity Discovery with Automatic Neighborhood Estimation

                    David Minnen, Thad Starner, Irfan Essa, and Charles Isbell
                                    Georgia Institute of Technology
                                     GVU / College of Computing
                                {dminn,thad,irfan,isbell}@cc.gatech.edu


                    Abstract                          “most of the intellectual work in AI is done not by programs
                                                      but by their creators, and virtually all the work involved in
    A fundamental problem for artiﬁcial intelligence  specifying the meanings of representations is done by people,
    is identifying perceptual primitives from raw sen- not programs.” They adopt Fred Dretske’s theory of mean-
    sory signals that are useful for higher-level rea- ingful representation, positing that an internal state must both
    soning. We equate these primitives with initially indicate a condition and have the function of indicating that
    unknown recurring patterns called motifs. Au-     condition. Applying this theory to robotics, Cohen et al. con-
    tonomously learning the motifs is difﬁcult because clude that learning meaningful representations requires the
    their number, location, length, and shape are all un- robot to analyze its sensor readings to learn abstractions that
    known. Furthermore, nonlinear temporal warping    inform action. Similarly, we seek to design an activity discov-
    may be required to ensure the similarity of motif ery system that learns endogenously meaningful representa-
    occurrences. In this paper, we extend a leading   tions via unsupervised analysis of sensor data.
    motif discovery algorithm by allowing it to oper-   Our contributions are: (1) to extend the applicability of cur-
    ate on multidimensional sensor data, incorporating rent discovery algorithms, (2) to reduce the domain knowl-
    automatic parameter estimation, and providing for edge required of users, and (3) to improve performance of
    motif-speciﬁc similarity adaptation. We evaluate  both discovery accuracy and real-world execution time. Ap-
    our algorithm on several data sets and show how   plicability is extended by allowing discovery to work directly
    our approach leads to faster real world discovery with multidimensional data (see Section 4). Our approach
    and more accurate motifs compared to other lead-  achieves two additional improvements by automatically esti-
    ing methods.                                      mating the size of the neighborhood for each motif. First, the
                                                      user is no longer required to specify a parameter that is vi-
1  Introduction                                       tal to locating correct motif occurrences but which is highly
This paper addresses the problem of unsupervised discovery dependent on the domain and the distance metric used to mea-
of perceptual primitives from time-varying sensor data. Such sure subsequence similarity. Second, automatic estimation al-
data includes sensor readings collected by mobile robots, on- lows a different neighborhood size for each motif, something
body sensors, surveillance video, econometric data, and in- that is extremely difﬁcult to specify manually but which leads
dustrial diagnostic readings.                         to higher quality motifs in empirical tests (see Sections 4.1
  Perceptual primitives can be thought of as recurring pat- and 6). We also present several evaluation methods for motif
terns or motifs of the data; that is, they are sets of subse- discovery and discuss many of the semantic and application-
quences with high similarity. The goal of this work is to dis- speciﬁc issues involved in comparing different approaches
cover the motifs and the corresponding occurrences in real- (see Section 5).
valued, multivariate data. The problem is complicated be-
cause little is known about the motifs apriori. The number 2 Related Work
of motifs, number of occurrences, their length, shape, scale, Activity recognition is a supervised learning problem related
and the location of each occurrence are all unknown. Further- to activity discovery. Approaches often use complex mod-
more, motifs may only appear similar after nonlinear warp- els, including hidden Markov models (HMMs), switching lin-
ing, and the data may be corrupted by noise. Finally, any dis- ear dynamic systems, and stochastic grammars [Starner et al.,
covery algorithm must be efﬁcient, since even small data sets 1998; Pavlovic et al., 2000; Minnen et al., 2003]. Bao and In-
may have anywhere from a few thousand to several hundred tille [2004] provide a broad survey, comparing several meth-
thousand sensor readings. Thus, algorithms with quadratic ods for recognizing activities captured by on-body sensors.
space or time complexity are unacceptable for real applica- In the bioinformatics community, researchers have devel-
tions.                                                oped many approaches for discovering recurring patterns that
  We are inﬂuenced by the philosophical position articulated correspond to binding sites in nucleotide sequences. MEME
by Cohen et al. [2002]. In that work, the authors argue that uses expectation maximization (EM) to estimate the parame-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2814ters of a probabilistic model for each motif [Bailey and Elkan,
1994]. GEMODA uniﬁes several previous discovery meth-
ods, but the algorithm has an expected run time quadratic in
the size of the data [Jensen et al., 2006]. Finally, the greedy
EM method developed by Blekas et al. [2003] uses incremen-
tal mixture learning to discover motifs represented by proba-
bilistic models similar to MEME.
  The data mining and artiﬁcial intelligence communities
have developed methods that work with real-valued se-
quences. PERUSE ﬁnds recurring patterns in multidimen-
                                                      Figure 1: A real-valued, 1D signal is converted into a SAX string
sional data by estimating the parameters of an HMM-like
                                                      (edacb) using ﬁve PAA segments (bounded by the vertical dotted
model [Oates, 2002]. Tanaka et al. [2005] apply princi-
                                                      lines) and ﬁve SAX symbols.
pal component analysis (PCA) to multidimensional data, us-
ing a minimum description length criterion to select motifs
found in the principal component. Lin et al. [2002] use and then concatenating the resulting strings. This leads to
hashing and lower-bounding to efﬁciently search for motifs. a constant number of symbols and linear increase in string
Chiu et al. [2003] extend Lin et al.’s approach by using ran- length [Keogh, 2006].
dom projections to quickly ﬁnd candidate motifs in noisier
data.                                                 Building the Collision Matrix: Once each subsequence has
                                                      been converted to a string, the similarity between each pair
                                                      is efﬁciently estimated using random projection. The key in-
3  Motif Discovery via Random Projection              sight is that while direct comparison is infeasible since there
In this section, we focus on Chiu et al.’s probabilistic dis- are O(T 2) pairs given T strings, similar sequences can be
covery method [2003], discussing extensions to improve its identiﬁed in O(I·T ) time using I iterations of random projec-
applicability, effectiveness, and real-world run time. The al- tion (see Figure 2). Each iteration involves selecting a random
gorithm operates in ﬁve steps (see Table 1 for a summary of subset of the string positions and building a hash table with
the user-speciﬁed parameters):                        the corresponding characters. After all strings are hashed,
 1. Extract all subsequences of a given length (n)fromthe collisions (equivalent projections from different strings) are
    time series using a sliding window.               taken as evidence of similarity and the corresponding posi-
 2. Convert each subsequence to a string using SAX with tions in a collision matrix are incremented.
    length w and a unique symbols.                      Using random projection to estimate similarity has several
 3. Build a collision matrix by comparing the strings via sev- important properties. First, it is effective in the presence of
    eral iterations of random projection.             shot noise. Even if some of the symbols are drastically differ-
                                                      ent, when random projection does not select these positions,
 4. Select motif seeds as the two subsequences correspond-
                                                      the string will still appear similar. Second, although the colli-
    ing to the largest entry in the collision matrix.
                                                      sion matrix could require O(T 2) time and space in the worst
 5. Extract motifs by detecting other windows in the neigh- case, realistic data sets produce a linear number of non-zero
    borhood of each seed. The neighborhood is deﬁned as
                                   R                  entries leading to linear time and space requirements with a
    all sequences within a ﬁxed distance ( ) of either seed. sparse matrix implementation.. Furthermore, the complexity
Subsequence Extraction: Subsequences are extracted using can be controlled online by dynamically changing the num-
a sliding window of user-speciﬁed length. Each window lo- ber of string positions included in each iteration of random
cation corresponds to one subsequence of the time series. projection [Keogh, 2006]. In a pathological data set, as when
Subsequence Discretization: Each subsequence is dis-  the distance between all subsequences is effectively zero, the
cretized using the symbolic aggregate approximation (SAX) matrix will still grow prohibitively large despite dynamic pro-
method developed by Lin et al. [2003]. SAX is a local quan- jection adaptation. When such a condition is detected, the al-
tization method that ﬁrst computes a piecewise aggregate ap- gorithm can switch to storing row sums rather than the full
proximation (PAA) [Keogh et al., 2000] of the normalized matrix. Our experiments show that this simpliﬁcation does
window data and then replaces each PAA segment with a reduce accuracy, but the penalty may be tolerable to achieve
symbol. Normalization ensures that the subsequence has zero strict linear time and space complexity.
mean and unit variance. PAA represents a sequence by divid- Selecting Seed Motif Occurrences: Once the collision ma-
ing it into equal length segments and then storing the mean trix is built, seed motif occurrences are extracted by locating
within each segment. The ﬁnal SAX quantization is based maximal entries. Each entry in the matrix corresponds to a
on precomputed breakpoints that divide the data range into pair of subsequences that can be used to ﬁnd the other oc-
equiprobable regions assuming an underlying standard nor- currences of the motif. The distance between the seeds must
mal distribution. Each PAA segment is represented by the be less than R, they must not temporally overlap previously
symbol of the corresponding bin (see Figure 1).       identiﬁed occurrences, and they must not overlap each other
  As presented, SAX appears applicable only to univari- (called a trivial match). Search for additional motif seeds
ate data; however, one can use the algorithm with multi- terminates when the largest entry in the collision matrix is
variate data by applying it to each dimension independently smaller than the expected score, which can be estimated by

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2815                                                        Table 1: User-Speciﬁed Parameters for Chiu’s Algorithm
                                                          Symbol   Description
                                                             n     window length
                                                             w     number of PAA segments (string length)
                                                             a     SAX alphabet size
                                                             R     radius of motif neighborhood

                                                      that all dimensions agree for a particular string position. This
                                                      drastically reduces the effective size of the collision matrix
                                                      and requires motifs to span all of the dimensions. To our
                                                      knowledge, no existing algorithm addresses the more general
                                                      problem of discovering motifs that exist in only a subset of
                                                      the dimensions.
                                                      4.1  Automatic Estimation of Motif-Speciﬁc
                                                           Neighborhoods
Figure 2: (a) For each iteration of random projection, a subset of In order to address the theoretical and practical issues sur-
string positions are selected (here, positions one and three). (b,c) rounding a user-speciﬁed neighborhood radius, we have de-
The remaining symbols are hashed, and (d) equivalent projections veloped a method for automatically estimating an appropriate
are tallied in a collision matrix.                    value from data. Because the radius is not used during the
                                                      random projection phase, that part of the algorithm proceeds
Equation 9 in [Chiu et al., 2003].                    as usual. Once a pair of motif seeds has been selected, the dis-
                                                      tance from each subsequence to the closer of the two seeds
Locating Additional Motif Occurrences: The ﬁnal step  is computed using the original, real-valued data. Next, the
of the discovery algorithm is to locate all other occur- smallest portion of the distances are selected for further anal-
rences of the motif identiﬁed by the seed locations. This ysis1. In the experiments presented below, the smallest 10%
is achieved by scanning the original subsequences and se- are used based on the assumption that 10% is a very loose
lecting those within the neighborhood of the seeds (i.e., upper bound on the number of motif occurrences. Our empir-
min(d(w , seed ),d(w , seed ) ≤ R    w  : i ∈{1..T }
        i    1     i     2     ,where  i              ical results show that this precise size of the portion only has
represents each of the original subsequences).        a minor impact on the ﬁnal estimate (see Figure 6).
Discussion: In our experiments (see Section 6), Chiu’s ap- Finally, to determine the appropriate neighborhood radius,
proach works very well despite the erroneous assumption that we sort the distances and seek a “knee in the curve.” The
all motifs and all motif occurrences have the same length. It knee corresponds to the change from distances within the mo-
is, however, quite sensitive to the various user-speciﬁed pa- tif to those outside. This change is an inﬂection point of the
rameters summarized in Table 1. In particular, the neighbor- curve. Inﬂection points can only occur at a zero of the second
hood radius, R, is vital for accurate motif discovery, yet it is derivative, which corresponds to an optima of the ﬁrst deriva-
very difﬁcult to specify since it depends on the domain, the tive. Thus, estimating the radius is equivalent to ﬁnding the
distance metric, the motif length, and the features selected for maxima of the derivative (see Figure 3), and because we can
processing.                                           directly compute the discrete ﬁrst derivative, no assumptions
                                                      about the parametric form of the distance curve are necessary.
4  Motif Discovery using Automatic                      The inherent undersampling of the true distribution of mo-
                                                      tif occurrences causes the observed distances to be quite
   Neighborhood Estimation                            noisy. Therefore, the mode is estimated as the weighted mean
Before discussing our approach for automatically estimating of the derivative. This procedure is summarized below:
a per-motif neighborhood radius, we address the issue of ap- 1. Calculate the minimum distance from each subse-
plying the discovery algorithm to multidimensional data.  quence, wi : i ∈{1..T }, to a motif seed:
  As discussed previously, we can apply a univariate dis- di = min(d(wi, seed1),d(wi, seed2))
                                                                   v     kth              k = T
cretization algorithm to each dimension of a multidimen- 2. Compute, k,the  order statistic for 10
sional subsequence and concatenate the result. If this com- 3. Select the k smallest distances: di : di ≤ vk
bined string is used directly for random projection, however, 4. Sort the distances in ascending order
                                                                                          
the space requirements will likely be quadratic in the length 5. Calculate the discrete ﬁrst derivative: di = di+1 − di
of the input data. This increase is understandable because 6. Treat the derivative as weighted votes for the best radius
projecting columns of the concatenated string is equivalent to
                                                          and compute the expected value:
deﬁning multidimensional similarity as a logical OR between               1        
                                                          E(i)=(    di · (i + ))/( di)
dimensions. Thus, two strings are deemed equivalent for a          i       2      i
particular iteration if they match in any dimension. Instead 1See [Cormen et al., 1997] for a linear time algorithm for ﬁnding
we implement similarity using a logical AND by requiring arbitrary order statistics.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2816                                                      stead, they are only scored according to their ability to accu-
                                                      rately detect higher-level structures such as words, phrases,
                                                      or sentences. The accuracy of phoneme-level motifs is not
                                                      important per se: they only matter insofar as the motifs rep-
                                                      resent useful features for improving word recognition rates.
                                                      5.3  Interpretability
                                                      Discovered motifs can also be qualitatively evaluated by pre-
Figure 3: The radius of each motif neighborhood is estimated from senting them to a domain expert. The expert can score the
the distance between each potential member and the motif seeds results by inspecting either the original data or some other
(left). It is equated with the inﬂection point, which is estimated by time-synchronized recording such as video or audio. Evalu-
the weighted mean of the derivative of the distances (center). The ation may consist of manually checking that all occurrences
result is automatic motif-speciﬁc neighborhood sizes (right). of a motif are semantically similar and that similar events are
                                                      not split across multiple motifs. The key difference between
                                                      this approach and a comparison to ground truth is that in-
5  Evaluation Methods                                 terpretability is evaluated by inspecting the motifs that were
Before evaluating the performance of our approach, we must actually discovered, whereas ground truth labels encode an
discuss what it means for one set of discovered motifs to be expert’s aprioriexpectations.
“better” than another set. As with activity recognition, the 5.4 Further Issues for Evaluation
efﬁcacy of a discovery system depends on how the results
will be used. We have identiﬁed three broad approaches for The quality of the discovered motifs is not the only factor that
evaluating the quality of discovered motifs: comparison to contributes to the value of a discovery algorithm. Other fac-
ground truth, primary utility, and interpretability.  tors matter, such as run time characteristics (including asymp-
                                                      totic performance and expected real world run time), online
5.1  Comparison to Ground Truth                       versus batch processing, and memory requirements. In addi-
                                                      tion, the overall usability of the system is a major component
When operating on well-understood data, domain experts
                                                      of its value and is a fundamental source of motivation for our
may be able to manually identify motifs. Thus, they can cre-
                                                      approach. Although we will show that motif-speciﬁc neigh-
ate a set of ground truth labels that identify which motifs ex-
                                                      borhood size estimation improves results, even if the differ-
ist and where they occur in the data. A discovery system can
                                                      ence was negligible, automatic estimation would still be a
then be evaluated by comparing the discovered motifs to the
                                                      contribution. The beneﬁt arises because automatic estimation
“correct” motifs identiﬁed by the experts in the same way that
                                                      eases the demands on the user to understand the domain be-
supervised recognition systems are evaluated. This approach
                                                      fore using the discovery system and reduces the need to man-
is often used in the bioinformatic literature where algorithms
                                                      ually explore the space. A similar idea is discussed in more
are tested against nucleotide data for which binding sites area
                                                      detail in [Keogh et al., 2004]; however, the compression-
already known.
                                                      based distance metric proposed in that work proved insufﬁ-
  Although ground truth labels allow for a quantitative, ob-
                                                      cient for detecting motifs in the test data.
jective measure of performance, evaluation is still compli-
cated by issues such as different kinds of errors, “bounded”
versus “ﬂuent” activities, and different levels of error anal- 6 Empirical Results
ysis (see [Minnen et al., 2006b] for a detailed discussion). In this section, we evaluate our approach to motif discovery
Furthermore, the number of discovered motifs may not be the and compare it to existing methods. We compare the discov-
same as what was identiﬁed by a domain expert. Different er- ered motifs to known motifs (for the manually labeled exer-
ror metrics may prefer methods that discover fewer but more cise data set), and we also visually present the motifs discov-
accurate motifs (high precision) or those that identify all of ered in public data sets that have been used for empirical eval-
the expected motifs but also ﬁnd unlabeled motifs (high re- uation by other researchers (the shuttle and fetal ECG data).
call). Note that these additional motifs are neither correct nor
incorrect in general. They may be errors, or they may corre- 6.1 Exercise data
spond to real patterns in the data that were simply unexpected. The exercise data set was captured from an exercise regime
                                                      composed of six different dumbbell exercises. An Xsens
5.2  Primary Utility                                  MT9 inertial motion sensor was attached to the subject’s wrist
The best measure of performance is the utility of the discov- by ﬁtting it into a pouch sewn to the back of a thin glove. The
ered motifs in accomplishing a primary task. The assumption MT9 was sampled at 100Hz and three-axis accelerometer and
here is that motifs are not discovered for their own sake but gyroscope readings were recorded. In total, approximately
rather in the service of a primary goal. For example, when 27.5 minutes of data was captured over 32 sequences. For
analyzing speech data, a discovery algorithm may identify the experiment, the data was resampled at 12.5Hz leading to
phonemes as motifs if a short temporal scale parameter is 20,711 frames. The data contains six different exercises and
speciﬁed. Speech recognition systems, however, are not typi- 864 total repetitions (roughly 144 occurrences of each exer-
cally evaluated based on their phoneme recognition rates. In- cise). Each frame is composed of the raw accelerometer and

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2817gyroscope readings leading to a six-dimensional feature vec-
tor.
  Evaluation was performed by comparing the discovered
motifs to the hand labeled occurrences of each exercise. Both
discovery methods located extra motifs in addition to the six
exercises. We do not consider this to be an error, however,
as the extra motifs are legitimate clusters of similar subse-
quences. To quantify performance, we performed analysis
over events (individual occurrences) and frames (each of the
20,711 sensor readings). Accuracy, precision, and recall were
calculated in both cases considering only the six motifs that Figure 5: Comparison of the proposed approach to Chiu’s algo-
most closely correspond to the exercises. For all experiments, rithm for the exercise data showing superior performance of the pro-
the dynamic time warping (DTW) distance was used with a posed approach across all six evaluation metrics.
Sakoe-Chiba band of 10%, which follows standard practice
in the ﬁeld [Ratanamahatana and Keogh, 2005].
                                                      values. The graph shows that the proposed approach outper-
  Figure 4 shows the result of running Chiu’s algorithm over forms the previous method according to all of the metrics. For
a range of values for the neighborhood radius. The chart event accuracy, the proposed approach achieves 78.2% com-
shows performance for each of the six evaluation metrics pared to 61.1%,whichisa44% reduction in error. For com-
along the horizontal axis. For each metric, performance is
                                             8.0      parison, another discovery method, which relies on global
measured for 18 different radius values ranging from to discretization and a minimum description length criterion to
14.0. Note that event-level accuracy, which we consider to be                                 86.7%
                                             61.1%    ﬁnd motif seeds, achieves an event accuracy of [Min-
the most important overall summary statistic, peaks at nen et al., 2006a]. This approach, however, requires consid-
with a radius of 9.5, but it is very unstable as accuracy drops
  39.1%               9.75                            erably more time to locate the motifs, and it includes a step
to      with a radius of . This instability is due to the that is quadratic in the number of motif occurrences.
use of a single neighborhood size across motifs when the mo-
tifs actually have different scales (see Figure 3).   6.2  Shuttle and Fetal ECG Data
  The performance of our approach is shown in Figure 6. For
each of the six evaluation metrics, performance is presented In order to demonstrate the generality of our approach, we
across a range of estimation portion sizes. Each portion size tested on two public data sets commonly used in the motif
                                                                       [                     ]
corresponds to the percentage of the smallest distances used discovery literature Keogh and Folias, 2002 . In the case
to estimate the neighborhood size as explained in Section 4.1. of the shuttle telemetry data (see Figure 7), the algorithm dis-
Although the portion size does impact overall performance, covers a single motif with two occurrences. For the fetal ECG
the results are very stable between the relatively wide range data, the algorithm ﬁnds thirteen occurrences of the heartbeat
from 5.0% to 15.0%. For all of the experiments performed (see Figure 8). In both cases, the motif neighborhood size
in this section, the generic value of 10.0% was selected since was automatically estimated, and the results are qualitatively
it is in the center of this stable range. Note that a value of equivalent to those presented in the literature (see, for exam-
                                                          [               ]
7.5% leads to superior results on this data set but will likely ple, Tanaka et al., 2005 ).
fail to generalize as well since it is closer to the boundary of
the stable region.                                    7   Future Work
  Figure 5 shows a direct comparison of our proposed ap- We are currently investigating several ways of extending our
proach to Chiu’s algorithm on the exercise data. For Chiu’s approach. We are particularly interested in generalizing the
algorithm, a radius of 9.5 was used since it was found to motif length parameter by incorporating automatic estima-
be the optimal choice after manually comparing a range of tion, allowing variable length occurrences within a motif, and


Figure 4: Performance of Chiu’s algorithm on the exercise data set Figure 6: Performance of the proposed approach on the exercise
over a range of radii. Note the instability (for example, between the data set showing stability over a relatively wide range of portion
radius values of 9.5 and 9.75 for event and frame-based accuracy). sizes used to estimate the neighborhood (5%-15%).


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2818