                            Generalizing Temporal Controllability

                              Michael D. Mofﬁtt    and Martha E. Pollack
                      Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
                                         University of Michigan
                                      Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
                                 {mmofﬁtt, pollackm}@eecs.umich.edu

                    Abstract                          point only at the time of its occurrence). This is not an ac-
                                                      curate reﬂection of how such knowledge is obtained in many
    In this paper, we focus on extending the expressive practical situations: one often learns the time of an initially
    power of constraint-based temporal reasoning for- uncertain event before its actual execution, and can use that
    malisms. We begin with the well-known Simple      knowledge to make informed decisions about the remainder
    Temporal Problem with Uncertainty, and incorpo-   of the plan. In addition, one may acquire only partial infor-
    rate three extensions: prior observability, in which mation about the time of an upcoming event. Finally, and
    the values of uncontrollable events become known  perhaps surprisingly, certain varieties of uncertainty may ex-
    prior to their actual occurrence; partial shrinkage, ist even for problems that should be modeled entirely with
    in which an observation event triggers the reduc- controllable time points, something that again cannot be cap-
    tion of a contingent temporal interval; and a gener- tured by previous formalisms.
    alization of partial shrinkage to requirement links, In this paper, we generalize the problem of controllabil-
    making it possible to express certain types of uncer- ity in constraint-based temporal reasoning. We begin with
    tainty that may arise even when the time points in a the Simple Temporal Problem with Uncertainty, an increas-
    problem are themselves fully controllable. We de- ingly popular framework that models uncertain events and
    scribe levels of controllability in the resulting for- contingent constraints. We then consider three progressive
    malism, the Generalized STPU, and relate this for- extensions to this formalism. The ﬁrst introduces the notion
    malism to related developments in disjunctive tem- of prior observability, in which the values of uncontrollable
    poral reasoning. Throughout, we motivate our ap-  events become known prior to their actual occurrence. The
    proach with simple, real-world examples that illus- second captures situations in which an observation event trig-
    trate the limitations of existing formalisms and the gers the reduction of a contingent temporal interval, a form
    ﬂexibility of our proposed extensions.            of partial observability that has not yet been captured in pre-
                                                      vious work. The third and ﬁnal extension generalizes this
1  Introduction                                       notion to the requirement links, making it possible to express
Several recent studies have addressed the problem of un- certain additional types of uncertainty. Finally, we draw rela-
certainty in constraint-based temporal reasoning [Vidal and tionships between our extended framework and related de-
Ghallab, 1996; Vidal and Fargier, 1999; Morris et al., velopments in disjunctive temporal reasoning, and suggest
2001]. In this line of research, traditional temporal networks promising avenues of continued research. Throughout the
[Dechter et al., 1991] are extended to include two classes text, we make use of practical, real-world examples that illus-
of time points: controllable ones, whose time of occurrence trate the limitations of existing formalisms and the ﬂexibility
can be set by the execution agent, and uncontrollable ones of our proposed extensions.
that are instead determined by an external force, often called
“Nature”. As a result, the problem of consistency is trans- 2 Background
formed into one of controllability. Recent efforts have made 2.1 Simple Temporal Problems
signiﬁcant progress toward increasing both the expressiv- The Simple Temporal Problem [Dechter et al., 1991] (STP) is
ity [Venable and Yorke-Smith, 2005] and efﬁciency [Morris deﬁned by a pair X, E, where each Xi in X designates a
and Muscettola, 2005] of constraint-based temporal reason- time point, and each Eij in E is a constraint of the form
ing with uncertainty.                                                  l  ≤ x − x  ≤ u
  However, signiﬁcant limitations in expressive power do ex-            ij   i    j   ij
ist in the formalisms developed to date. In particular, they with xi, xj ∈ X and lij, uij ∈. An STP is said to be
have all assumed that temporal uncertainty is resolved in a consistent if there exists a solution S : X →that satisﬁes
speciﬁc way: the execution agent discovers the duration of all constraints in E.
a contingent link only at the exact moment of its conclusion Each STP has an associated graph-based encoding, which
(or equivalently, it discovers the time of a uncontrollable time contains a node for each time point, and a directed edge for

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1985each inequality having weight uij or −lij (depending on its    Example 1:               Example 2:
direction). An STP is consistent if and only if its correspond-  T                T                  T
ing graph contains no negative cycles; this can be determined R                   R  [9:45, 11:15]   O

in polynomial time by computing its All Pairs Shortest Path                                           [00:45,  00:45]
matrix and examining the entries along the main diagonal.
                                                             [10:30, 12:00]
2.2  Simple Temporal Problems with Uncertainty
The STP models situations in which the agent in charge of
plan execution is in complete control of all time points. The
Simple Temporal Problem with Uncertainty (STPU) is an ex-
tension of the STP that relaxes this assumption. Speciﬁcally,
                         X  ,X  ,E,C                   T                  T     T                  T
the STPU is deﬁned as a tuple C U      , where:          C  [00:45, 00:60]   D    C  [00:45, 00:60]  D
  • XC  and XU are sets of controllable and uncontrollable                       Contingent Link
    time points, respectively. Their union, XC ∪ XU , forms                      Requirement Link
    an entire set X of time points.
  • E is a set of requirement links, where each Eij is of the
                                                        Figure 1: Networks corresponding to Examples 1 and 2.
    form lij ≤ xi − xj ≤ uij.
  • C                                   C
      is a set of contingent links, where each ij is of the 10:30 12:00    T
        l  ≤ x  − x ≤  u     x  ∈ X  1                     and     . At time C , you begin to clean out the items
    form ij   i    j    ij and i   U .                in your current fridge; to guarantee that all items can be re-
  The contingent links in the STPU can be regarded as repre- moved without any spoiling, this must happen no later than 45
senting causal processes whose durations are uncertain, and minutes, and no earlier than 60 minutes, before they arrive. 
thus their endpoints (the uncontrollable time points) are de- The network corresponding to this example is depicted
termined by some external force. The remaining time points graphically in Figure 1 (left). The time point TR is a tem-
are in the control of the agent, who is charged with the task poral reference point representing midnight, and is used to
of assigning them in such a way as to satisfy the requirement express constraints with respect to wall-clock time.
links.
  It is often convenient to refer to a projection p of the STPU Weak Controllability
[Vidal and Ghallab, 1996], which is simply an STP obtained An STPU is said to be Weakly Controllable if there is a viable
by replacing the interval of each contingent link [l, u] with a execution strategy; in other words, for every possible projec-
particular ﬁxed bound [b, b] where l ≤ b ≤ u.Aschedule T tion, there exists a consistent solution. Our example is indeed
is deﬁned as a mapping                                weakly controllable; if we happen to know what Nature will
                                                      assign to TD, we can obtain a consistent solution by setting
                    T : X →                          TC to TD − x for any x between 45 and 60 minutes.
where T (x) is the time of time point x. A schedule is deemed Strong Controllability
consistent if it satisﬁes all links. The prehistory of a time An STPU is said to be Strongly Controllable if there is a vi-
point x with respect to a schedule T , denoted T {≺ x}, speci- able execution strategy S such that
                                                 x
ﬁes the durations of all contingent links that ﬁnish prior to ;         S  (x)=S    (x)
it can be determined directly from any schedule.                         p1       p2
  Finally, we deﬁne an execution strategy S as a mapping: for each controllable time point x and all projections p1 and
                    S : P→T                           p2, i.e., there exists a single consistent solution that satisﬁes
                                                      every possible projection. Our example is clearly not strongly
where P is the set of all projections, and T is the set of all controllable; for instance, there is no solution for the case
schedules. An execution strategy S is viable if S(p), hence- when TD =10:30that will also work for the case when
forth written Sp, is consistent with p for each projection p. TD =11:30.
2.3  Controllability of the STPU                      Dynamic Controllability
With the addition of uncontrollable events and contingent The most interesting and useful type of controllability is that
links in the STPU, the previously deﬁned notion of consis- of dynamic controllability, a concept that exploits the tempo-
tency for the STP is no longer sufﬁcient. Instead, we ex- ral nature of plan execution. Speciﬁcally, an STPU is said
                                                      to be Dynamically Controllable if there is a viable execution
plore various ﬂavors of controllability, which have all been S
deﬁned previously in [Vidal, 2000]. To illustrate these con- strategy such that:
cepts, we put forth the following example (which will later be Sp1{≺ x} = Sp2{≺ x}⇒Sp1(x)=Sp2(x)
extended):                                                                       x                 p1
  Example 1: ACME Appliances is delivering a new refrig- for each controllable time point and all projections and
                                                      p2. In other words, there must exist a strategy that depends
erator to your apartment at some (unknown) time TD between
                                                      on the outcomes of only those uncontrollable events that have
  1
   As in prior work, we assume 0 <lij <uij < ∞ for each occurred in the past (and not on those which have yet to oc-
contingent link, and that contingent links do not share endpoints. cur). Our current example is not dynamically controllable,

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1986since we need to set the time of TC before we learn that TD nately, the reduction is not sufﬁcient to achieve dynamic con-
has occurred.                                         trollability. However, if ACME instead provided a 15-minute
  Of the three types of controllability, dynamic controlla- time window on their arrival, then the reduction would sup-
bility has been the most extensively studied. Recently, it ply enough information to guarantee dynamic controllability
was shown to be computable in polynomial time [Morris and (despite the fact that the exact delivery time would still not be
Muscettola, 2005].                                    known precisely).
                                                        This scenario clearly addresses a different kind of knowl-
3  Adding Observation Events                          edge acquisition than the previous examples. Partial observ-
                                                      ability is a very general phenomenon that commonly arises
The concept of dynamic controllability assumes that the val- in a broad range of practical instances that involve complex
ues of uncontrollable events become known at the same time sequences of decision making. For instance, consider a Mars
as their occurrence; that is, we learn when they happen, only rover domain where the texture of the upcoming terrain is un-
when they actually happen. However, as we see in the follow- known. As the rover moves forward, it may execute a sens-
ing example, the temporal uncertainty of an event is some- ing action to establish whether the ground will be rough or
times resolved earlier than its actual execution.     smooth. While this information might not allow it to calcu-
  Example 2: Consider Example 1; however, now ACME    late the exact travel time, it could enable the estimation of a
Appliances agrees to phone you exactly 45 minutes before
                                                     more accurate window on the time of arrival. The need to
they arrive.                                          model constraint “shrinkage” of this type motivates the de-
  In this new scenario, we discover the time of the uncon- velopment of an extension to the STPU formalism.
trollable event before that particular time arrives. While ob-
taining this information earlier has no impact on the weak or 4.1 The STPU+
strong controllability of the problem, it serves to enable dy-         +
                                                      We deﬁne the STPU  as a tuple XC ,XU ,E,C,O, where:
namic controllability (e.g., we can begin clean out the fridge
immediately after receiving the phone call).            • XC  and XU are as in the STPU (and X is their union).
  Fortunately, prior observability of this form can be mod- • E is a set of requirement links, as in the STPU.
eled with the existing STPU framework. We achieve this  • C
by introducing an uncontrollable observation event – for in- is a set of generalized contingent links, where each
                                                          Cij is of the form:
stance, TO – and making it, rather than TD, the endpoint of
                                                          x  − x ∈{d    :[l  ,u  ], ..., d :[l   ,u    ]}
a contingent link. A requirement link can then be introduced i  j    ij1   ij1 ij1     ijnij ijnij ijnij
between the new observation action and the original uncer-
                                                              x ∈  X                  d
tain event. Therefore, the act of “splicing” contingent links in and i U . Each sub-interval ijk is referred to as a
this fashion makes it possible for the agent to reason about the reduction.2
foreknowledge of events. The STPU for the current example • O : XO →  C is a mapping from observation events
is shown graphically in network of Figure 1 (right).      to generalized contingent links, where XO ⊆ X. Each
  Despite the fact that our current notion of prior observabil- event in XO speciﬁes (at the time of its occurrence) the
ity is a mere modeling issue, this concept will prove to be reduction of its corresponding constraint in C .
essential in extensions to follow.
                                                        Turning to Example 3, let us assume that the phone call will
                                                      occur sometime between 7:00 and 7:30. We can then encode
4  Partial Shrinkage of Contingent Links              Example 3 as an STPU+ by creating a generalized contingent
In the STPU, the occurrence of an uncontrollable event can link Cdeliv containing three possible reductions:
be thought of as establishing complete shrinkage of a contin-
                                                        TD − TR ∈{[10:30, 11:00], [11:00, 11:30], [11:30, 12:00]}
gent link; that is, a constraint xi − xj ∈ [l, u] is squeezed to a
single point xi −xj ∈ [b, b]. However, many real-world prob- and establishing that this link will be resolved at the time of
lems demand a generalization of this mechanism, in which an the phone call:
intermediate reduction is achieved. We refer to this as partial         O(TO)=Cdeliv
shrinkage.
                                                      Regular STPU-style contingent links can be modeled as well
  Example 3: Again consider Example 1; however, ACME
                                                      by encoding them as generalized contingent links with sin-
Appliances agrees to phone you very early in the morning to
                                                      gleton intervals. An example of this is the contingent link on
inform you of within which of the three half-hour blocks they
                                                      the time of the phone call:
intend to arrive (e.g., they may say “sometime between 11:00
and 11:30”).                                                        TO − TR ∈{[7:00, 7:30]}
  Unlike Example 2, here the time of the phone call is
only a portion of the information obtained. In addition, In Figure 2 (left) we provide a graphical interpretation of this
there is knowledge conveyed during the observation event example. The generalized contingent link is labeled with each
that triggers the reduction of a contingent link: the origi- 2As will be discussed in Section 7, these generalized links re-
nal interval [l, u] is reduced to a subinterval [l,u], where
                                                    semble – but should not be confused with – the disjunctive con-
l = u . (For example, the interval [10:30,12:00] may be- straints of a TCSP, DTP, or DTPU. Note also that the sub-intervals
come [11:00,11:30]). This reduction becomes known simul- in a generalized link may overlap, although in our examples we use
taneously with the execution of TO (the phone call). Unfortu- non-overlapping intervals without loss of generality.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1987         Example 3:               Example 4:          have a problem if ACME selected the interval [10:30, 11:00]:
  T                   T    T                  T       even though we can choose to schedule the delivery as late as
   R  [07:00, 07:30]  O     R  [07:00, 07:30]  O      11:00, we now only have 40 minutes to clean out the fridge
   [10:30,11:00] v [11:00,11:30] v [10:30,11:00] v [11:00,11:30] v (whereas we need 45).
                                                        We can now see the advantage of explicitly specifying the
      [11:30,12:00]            [11:30,12:00]          set of allowed reductions. In the current example, because we
                                                      know up front that the possible resolutions of the TR → TD
                                                      link are each a half-hour in length, we are able to determine
                                                      that the problem is dynamically controllable. If, instead, any
                                                      arbitrary reduction were possible, we could never conclude
                                                      this: indeed, in the worst case, the “reduction” might not re-
  T                   T    T                  T                             4
   C  [00:45, 00:60]  D     C  [00:45, 00:60]  D      sult in any shrinkage at all.
                           Contingent Link
                           Requirement Link           6   The Generalized STPU
                           Observation Mapping        We   deﬁne   the  Generalized  STPU    as  a   tuple
                                                      XC ,XU ,E,C,O, where:
                                                        • X      X                       X
  Figure 2: Networks corresponding to Examples 3 and 4.     C and  U are as in the STPU (and is their union).
                                                        • E  is a set of generalized requirement links, where each
                                                          Eij is of the form:
of the possible reductions, and a dotted arrow is added to sig-

nify that the reduction occurs simultaneously with TO.    xi − xj ∈{dij1 :[lij1,uij1], ..., dijnij :[lijnij ,uijnij ]}
  One might wonder why we enumerate the set of all allowed
                                                        • C
partial shrinkages, rather than the leave the potential reduc- is a set of generalized contingent links, where each
                                                          C
tions completely unspeciﬁed. Although the latter alternative ij is of the form:
might seem to be more general, we will see in the next sec-
                                                          xi − xj ∈{dij1 :[lij1,uij1], ..., dijnij :[lijnij ,uijnij ]}
tion how it precludes the possibility of generalized notions of
controllability.                                          and xi ∈ XU .
                                                        • O : XO →  E ∪ C is a mapping from observation events
5  Partial Shrinkage of Requirement Links                 to generalized links, where XO ⊆ X.
The generalization in the STPU+ is limited to the contingent In the Generalized STPU, we augment both requirement
link, an interval whose endpoint is an uncontrollable event. links and contingent links in an identical fashion, expanding
As we demonstrate in the following example, this expressive them from single intervals to sets of intervals (the reductions),
power can be further extended to express uncertainty over and associating the moment at which a single reduction is se-
requirement links that constrain pairs of purely controllable lected with observation events. The deﬁnitions of projection
time points.                                          and schedule can remain unchanged from the STPU. In ad-
  Example 4: Consider another variation of Example 3. This dition to these, we introduce a new notion, an observation
time, ACME tells you to call them sometime between 7:00 trace v, which is a record of the generalized link reductions
and 7:30. When you do, they’ll tell you which half-hour block dynamically selected (by Nature):

works best for them, but then allow you to specify the exact         L1,d1k , ..., Ln,dnk 
time in that block for delivery.3                                          1           n
  Note that in this ﬁnal variation (depicted in Figure 2 right), where L = E ∪ C is the set of all generalized links. We also
all events involved – including the phone call (TO) and the need to extend the notion of a prehistory: T {≺ x} (the pre-
delivery time (TD) – are both controllable. Yet there is still history of x with respect to schedule T ) now speciﬁes both
uncertainty that can only be resolved dynamically, i.e., dur- the durations of all contingent links that ﬁnish prior to x, and
ing the execution of the plan. In particular, you do not know the selected reduction of all generalized links whose associ-
what constraint on delivery time must be satisﬁed prior to ated observation event occurs before x.
the phone call, even though the exact time is ultimately up Finally, we deﬁne a generalized execution strategy S to be
to you. Further, the nature of this uncertainty interacts di- a mapping:
rectly with the level of controllability that can be achieved.           S : P×V→T
For instance, our current example is dynamically controllable where P and T are as before, and V is the set of all possible
even with half-hour intervals, as we can decide TD and thus observation traces. A generalized execution strategy S is vi-
T
 C once the delivery interval becomes known. However, if able if S(p, v), henceforth written Sp,v, is consistent with p
instead our phone call had to be placed at 10:20, we would and v for each mutually consistent pair of a projection p and
                                                      an observation trace v.
  3If this example seems contrived, imagine a situation in which a
friend says that he wants to get together this weekend, but isn’t sure 4One could consider extensions to our formalism that allow for
yet whether he has to work on Saturday or Sunday. Once he ﬁnds more ﬂexible speciﬁcations of possible reductions (for instance, in-
out, he calls you, and lets you select the time to meet on his day off. volving reductions that comprise sets of intervals).

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  19886.1  Generalizing Controllability                             Agent Picks a Duration Nature Picks a Duration
With these new deﬁnitions in hand, we can now specify the
three levels of controllability for the Generalized STPU. A        Disjunctive           Disjunctive
Generalized STPU can be said to be Weakly Controllable if         Requirement            Contingent
                                                                   DTP Link              DTPU Link

there exists a viable generalized execution strategy; this is a Disjunct
equivalent to saying that every pair p, v of a projection p Agent Picks
and an observation trace v is consistent.
  A Generalized STPU is Strongly Controllable if there is a       Generalized            Generalized
viable generalized execution strategy S such that                 Requirement            Contingent
                                                                   STPU Link             STPU Link
                                                           a Disjunct
                Sp1,v1(x)=Sp2,v2(x)                      Nature Picks

for each executable time point x, all projections p1 and    Table 1: Classiﬁcation of “Disjunctive” Links
p2, and all observation traces v1 and v2. As before, this
means that a single schedule is guaranteed to satisfy all con-
straints, regardless of the choices (assignments to uncontrol- words, we need to be able to satisfy each of the disjuncts in
lable events or partial shrinkages of generalized links) that the generalized requirement link.
            5
Nature makes.                                           Further properties of the solution set will deﬁne the level of
  Finally, a Generalized STPU is said to be Dynamically controllability: the Generalized STPU will be strongly con-
                                            S
Controllable if there is a viable execution strategy such trollable if the set of solutions is a singleton (so that the same
that:                                                 assignment to controllables “works” regardless of the deci-
                                                      sions made by Nature); it will be dynamically controllable if
  Sp1,v1{≺ x} = Sp2,v2{≺ x}⇒Sp1,v1(x)=Sp2,v2(x)
                                                      the solutions for sets of selections that are identical prior to
for each executable time point x, all projections p1 and p2, time point x make an identical assignment to x; and it will
and all observation traces v1 and v2. In other words, there ex- otherwise be weakly controllable.
ists a strategy that depends on the outcomes of only those un- Interestingly, the difference in what is needed to satisfy
controllable events and partial shrinkages that have occurred standard disjunctive links (e.g., of the DTP) versus general-
in the past (and not on those which have yet to occur). ized links closely parallels the difference in what is needed
                                                      to satisfy requirement versus contingent links of either ﬂavor.
7  Disjunctions, Generalized Links, and               Given a problem with only requirement links, what is needed
                                                      for consistency is the existence of a solution that “selects” a
   Controllability                                    particular legal duration for each constraint. However, once
As mentioned earlier, there is an apparent similarity between contingent links are added, controllability depends upon there
the reductions of a generalized (requirement or contingent) being solutions that satisfy each possible combination of du-
link, and the disjuncts in a constraint of a Binary Temporal rations that the contingent links might take.
CSP [Dechter et al., 1991] or Disjunctive Temporal Problem These distinctions are summarized in Table 1. This analy-
(DTP) [Stergiou and Koubarakis, 1998]. However, the se- sis reveals that there are additional scenarios that can be mod-
mantics of the two types of links are in fact quite different eled using this general approach: for example, by introducing
from one another.                                     observation events and partial shrinkage into DTPU’s, we can
  Recall that the DTP is a generalization of the STP, in which model cases in which both Nature and the agent can “pick”
each constraint Ci may consist of a disjunction of simple tem- reduced intervals from contingent links.
poral constraints:                                      Note that just as the Generalized STPU with controllable
                                                      time points serves as a counterpart to the TCSP or DTP, the
  l ≤  x  − y  ≤ u  ∨ ...∨ l  ≤  x   − y   ≤ u
  i1    i1   i1   i1       ini    ini   ini   ini     full Generalized STPU (which allows contingent time points)
                                                                                       [
A solution to a DTP is an assignment to its time points that parallels the recently proposed DTPU Venable and Yorke-
                                                                ]
satisﬁes every constraint; of course, since the constraints are Smith, 2005 .
disjunctive, what is required is that some disjunct from each
constraint be satisﬁed.                               8   Other Related Work
  In contrast, consider a Generalized STPU; for the moment, The addition of observation events is similar to the approach
to facilitate comparison with the DTP (which has only con- taken in Conditional Temporal Problems [Tsamardinos et al.,
trollable time points), assume that it is also comprised ex- 2003]. However, in that line of research, the observation ac-
clusively of controllables. Because Nature may select any tions serve to remove events from the execution plan, rather
reduction (or disjunct) for each constraint, it will be control- than to specify the resolution of constraints. Furthermore,
lable only if there is a set of solutions, at least one of which pure temporal uncertainty is not modeled in the CTP, as all
satisﬁes each combination of selected reductions. In other time points are required to be controllable.
  5It is worth noting that strong controllability can be easily dis- Also, there are some relationships between our General-
proven in cases where there exists a generalized requirement link ized STPU and the Uncertain CSP [Yorke-Smith and Gervet,
containing a non-overlapping pair of reductions.      2003], a formalism that augments a standard CSP X, D, C

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1989