            An Analysis of the Use of Tags in a Blog Recommender System

                      Conor Hayes Paolo Avesani Sriharsha Veeramachaneni
                                               ITC-IRST,
                      Via Sommarive 18 - Loc. Pant`e, I-38050 Povo, Trento, Italy
                                         {hayes,avesani}@itc.it


                    Abstract                            Tagging has achieved widespread acceptance by blog users
                                                      and advocates argue this is due to its simplicity [Quintarelli,
    The Web is experiencing an exponential growth     2005]. Bloggers can easily categorise resources without hav-
    in the use of weblogs or blogs, websites contain- ing to learn the precise vocabulary of a formally deﬁned clas-
    ing dated journal-style entries. Blog entries are siﬁcation scheme. The drawback is that a tag is deﬁned lo-
    generally organised using informally deﬁned labels cally and there is no mechanism for indicating that two tags
    known as tags. Increasingly, tags are being pro-  mean the same thing.
    posed as a ‘grassroots’ alternative to Semantic Web As tagging has been so widely adopted, we present an em-
    standards. We demonstrate that tags by themselves pirical evaluation of how tags perform in organising and an-
    are weak at partitioning blog data. We then show  notating blogs. Using a simple clustering approach, we ﬁrstly
    how tags may contribute useful, discriminating in- demonstrate that tags perform poorly compared to a standard
    formation. Using content-based clustering, we ob- content-based approach. We then introduce a supporting role
    serve that frequently occurring tags in each clus- for tags. We observe that a power law probability distribution
    ter are usually good meta-labels for the cluster con- exists for the frequency of tag usage within clusters. Using
    cept. We then introduce the Tr score, a score based measures of intra- and intercluster distance, we demonstrate
    on the proportion of high-frequency tags in a clus- that ‘strong’ clusters are more likely to contain high propor-
    ter, and demonstrate that it is strongly correlated tions of high-frequency tags than weak clusters. We observe
    with cluster strength. We demonstrate how the Tr  that high-frequency tags are usually good meta-labels for the
    score enables the detection and removal of weak   cluster concept. We introduce, Tr, a score based on the pro-
    clusters. As such, the Tr score can be used as an portion of high-frequency tags in a cluster, and demonstrate
    independent means of verifying topic integrity in a that it is strongly correlated with cluster strength. Finally, we
    cluster-based recommender system.                 demonstrate how the Tr score enables the detection and re-
                                                      moval of clusters that appear coherent but are in fact weak
                                                      and impure. As the Tr score is produced by the aggregated
1  Introduction                                       tag data from a set of independent users, it can be viewed as
A weblog (blog) is a website containing journal-style entries an independent means of verifying cluster topic integrity.
presented in reverse chronological order and generally writ- In Section 2, we describe recent work on tagging. In Sec-
ten by a single user. Over the past few years, there has been an tion 3, we describe our datasets: a blog dataset and a labelled
exponential growth in the number of blogs [Sifry, 2006] due newsgroup dataset that we use for comparison purposes. We
to the ease with which blog software enables users to publish compare clustering using content and tags in Section 4. In
                                                      Section 5, we show that tags can be used as cluster meta-
to the web, free of technical or editorial constraints.                     T
  However, the decentralised and independent nature of labels. We introduce the r score and demonstrate empiri-
blogging has meant that tools for organising and categoris- cally that it can be used to automatically identify clusters with
ing the blog space are lacking. The solutions to this problem poor semantics. We present our conclusions in section 6.
can be characterised by two positions: the tagging approach
and the Semantic Web approach. Tags are short informal de- 2 Background
scriptions, often one or two words long, used to describe blog The Semantic Web vision for the blog domain is typiﬁed
entries (or any web resource). There is no globally agreed list by prototype applications in which a RDF-based data model
of tags the user can choose from, nor is there an agreed best allows sophisticated, inference-enabled querying of blogs
practice for tagging. Conversely, researchers on the Seman- [Cayzer, 2004; Karger and Quan, 2005]. In contrast, tag-
tic Web project have proposed frameworks in which blogs ging is a ‘grassroots’ solution to the problem of organis-
are marked up using machine-readable meta-data, written in ing distributed web resources, with emphasis on ease of use.
a language such as RDF, which would facilitate cross-blog Tags are ﬂat propositional entities and there are no techniques
indexing [Cayzer, 2004; Karger and Quan, 2005].       for specifying ‘meaning’, inducing a hierarchy or inferring

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2772or describing relationships between tags. Despite the obvi-
ous weakness of this approach, tagging appears to be part
of a trend toward information sharing on the Internet. Sites
like the blog aggregator, Technorati1, the photo sharing site,
Flickr2, and the social bookmarks manager, Del.icio.us3,all
rely upon tags to allow users to discover blogs, photos and
websites tagged by other people. Quintarelli [2005] proposes
that tag usage engenders a folksonomy,anemergentuser-
generated classiﬁcation. Although the mechanisms of such a
self-organising process are not clearly outlined, we do share
the view that aggregated tag data can provide discriminating
features for partitioning purposes.
  Brooks and Montanez [2005] have analysed the 350 most
popular tags in Technorati in terms of document similarity Figure 1: Tag frequency vs. tag rank by frequency for the set
and compared these to a selection of similar documents re- of blog tags, blog tag tokens and newsgroup tag tokens.
trieved from Google. In this paper we will show that the
most popular tags form a small percentage of the overall tag
space and that a retrieval system using tags needs to employ indexed under a single tag by one user during the evaluation
at least token-based matching to retrieve a larger proportion period. We removed stop-words and stemmed each docu-
of tagged blogs. Golder and Huberman [2006] provide a good ment. Low-frequency words appearing in less than 0.2% of
introduction to the dynamics of collaborative tagging on the the documents, and high-frequency words occuring in more
Del.icio.us social bookmarks site. However, the Del.icio.us than 15% of the documents were then removed. Documents
site differs from the blog domain in that tags are applied in with less than 15 tokens were discarded at this point. The
a centralised way to URLs generally belonging to other peo- features in each instance were weighted using the TF/IDF
ple. A Del.icio.us user can view the bookmark tags already weighting scheme. In order to account for documents of dif-
applied to the URL he wishes to index and choose an existing ferent lengths, each instance was normalised so that it was of
                                                                d    
tag or use another. This aggregating facility is not available unit length tfidf 2 = 1. This produced a dataset, blog c,
to the blogger, who must tag a piece of writing he/she has just based on blog content with 7209 instances and 3857 tokens
completed. Whereas a tag on Del.icio.us references the URL (see Table 1).
of a website, a blogger’s tag often references a locally deﬁned We created a second view of the data based on the same set
concept.                                              of documents as blog c but using the tag data of each docu-
  Although the popular collective term ‘blogosphere’ implies ment instead of the content. We tokenised each tag and per-
a type of social network, recent research suggests that less- formed stop-word removal and stemming as before. Further-
connected or unconnected blogs are in the majority on the more, we removed 24 very commonly occurring tag tokens
Web [Herring et al., 2005]. Link analyses on our datasets such as ‘general’ and ‘random’ (see Section 5.1). We then
have produced the same results. For this reason we do not removed instances that did not share at least one token with
consider links between blogs in this paper.           at least one other instance in the dataset. This produced a
                                                      dataset, blog t, based only on tag tokens with 6064 instances
3Data                                                 and 1003 tokens (see Table 1). Each document in blog trep-
                                                      resents the tokens from a single tag used by a single user.
Our blog dataset is based on data collected from 13,518 blogs The set of users in this dataset is a subset of the users in the
during the 6-week period between midnight January 15 and ‘content’ dataset.
midnight February 26, 2006. All blogs were written in En-
glish and used tags. Blogging activity obeys a power law, 3.1 Newsgroup Data
with 88% of bloggers posting between 1 and 50 times during
the period and 5% posting very frequently (from 100 to 2655 The 20 newsgroup dataset is a popular labelled dataset for ex-
                                                                                            4
posts). On inspection, many of these proliﬁc bloggers were periments in text classiﬁcation and clustering . In the news-
either automated blog spammers or community blogs. We se- group domain users post dated messages in a public place to
lected data from bloggers who had posted from 6 to 48 times which on-line readers may reply. However, newsgroups are
during the evaluation period. The median for this sample is logically organised into topics and contributors must select
16 posts. On average, each user posted at least once per week a relevant forum before writing, whereas blogs are blogger-
during the six-week period.                           centred and their authors write without fear of being censured
  For each user we selected the tag that was used on the for non-relevance. For comparison purposes we performed a
largest proportion of the user’s posts during the evaluation parallel set of experiments on this dataset.
period. We aggregated these posts to form a single docu- We based our dataset on 92% of the 18,826 posts, which
ment. Thus, each document represents the collective posts were dated during a 4-week period from April 5 to May 3
                                                      1993. We extracted 11,139 email addresses from the head-
  1http://www.technorati.com                          ers of the posts, each of which acted as a unique user id. As
  2http://www.ﬂickr.com
  3http://www.del.icio.us                                4http://people.csail.mit.edu/jrennie/20Newsgroups/

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2773  Dataset     # Instances #Features Mean # Feat.
  blog c      7209       3857       187.82
  blog t      6064       1003       1.27
  news c      7183       3248       80.6
  news t      7183       3152       5.5

 Table 1: A summary of the datasets used for partitioning.

with the blog dataset, we created a document for each user
containing the largest number of posts made to a single news-
                                                      Figure 2: H scores at k for the blog and newsgroup datasets.
group during the 4-week period. Stop-words were removed H
and the remaining words stemmed. Too frequent and infre- scores were measured based on the content tokens of the
quent words were removed. At this point documents with document instances.
less than 15 words were discarded. Each word was weighted
according to the standard TF/IDF weighting scheme and the incrementally selected by choosing the seed with the greatest
document vector was normalised so that it was of unit length distance to the mean of the seeds already selected. As a base-
dtfidf 2 = 1. This produced a dataset, news c, with 7183 line we create a partition of k clusters by randomly assigning
instances and 3247 features (see Table 1). Each instance is instances.
associated with 1 out of 20 newsgroup class labels.     Typically, clustering ‘goodness’ on unlabelled datasets is
  Unlike the blog dataset, the newsgroup dataset does not measured using criterion functions based on intra- and inter-
have a user-deﬁned tag associated with the posts a user makes cluster distance. Following Zhao and Karypis [2004], we use
in a single newsgroup. Instead, each post has a short subject the ratio of intra- to intercluster similarity, Hr. Intracluster
header designed to summarise the content of the post. We similarity, Ir, is the average of the cosine distances of each
created a synthetic tag for the posts of a single user by ag- instance in the cluster to the cluster centroid, Cr. Intercluster
gregating the tokens from the subject header of each post, similarity, Er, is the cosine distance of the cluster centroid to
removing duplicate tokens and stop-words, and stemming. the centroid of the entire dataset, C (see Equation 1). H is
The remaining tokens were then weighted using TF/IDF and the summation of the Hr contributions of each cluster where
normalised. This produced a dataset, news t, with 7183 in- each Hr score is weighted by the fraction of the overall in-
stances and 3152 features (see Table 1).              stances contained in the cluster. |Sr| is the size of cluster r.
                                                                                 
                                                                             1
                                                                                    cos(di,Cr)
                                                                       I    |Sr|
4  Partitioning by Tags or Content                               H  =   r =    di∈Sr
                                                                   r   E        cos(C ,C)             (1)
A simple way to recommend new blog posts would be to use                r            r
the tag label of each post to retrieve posts by other bloggers               k  n
with the same tag, an approach used by Technorati and anal-              H =      r H
                                                                                 n   r                (2)
ysed by Brooks and Montanez [2005]. However, a problem                       r=1
with this approach is illustrated by Figure 1: the frequency
distribution for blog tag overlap follows a power law. From 4.1 Discussion
7209 documents, there were 3934 tags of which only 563 Using the random clustering as a baseline, we can see from
(14%) were used 2 or more times, meaning that 86% of tags Figure 2a that clustering by blog tag tokens achieves 22%
were useless for retrieval using an exact matching approach. of the area under the curve achieved by the content cluster-
However, by allowing a partial match between tag tokens the ing. Figure 2b shows results from the same experiment on
overlap is much greater, allowing us to make at least 1 match the newsgroup dataset. Clustering using tag tokens performs
based on shared tag tokens for the 6064 documents in the considerably better for the newsgroup dataset, achieving 37%
blog t corpus.                                        of the area achieved by clustering using content tokens. Our
  For our ﬁrst experiment we use a text-clustering approach results would suggest that any recommendation service based
where we compare the partitioning produced using tag to- on blog tag matching is likely to recommend/retrieve posts
kens, content tokens and random assignment. For the blog that are only marginally more relevant than a selection of
datasets we use only the 6064 blog instances found both in posts chosen at random. We suggest that the better perfor-
blog c and blog t. We implement the spherical k-means al- mance of the newsgroup tags is due to the fact that the sub-
gorithm because of its efﬁciency in partitioning large cor- ject header of a post is generally adopted by other users who
pora and its ability to produce cluster concept descrip- choose to make a reply, whereas the distributed architecture
tions [Dhillon et al., 2001]. In these experiments we do not of the blog domain means that users must select tags in an
address the issue of an optimal value of k as we are interested arbitrary fashion.
simply in the partitioning ability of tags compared to content. In order to conﬁrm that the Hr is a good indicator of topic
We cluster the content data and the tag data for both the blog cohesiveness, we conduct a simple experiment on the labelled
and newsgroup datasets at values of k from 5 to 100. For each newsgroup dataset (news c). At each value of k we measure
value of k, a random seed is chosen after which k-1 seeds are the purity of each cluster, Pr i.e. the fraction of the cluster

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2774          Blogs                Newsgroups               id Centroid keywords Hr   A-tags             Tr
  Partition auc dfr  %    Partition auc dfr  %          42 knit, yarn, sock, 1.55 knit, sock, main,  0.67
  content  51.9 31.1 100  content  65.1 47.2 100           stitch, pattern        olympics, project
  tags     27.6 6.8  21.9 tags     35.6 17.7 37.5       37 loan, estate, mort- 1.50 loan, credit, real, es- 1.11
  random   20.8 0    0    random   17.9 0    0             gage, credit, debt     tate, mortgage
                                                        44 interior, hotel, toilet, 1.50 interior, design 1.45
                                                           decoration, bathroom
Table 2: A summary of the information in Figure 2. auc = 46 jen, golf, rug, club, 1.01 -             0
area under curve. dfr = difference from random.            patent
                                                        11 www,http,br,simi- 0.9  link, web, business, 0.16
                                                           lar, jan               blog, tech
                                                        16 wordpress, upgrade, 0.89 blog, technology, 0.49
                                                           spam, ﬁx, bug          tech
                                                        3  israel, iran, hamas, 0.87 politics, affairs, cur- 0.84
                                                           al, nuclear            rent, america, israel
                                                        24 muslim, cartoon, is- 0.87 politics, religion, 0.59
                                                           lam, danish, prophet   war, current, affair

                                                                                        H
                                   H         P        Table 3: The top 8 clusters in terms of r scores from the
   Figure 3: The Spearman correlation of r against r. blog c dataset where k=50.

made up of instances of a single class. At each value of k we
correlate Pr against Hr. Figure 3 illustrates a high positive k =100. Clusters 41 and 94 contain 47 and 43 instances per
                                                                                                Hr
correlation for all values of k, suggesting that Hr is indeed cluster respectively. Cluster 41 is in the top 20% of scores
a good indicator of whether a cluster contains documents of and cluster 94 is in the bottom 20%. We propose that the
a single class. Figure 3 also illustrates the low correlations probability of distributed users independently using the same
                                                                                                     H
achieved for clusters generated randomly.             tag is higher in a cluster with a well deﬁned topic (high r)
                                                      than in a cluster where the topic is weakly deﬁned (low Hr).
                                                      In the next section, we deﬁne a score, Tr, based on the pro-
5  Cluster Meta Labels and the    Tr Score
                                                      portion of high-frequency tag tokens in a cluster and we test
In the previous section we suggested that blogs tags cannot the correlation of Tr against Hr. We show that clusters with
usefully partition our datasets. In this section, we propose a low Tr scores have poor semantic description in terms of the
supporting role for tags where clustering is carried out us- most highly weighted terms in the cluster centroid. More im-
ing content. We cluster the content datasets as before but portantly, we demonstrate that Tr allows us to identify (and
this time we examine how the tag token data is distributed remove) clusters with spuriously high Hr scores.
per cluster. For example, we cluster blog c and then examine
how the associated tokens in blog t are distributed through- 5.1 Tag Types
out the clusters. Figure 1 demonstrates that few tags are used
very frequently and the majority of tags and tag tokens are We can qualify the tag frequencies per cluster. C-tags are tag
used once. Partitioning the data using content clustering, we tokens not repeated by any other user in the cluster. These
observe a tag token frequency distribution per cluster which tags are represented by the long tail of the frequency dis-
                                                                                                  ≥
seems to vary according to cluster strength (Hr). Weak clus- tribution. B-tags are tag tokens with a frequency 2that
ters tend to have a long ﬂat distribution, that is, few or no occur in ≥2 clusters. B-tags are analogous to stop-words,
high-frequency tags (tokens) and a long tail of tags that have words that are so common that they are useless for index-
been used only once. Strong clusters tend to contain many ing or retrieval purposes. Furthermore, b-tags also tend to
high-frequency tags and a shorter tail.               be words with non-speciﬁc meaning, such as ‘assorted’, ‘ev-
  Figure 4 illustrates the tag distribution for 2 clusters where erything’and ‘general’. As such, they do not contribute to
                                                      cluster interpretation. Our experiments on the blog dataset
                                                      identiﬁed a set of 24 b-tags which remained consistent even
                                                      when we clustered the data on a weekly basis. A-tags are the
                                                      remaining high-frequency tags. As Table 4 demonstrates, the
                                                      average percentage of b-tag tokens in a cluster varies little for
                                                      different values of k. On the other hand, as k increases there
                                                      is a trade-off between a-tags and c-tags. As clusters become
                                                      smaller, fewer co-occurring tags are found, decreasing the a-
                                                      tag count and increasing the c-tag count. At k =50 on the blog
                                                      dataset, only 24% of tags in a cluster, on average, are a-tags.
                                                      Clearly, a-tags should contribute to cluster interperatability as
Figure 4: Tag token frequency distribution for cluster 41 they represent an independent description of the cluster topic
(high Hr) and cluster 94 (low Hr).                    by2ormoreusers.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2775                                                                    Blog tags       Newsgroup tags
                                                            k    A     B     C     A     B     C
                                                            5    0.47  0.17  0.36  0.78  0     0.22
                                                            10   0.38  0.20  0.42  0.73  0     0.27
                                                            20   0.33  0.20  0.47  0.62  0     0.38
                                                            50   0.24  0.21  0.55  0.57  0     0.43
                                                            100  0.17  0.21  0.62  0.4   0     0.6
                                                            250  -     -     -     0.34  0     0.66

Figure 5: The mean correlation between Hr and Tr for the 6 Table 4: The table gives the mean fractions of a-tags, b-tags
blog and 4 newsgroup datasets.                        and c-tags per cluster at different values of k. The means are
                                                      measured over the 6 windowed blog datasets.
  Table 3 lists the top 8 clusters of the blog c dataset ranked
         H                                              However, examining the top 8 (out of 50) Hr scores shown
in terms of r where k = 50. Clusters are described in terms                      T      H
of the top 5 most highly weighted terms in the cluster centroid in Table 3 we can see that the r and r scores appear to
                                                      disagree strongly in several places. In fact, clusters 46 and 11
and in terms of their most frequent a-tags. In many cases the T                                  T
a-tag descriptors for each cluster provide clear meta-labels for have r scores that lie within the bottom 20% of r scores
each cluster. For example, cluster 16, which contains many for this clustering. This is not an anomaly: it can also be ob-
documents on a recent upgrade to the Wordpress blog soft- served in each clustering of the 6 weekly blog datasets. Clus-
ware, is described as ‘blog, technology, tech’. In some cases, ters 46 and 11 are also clusters whose top-weighted centroid
such as cluster 42, a-tags provide contextual information not key words provide us with no clear concept description. As
included in the keyword descriptions. The term ‘olympics’ in text clustering is based on token-based matching of sparsely
                                                      featured instances, without consideration for semantics, it is
the a-tag list is due to the fact that 8 of the documents in this                H
cluster refer to knitting while watching the Winter Olympics. possible for clusters with high r scores but with poor se-
  Two rows in Table 3, representing clusters 46 and 11, are mantics to emerge. This poses problems for an application
                         H                            such as a blog recommender system, where a misleadingly
marked in bold. Although the r scores of these clusters lie H
within the top 20%, the centroid keywords for these clusters high r score would cause blogs to be recommended that
do not impart a clear description of a topic. This is problem- have nothing in common.
                                                        One source of error is noise in the feature set. For exam-
atic as we would expect a high Hr score to imply a coher-
                                                T     ple, on inspecting the instances in cluster 11 we found that the
ent topic description. In the next section we describe the r H
score, which is based on the proportion of a-tags in each clus- high r score was due to the matching of noisy token features
ter. We show how these problematic clusters can be created such as ‘http’ and ‘www’, which were extracted from lists of
                                                      URLs posted as free text. We suggest that the Tr score, be-
due to noise in the feature set and how the Tr score allows us
to identify them.                                     cause it measures human consistency in assigning descriptors
                                                      to documents in a cluster, facilitates the identiﬁcation of clus-
5.2  The Tr score                                     ters that may in fact be meaningless.
The Tr score is the fraction of a-tags in a cluster, scaled by 5.3 Using Tr to Remove Noisy Clusters
             A   B     C
the cluster size. r, r and r are the (disjoint) sets of a-, b- As the blog dataset is unlabelled, our assessment of whether
and c-tags respectively found in cluster r. n is the number of a cluster is meaningful or not is overly subjective. In this
instances in cluster r.                               section we describe a more rigorous experiment using the la-
                                                      belled news c and news t datasets, where we measure the ef-
                          |A |
                          r                          fect on cluster purity after we remove clusters that have a high
                             |ai|
               1          i=1                         Hr and low Tr.
         Tr =                                   (3)
              |n| |Ar |  |Br |   |Cr|                We limit the number of tokens per instance in news tto
                     |ai| +  |bi| +   |ci|            the top TF/IDF weighted tag token. Thus, the average token
                 i=1      i=1      i=1                frequency is comparable to the mean of 1.27 for the blog t
  In order to test that the correlation between Tr and Hr is dataset (see Table 1). Secondly, because news thasamuch
consistent over time, we created 6 datasets, each dataset rep- greater proportion of a-tags per cluster than the blog data, we
resenting a week’s worth of data from the blogs represented raise the value of k to 250, which decreases the mean propor-
in the blog c dataset. Likewise, we divided the newsgroup tion of a-tags per cluster to 0.34, which is comparable with
dataset into 4 weekly datasets. We measured the correlation the mean observed in the blog dataset when k is between 20
between Tr and Hr for each dataset at values of k from 5 to and 50 (See Table 4).
                                                        We select the top 20% of clusters ranked according to Hr
100. We found that the correlation was high for all datasets                          ˆ
and all values of k, suggesting a strong relationship between in descending order, which we term H. We then select the
cluster strength and tag frequency. Figure 5 illustrates the bottom 20% of clusters ranked according to Tr in descending
                                                                         ˇ                   ˆ      ˇ
mean correlation between Tr and Hr for the 6 blog datasets order, which we term T . The intersection of H and T pro-
and the 4 newsgroup datasets at different values of k. vides us with a set of candidate ‘weak’ clusters, W.Tode-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2776