       Resource Constraints on Computation and Communication in the Brain

                                            Sashank Varma
                              Stanford Center For Innovations in Learning
                                      450 Serra Mall, Building 160
                                       Stanford, CA 94305-2055
                                         sashank@stanford.edu

                    Abstract                          be seen as allocating resources in a way that respects these
                                                      constraints while maximizing cognitive throughput.
    This paper contributes to the emerging literature at
                                                          This view is developed and evaluated below. First, re-
    the border between AI and cognitive neuroscience,
                                                      source constraints on brain function are formalized using the
    analyzing the resource constraints that shape brain
                                                      machinery of operations research. Second, this machinery is
    function. The brain is conceptualized as a set of ar-
                                                      analyzed and three canonical patterns of resource allocation
    eas that collaborate to perform complex cognitive
                                                      are identified. Third, this machinery is applied to a model of
    tasks. Both (1) computation within individual areas
                                                      language processing. The model is shown to exhibit the pat-
    and (2) communication between collaborating ar-
                                                      terns and to account for brain activations as measured by
    eas are viewed as resource-consuming activities.
                                                      fMRI. Finally, three avenues for future research are
    The efficient deployment of limited resources is
                                                      sketched.
    formalized as a Linear Programming  problem
    which the brain is hypothesized to solve on a mo-
    ment-by-moment basis. A model of language proc-   2   Formalizing Resource Constraints
    essing is analyzed within this framework and found Cognition is the emergent product of multiple collaborating
    to exhibit resource utilization profiles consistent brain areas. It is profoundly shaped by resource constraints
    with those observed in functional neuroimaging    on computation within individual brain areas and communi-
    studies of humans.                                cation between brain areas. These resource constraints can
                                                      be formalized as a linear programming (LP) problem.
1   Introduction                                          Each brain area is termed a center. Each center is an
In his 2002 AAAI presidential address, Tom Mitchell called encapsulated production system containing declarative ele-
for a rapprochement between AI and the rapidly emerging ments and production rules. Declarative elements are lists of
discipline of cognitive neuroscience. AI researchers have attribute-value pairs annotated with continuous activation
begun to answer this call. Some are modeling the function levels. They are processed by productions, which have acti-
of brain areas, e.g., Dean [2005] modeled primary visual vation thresholds on their condition sides and whose pri-
cortex as a hierarchical Bayesian network. Others are apply- mary action is to direct activation from one declarative ele-
ing classification algorithms to functional Magnetic Reso- ment to another modulo a weight that is either positive (rep-
nance Imaging (fMRI) data to predict cognitive states, e.g., resenting excitation) or negative (representing inhibition or
which word a person is thinking of [Mitchell et al., 2004]. suppression). The control structure is fully parallel: at each
Still others are using clustering algorithms [Dimitriadou et point in time, all productions are matched against all de-
al., 2004] and multi-agent approaches [Richard et al., 2004] clarative elements in all centers and fired. We assume a de-
to find patterns in large fMRI data sets.             composition of the brain into M centers.
    The research reported in this paper contributes to this A function is a primitive cognitive process, such as de-
effort. It focuses on the resource constraints that shape brain tecting an edge or retrieving the meaning of a word. Func-
function. Specifically, the brain is viewed as a set of areas tions are abstractions that enable a higher level of descrip-
that collaborate to perform complex cognitive tasks such as tion; each is implemented by a combination of declarative
language processing, problem solving, and spatial reason- elements and productions. We assume a decomposition of
ing. There are limitations on the computational power of cognition into N functions.
individual brain areas and on the communication bandwidth Each center is specialized for multiple functions, and
between different brain areas. Both kinds of limitations can conversely, each function can be performed by multiple
be conceptualized as resource constraints, and the brain can centers. This proposal is intermediate between a pure modu-
                                                      larity that maps functions one-to-one to centers and a pure
                                                      distributivity that maps every function to every center. The


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   611specialization of center i for function j is denoted Sij,where (1), (2), (3), and (4) define an LP problem that the brain is
Sij[1,). It specifies the amount of the center’s resources hypothesized to solve at each point in time. The result is an
(i.e., activation, the common currency of storage and proc- assignment of functions to centers that (1) satisfies the re-
essing) that are required to perform one unit of the function. source demands of functions to be performed (to the degree
A value of 1.0 represents perfect specialization, larger val- possible), (2) respects resource constraints on computation
ues represent lesser specializations, and a value of  repre- within individual centers, (3) respects resource constraints
sents a complete inability of center i to perform function j on communication between centers, and (4) maximizes cog-
(because resources are limited, as we will see below). nitive throughput. The simplex algorithm is used to solve
                                                      the assignment problem.
    At each point in time during task performance, there ex-
                                                          This account of the resource constraints on brain func-
ist a number of functions to be performed. The amount of
                                                      tion can be empirically evaluated via the following meas-
function j performed by (i.e., assigned to) center i is denoted
                                                      urement assumption: The capacity utilization of center i,
A .Theassignment problem is to determine the A .
 ij                                      ij           denoted CU , is the proportion of its resources currently
    The assignment problem is a constraint satisfaction          i
                                                      being used.
problem. One set of constraints specifies the resource de-       N
mands of the functions to be performed. Specifically, the            
                                                                ()Aij Sij
resource demands of function j are denoted Rj and the fol-    = j=1                                   (5)
                                                          CUi :
lowing constraint is enforced at all times:                         Ci
    M
     A   R                                    (1)   The capacity utilization of a center will be used to predict
       ij   j                                         activation (as measured by fMRI) in the corresponding brain
    i=1
It ensures that the resources supplied by all centers to the area. This is a reasonable assumption because the fMRI sig-
function are as close as possible to the resources demanded. nal reflects the vascular response to the consumption of neu-
Another set specifies intra-center constraints on computa- robiological resources [Logothetis, 2003].
tion within individual centers. Specifically, the resource
                                                      3   Three Patterns of Resource Allocation
supply of center i is denoted Ci and the following constraint
is enforced at all times:                             Solving the assignment problem produces three canonical
    N                                                 patterns of resource allocation. This section describes and
    ()A  S   C                               (2)
        ij  ij   i                                    illustrates them in the context of a toy model. Specifically,
    j=1
It ensures that the resources supplied by the center to all consider the case of two centers with equal resource sup-
functions do not exceed its resource supply. The final set plies (C1=C2=6) where the first center is more specialized
specifies inter-center constraints on the joint resource con- for a function 1 than the second center (S11=1 and S21=2).
sumption of multiple centers, which are interpreted as Further assume that the resource demands of the function
bandwidth limitations on communication between these  are relatively light (e.g., R1=3). This defines the LP prob-
                                                      lem:
centers. The number of inter-center constraints and the na-               1
ture of each one (i.e., the centers whose resource supplies it maximize: A11 + /2A21 (objective function)
jointly constrains) are empirical matters. For ease of exposi- subject to: A11 + A21  3 (function)
tion, we assume a single inter-center constraint on the joint        A11  6         (first center)
resource consumption of all centers:                                 2A21  6        (second center)
    N  M                                                             A11, A21  0    (default LP constraints)
                                              (3)
    ()Aij  Sij  CCORTEX                             depicted in Figure 1a. The constraints, shown as dashed
    i=1 j=1                                           lines, demarcate the boundaries of the shaded feasibility
It ensures that the resources supplied by all centers to all region – the set of satisfactory assignments (A11, A21). The
functions do not exceed the resource supply of the entire simplex algorithm effectively positions the objective func-
cortex, denoted CCORTEX.                              tion line, shown as a solid line, so that it touches a vertex of
    The constraints (1), (2), and (3) only partially determine the feasibility region. This vertex represents the values of
the assignment of functions to centers because they are sat- A11 and A21 that maximize the objective function. When the
                                                      resource demands are relatively light, the objective function
isfiedbymanydifferentassignments,e.g.,Aij=0 for all i and
j. This ambiguity is resolved by defining a measure of the is maximized at a vertex that assigns the function entirely to
goodness of an assignment, expressed as a linear combina- the well-specialized first center (i.e., A11=3 and A21=0).
tion of the Aij, to be maximized:
    M  N                                              3.1  Pattern 1
                                               (4)
    ()Wij   Aij                                     As task difficulty increases from low to moderate, task per-
    i=1 j=1                                           formance consumes an increasing amount of resources. For
Defining Wij:=1/Sij ensures that all other things being equal, example, as the resource demands of the function (R1)in-
function j will be assigned to the center i most specialized crease from 4 to 5 to 6 units, the shape of the feasibility re-
for it (i.e., whose Sij is minimal and Wij is maximal). gion changes, and consequently so does the vertex at which
                                                      the objective function is maximized, as shown in Figure 1b.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   612Over this range of task difficulty, the well-specialized first The vertex that maximizes the objective function assigns 6
center continues to possess a resource supply sufficient to units to the well-specialized first center and 1 unit to the
satisfy the increasing resource demands, and therefore con- less-specialized second center. In other words, resource de-
tinues to be assigned all of the function (i.e., A21=0). mands now exceed the resource supply of the first center,
                                                      and excess processing spills over to the second center.
                                                          When resource demands decrease following some peak,
 A21
                        2A216                        performance of the function will revert entirely to the first
a)                                                    center. This corresponds to a transition back to pattern 1
                                                      shown in Figure 1b.
            A11+A213
                                        A116         3.3  Pattern 3
                                                      Finally, consider the case of a focal lesion to a brain area,
                                                      which is simulated by drastically reducing the resource sup-
                      A +1/ A
                       11  2 21                       ply of the corresponding center. As a result, even easy tasks
                                                      will result in the spillover of excess resource demands to
                 (3,0)                         A11    less-specialized centers. For example, if the resource supply
                                                      of the first center is reduced from 6 units to 2 units, then
b)
                                                      even light resource demands (R1=3) will require recruitment
                                                      of the second center to help perform the function. This is
                                                      shown in Figure 1d, and it stands in contrast to pattern 1
                                                      shown in Figure 1a, where in the undamaged system the
                                                      same resource demands can be entirely satisfied by the first
                                                      center.
                                                          It should be noted that all patterns are bottom-up con-
                                                      sequences of solving the assignment problem on a moment-
                                                      by-moment basis. There is no executive making resource
                                                      allocation decisions in a top-down fashion.

c)                                                    4   Application to Language Processing
                                                      This section situates the discussion in the context of a model
                                                      of language processing. The model is shown to exhibit the
                                                      three resource allocation patterns and to provide a good ac-
                                                      count of relevant fMRI data.
                                                          The model is composed of four centers. Left posterior
                                        (6,1)         superior temporal gyrus (L. STG; Wernicke’s area) and left
                                                      inferior frontal gyrus (L. IFG; Broca’s area) are the core
                                                      components of the human language network. They are well-
                                                      specialized for lexical, syntactic, and semantic/thematic
                                                      functions. The homologous areas in the right hemisphere, R.
d)
                                                      STG and R. IFG, also belong to the language network. They
                                                      are less-specialized for these functions (although they are
                                                      well-specialized for linguistic functions not considered here,
                  A112                               such as prosodic processing). The four centers collaborate to
                                                      process language. It is beyond the scope of this paper to
                                                      describe the model any further; the interested reader is di-
                  (2,1)                               rected to Just and Varma (2006) for the details.
                                                      4.1  Patterns 1 and 2
                                                      The time to comprehend a sentence is an increasing function
Figure 1. (a) Low resource demands. (b) Pattern 1: moderate re- of its length, of course, but also of its structural complexity.
source demands. (c) Pattern 2: high resource demands. (d) Pattern For example, consider the following three sentences:
3: reduced resource supply following lesion.
                                                          • Conjoined Actives: [clause-1The senator attacked the
                                                            reporter] [  and admitted the error].
3.2 Pattern 2                                                       clause-2
                                                          • Subject-Relative: [main-clauseThe senator [relative-clausethat
Next, consider a task of high difficulty. If the resource de- attacked the reporter] admitted the error].
mands of the function (R1) increase to 7 units, the feasibility • Object-Relative: [main-clauseThe senator [relative-clausethat
region will change shape yet again, as shown in Figure 1c.  the reporter attacked] admitted the error].


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   613They contain the same number of words (nine) and clauses notice. First, for the well-specialized left-hemisphere areas,
(two). The conjoined actives sentence concatenates the two activation increases from moderate to high levels with in-
clauses. Its resource demands are relatively light because creasing syntactic complexity. This is an example of pattern
when the second clause begins, the first clause has been 1 illustrated in Figure 1b. Second, for the less-specialized
completely processed, and therefore no associated declara- right-hemisphere areas, activation is initially negligible, but
tive elements must be maintained. By contrast, the other increases to a moderate level with increasing syntactic com-
sentences embed one clause (the “relative clause”) within plexity. This is an example of pattern 2 illustrated in Figure
the other (the “main clause”). This imposes additional re- 1c. The capacity utilizations of the corresponding model
source demands because the declarative elements associated centers while processing the three sentence types are shown
with the main clause must be maintained while the relative in the bottom panel of Figure 2. (Four free parameters – the
clause is comprehended. The object-relative sentence is resource supplies of the four centers – were estimated to
more resource demanding than the subject-relative sentence maximize the fit to the human data.) The model correctly
because the declarative elements associated with the relative displays pattern 1 in its left-hemisphere centers and pattern
clause must be maintained deeper into this clause (until the 2 in its right-hemisphere centers. This qualitative corre-
verb attacked) before thematic representations can be com- spondence is confirmed by the 0.98 (p<.01) correlation be-
puted.                                                tween human and model performance.
                                                      4.2  Pattern 3
                                                      An often-observed phenomenon in patients with stroke-
                                                      induced lesions is contralateral takeover: when a brain area
                                                      is damaged, the functions it used to perform migrate perma-
                                                      nently to the homologous area in the other hemisphere. This
                                                      was observed in a patient tested by Thulborn et al. [1999]
                                                      who had suffered a stroke six months earlier that damaged
                                                      his L. IFG. The patient initially experienced a dense expres-
                                                      sive aphasia but subsequently recovered much of his lan-
                                                      guage function. Activation was measured in left and right
                                                      STG and IFG, the four brain areas simulated by the model,
                                                      while he read simple five- and six-word sentences. These
                                                      data are shown in the top panel of Figure 3. The patient
                                                      showed the normal pattern in STG, with much more activa-
                                                      tion in the well-specialized left area than the less-specialized
                                                      right area. Strikingly, this pattern reversed in IFG: there was
                                                      no activation in the damaged left area and substantial activa-
                                                      tioninthehealthyrightarea.Thisisanexampleofpattern3
                                                      illustrated in Figure 1d. Thulborn et al. interpreted this as
                                                      evidence that R. IFG had taken over the functions of the
                                                      damaged L. IFG. To simulate the L. IFG lesion, the corre-
                                                      sponding model center was stripped of its resources. The
                                                      model processed the same sentences the patient read. The
                                                      capacity utilizations of its four centers are shown in the bot-
                                                      tom panel of Figure 3. (Three free parameters – the resource
                                                      supplies of the undamaged centers – were estimated to
                                                      maximize the fit to the human data.) The model correctly
                                                      displays pattern 3, with normal left-lateralization in STG
                                                      and striking right-lateralization in IFG. Its capacity utiliza-
                                                      tions provide a good quantitative account of the observed
                                                      activations (r=0.99, p<.01).
                                                      4.3  Inter-Center Resource Constraints
Figure 2. (top) Sentence comprehension data (Just et al. 1996). The fits to the data reported thus far have been due to intra-
(bottom) Model capacity utilizations.                 center resource constraints, i.e., limitations on computation
                                                      within individual centers. We turn now to inter-center re-
    Just et al. [1996] had participants read sentences of the source constraints, which are interpreted as bandwidth limi-
three types and answer comprehension questions. They col- tations on communication between different centers. Inter-
lected activations in the four brain areas simulated by the center constraints do not normally operate during language
model: left and right STG and IFG. These activations are processing because it recruits a relatively small number of
shown in the top panel of Figure 2. There are two patterns to collaborating centers. However, they do operate when lan-


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   614guage processing is paired with a second task such as spatial The goal was to evaluate the necessity of inter-center
reasoning because this greatly increases the number of col- constraints for accounting for the Just et al. [2001] data by
laborating centers, and therefore the joint resource demands comparing the fits of the base and augmented models. The
on the system.                                        capacity utilizations of the bilateral STG and SPL centers of
                                                      the base model during the single-task and dual-task condi-
                                                      tions are shown in the middle panel of Figure 4; those of the
                                                      augmented model are shown in the bottom panel. (The free
                                                      parameters are the intra-center resource supplies of the indi-
                                                      vidual centers and, in the case of the augmented model, the
                                                      inter-center resource supply.) Qualitatively speaking, only
                                                      the augmented model correctly exhibits the observed un-
                                                      deradditivity during dual-tasking. Quantitatively speaking,
                                                      the augmented model accounts for reliably more variance
                                                      than the base model, 95% vs. 79% (p<.01).

                                                      5   Future Directions
                                                      The research described here represents a promising first step
                                                      towards formalizing the resource constraints that shape
                                                      brain function. It also suggests a number of avenues for fu-
                                                      ture exploration.
                                                      5.1  The Assignment Problem
                                                      The assignment problem is currently formalized as an LP
                                                      problem and currently solved using the simplex algorithm.
                                                      However, the centralized nature of simplex is neurally im-
                                                      plausible. One avenue for future research is therefore to
                                                      develop algorithms that solve the assignment problem in a
                                                      de-centralized manner. Such algorithms will likely lack the
                                                      optimality of simplex but will be more neurally plausible. A
Figure 3. (top) Lesion patient data (Thulborn et al., 1999). (bottom) number of promising candidates have been proposed by
Lesioned model capacity utilizations.                 computer scientists interested in the parallel solution of LP
    For example, Just et al. [2001] had participants per- problems [Alon and Megiddo, 1994; Lustig and Rothberg,
form  sentence comprehension and mental rotation tasks 1996; Maros and Mitra, 2000] and by AI researchers inter-
individually as single-tasks and concurrently as dual-tasks. ested in cooperative computation among resource-
(The mental rotation task required rotating 3D figures to constrained agents [Wooldridge and Dunne, 2006; Well-
determine whether they are the same or mirror-images  man, 1993].
[Shepard and Metzler, 1972].) The activations in one com-
                                                      5.2  Inter-Center Communication
ponent of the language network, bilateral STG, and one
component of the spatial network, bilateral superior parietal The communications infrastructure of the human brain is
lobule, during the single-tasks and dual-task are shown in slowly being revealed by diffusion tensor imaging studies of
the top panel of Figure 4. The striking result is underaddi- the white matter tracts through which neural information
tivity: the activations during dual-tasking are less than the flows. This infrastructure is currently modeled by inter-
                                                      center resource constraints on the joint computation of mul-
sum of the activations during the single-tasks (even though
                                                      tiple centers. The benefit of this approach is a unified ac-
behavioral performance remains at high levels).
                                                      count of intra- and inter-center resource constraints. The
    In separate work, we developed a model of mental rota-
                                                      drawback is that it is conceptually too far from the point-to-
tion consisting of centers corresponding to bilateral superior point communication network of the brain. Therefore, an
parietal lobule (SPL) and bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal avenue for future research is to directly capture the connec-
cortex. (The implementation details are found in Just and tivity between brain areas. Luckily, this can be done within
Varma [2006].) The sentence comprehension and mental  the LP formalism. Specifically, the transshipment problem
rotation models were paired to form a base model of dual- is an LP problem for the optimal transport of goods over
tasking. This model contains only intra-center constraints on routes of varying carrying capacity. By formalizing intra-
resource consumption within individual centers. An aug- center computation as a conventional LP problem and inter-
mented model was also constructed by adding to the base center communication as a transshipment problem, a unified
model a single cortex-wide inter-center constraint on the and neurally-plausible account of resource constraints on
joint resource consumption of all centers.            brain function should still be possible.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   615