      An Improved Probabilistic Ant based Clustering for Distributed Databases

                              R.Chandrasekar1             T.Srinivasan2
                                1Department of Information Technology
                2Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering
                    Sri Venkateswara College of Engineering, Sriperumbudur, India
                            1chandra85@gmail.com,    2tsrini1969@gmail.com


                    Abstract                          banks. Rather than restricting learning to specific databases,
                                                      with increasingly more databases becoming available on the
    In this paper we present an improved version of the
    Probabilistic Ant based Clustering Algorithm for  Internet, we can globalize knowledge discovery and learn
    Distributed Databases (PACE). The most important  general patterns by this approach [Forman and Zhang,
    feature of this algorithm is the formation of numer- 2000].
    ous zones in different sites based on corresponding The use of ant based clustering for distributed databases
    user queries to the distributed database. Keywords, was explored in [Chandrasekar et al, 2006]. An algorithm
    extracted out of the queries, are used to assign a called probabilistic ant based clustering for distributed data-
    range of values according to their corresponding  bases (PACE) was proposed based on user-interaction or
    probability of occurrence or hit ratio at each site. We queries from the distributed database. The main advantage is
    propose the introduction of weights for individual or that highly probable or most likely keywords from the query
    groups of data items in each zone according to their can be further analyzed instead of concentrating on the en-
    relevance to the queries along with the concept of tire set of data available. It utilizes a commonly heard con-
    familial pheromone trails as part of an Ant Odor  cept of hit ratio, which it calculates for the user query. De-
    Identification Model to bias the movements of dif- pending on this, a number of zones are formed throughout
    ferent types of ants towards the members of their the database with priorities assigned to them. The sizes of
    own family. Its performance is compared against   these zones and their logical placement in the database are
    PACE and other known clustering algorithms for    discussed in that paper. A colony building algorithm of ants
    different evaluation measures and an improvement is is utilized for formation of the clusters with an extensive
    shown in terms of convergence speed and quality of odor analysis model which determines the number and type
    solution obtained.                                of agents or ants surrounding a data item. The results ob-
                                                      tained from PACE showed highly efficient retrieval from
1  Introduction                                       the final clusters formed. In spite of this there are many
                                                      shortcomings with PACE. The convergence time for the
Swarm systems have recently become a source of inspira- algorithm is not shown to be quick. This is necessary be-
tion for the design of various clustering algorithms in cause with increasing sizes of the database, though not
[Lumer and Faieta, 1994; Handl et al., 2003a; Handl et al., shown, the entire process may take a correspondingly large
2003b; Handl et al., 2005]. Ant based clustering and sorting time. Many parameters were not functions of the sizes of the
was first introduced by [Bonabeau et al, 1999] to explain data set to improve the convergence time. Also no further
different types of naturally occurring emergent phenomena. information could be gathered from the final solution ob-
It is an instance of the broad category of ant algorithms tained other than which points lay in what clusters according
                                  ;
[Dorigo et al, 1999; Dorigo et al., 2000] that is, algorithms to the user queries. Rest of the paper is organized as fol-
that model ‘some behavior’ observed in real ants. In the case lows; Section 2 describes the main motivations for our
of ant-based clustering and sorting, two related types of work, Section 3 gives an overview of PACE, Section 4
natural ant behavior are modeled. While the traditional ant gives the proposed improvements, Section 5 some Experi-
based algorithms have described clustering data in a single mental Results while Section 6 concludes our work.
site, we focus on the clustering mechanisms for data in dis-
tributed sites [Johnson and Kargupta, 1999]. For example, 2 Main Motivations for Our Work
we may have a number of banks belonging to a multina-
tional banking chain, and each bank maintains a database Our work has been inspired by the rules specified in [John-
describing its members. Then we may cluster the databases son and Kargupta, 1999]. The time duration of the algorithm
to learn new high-level concepts that characterize groups of should be less than or equal to that of clustering from a sin-


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2701glesiteconsideringallthedatatobepresentinasinglesite. ous sites. The number of occurrences of each keyword in the
To wait for each and every zone to complete its intra-zone sites is computed using a hit ratio.
clustering and then to perform inter-zone clustering would
entail a substantial increase in time. To reduce this consid-        =  =
                                                                   dm m i n 1
erably, we propose the parallelization of the clustering algo- H (r ) = ∑ ∑                           (1)
rithm so that inter-zone clustering can take place as and     m
                                                                   d =1 i=1 ki
when zones become free after intra-zone clustering. There           m
should also be a metric of dissimilarity between points and
clusters obtained in the final solution. By the introduction of The variable K represents the key words and the limit of
weights in our algorithm, the final heaps formed by the ants the summation is ‘n’ which is equal to the number of key-
could be in a weighted order. A reasonably informative met- words. Using this hit ratio each of the distributed sites is
                                                      assigned a probability value,
ric of dissimilarity could be a range of weights wmin and wmax
between any two points which is more suitable for clusters
                                                                 =  −
formed depending on the user queries to the distributed da- P(d m ) 1 H (rm )                         (2)
tabase rather than calculating the minimum and maximum
possible distances between any two points in the final tree.
                                                        The data sites are then ordered in descending order of their
Data gathered from different sites should also not be trans-
                                                      probabilities. Each data site is then divided into numerous
mitted to a single site for processing. To circumvent this,
building of a global model from a number of local models bounded regions called zones. The agents (ants) are distrib-
was suggested in [Johnson and Kargupta, 1999]. Instead of uted across various zones. Clustering at each stage is
this, the presence of well-defined zones and with paralleliza- achieved by agglomeration and sorting, which is performed
tion of clustering reduces the transmission costs involved in an iterative manner.
rather than transmitting data to a single site.         An ant in real situation identifies other group of ants of
                                                      their same colony using a distinctive odor possessed by
  For our proposed improvements to PACE, data items in a them that is unique to each colony [Bonabeau et al, 1999;
zone-even after inter-zone clustering has taken place-are Dorigo et al, 1999; Dorigo et al., 2000].This behavior of
marked in a scale either individually or as a group with a ants is exploited in PACE to identify and form a group of
weight, in ACO terms-a distinct odor, to denote their rele- ants that carry related data. Again the ants in a real situation
vance to the user queries to the distributed database. If the
                                                      move freely in search of food sources. Whenever they find a
odor associated with that group is strong then their associ-
                                                      food source, they cluster around it from Chandrasekar
ated weights are also correspondingly large and hence it
makes sense to perform clustering in that region of data [2006]. Similar behavior is incorporated in PACE. Since the
items first. This partially satisfies the criterion of a fast con- ants are free to move within their zones, they tend to move
vergence time and this along with the idea the notion of in search of data objects (Food). In doing so, ants tend to
parallelization of clustering between the zones provides a cluster around various data objects. The cluster of ants
better performance than PACE as we show in our results. around groups of data objects hence forms a Family of
Another important improvement is the introduction of fa- Agents (FoA). In this way group of ants clustering around
milial pheromone trails. A family of ants follows its own various data objects within different parts of a zone form
distinctive trails unless in some species, for example, a trait numerous FoA. Thus the ants within a FoA begin to build
of trying to impersonate other species exists. This holds true their colony using the data that they have collected. This is
even for a distinctive odor possessed by each and every spe- called as an Ant Odor Identification Model (AOIM) which
cies [Bonabeau et al, 1999] which formed the basis of iden- is extended in our work.
tifying the number and type of agents surrounding a data Once the FoA is formed, the ants begin to carry data
item in PACE. We utilize this concept to enable the forma- items specific to their family (colony) according to the Pick-
tion of clear and defined clusters by allowing each family or ing (Pp) and Dropping (Pd) probabilities [Lumer and Faieta,
species of ants to follow their own familial trails. As we 1994; Handl et al., 2003b] which depend on the environ-
show later, this proves to be effective for different densities ment surrounding the ants. In PACE, heaps formed are
of data items. For the re-ordering and agglomeration each sorted so that the data items closer to the keywords in terms
time after intra-zone and inter-zone clustering has been per- of relevance are placed so that they can be easily retrieved.
formed, it makes sense to re-order them based on those Every FoA within the zones form their own colony and re-
weights so that the quantities wmin and wmax can be calcu- peat the procedure. This is called as an Ant Colony Building
lated easily for effective representation to the user.
                                                      Algorithm (ACB). The colonies that are built form the pri-
                                                      mary clusters. The final step would be to perform agglom-
3   Overview of PACE Algorithm                        eration. PACE uses complete-link type of agglomeration.
                                                      This method assumes that all data items in the cluster are
  From Chandrasekar [2006] it can be seen that the query very similar to each other. This is possible because of the
from the user is disintegrated into atomic keywords each of sequence of execution from intra-zone to inter-zone ag-
which can be identified uniquely from the databases at vari- glomeration.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2702  These clusters are agglomerated through three different Where R is the radius of a zone and H(rm)isthehitratio
stages before the final cluster is formed. First is the Intra- for the overall database. We further analyze the memory
Zone Agglomeration, where the primary clusters within the costs of allocating weights for individual or groups of data
zone are agglomerated and then reordered by sorting. At the items. For individual data items, the memory costs may
end of this stage a single cluster is obtained. Next is the In- grow linearly with corresponding increase in data items. As
ter-Zone Agglomeration. In this stage the clusters from each an alternative, groups of data items which either partially or
zone are agglomerated to form a single cluster for the entire completely satisfies the queries can be marked with an odor-
data site. In this way many clusters are obtained each data in this case a collective weight or a collective odor-to elimi-
site. Again sorting of the cluster is performed to retain the nate the need for maintaining separate weights for the data
data items with maximum relevance to the keywords in a items. This could be the case when the density of data items
way which can be easily retrieved. The final stage involves in a region on the toroidal grid is not too high. Traditionally
agglomerating the clusters from the distributed data sites to ant based clustering algorithms have employed some kind of
form a single final cluster. This cluster again is sorted and a ‘look-ahead’ memory [Handl et al., 2003b; Handl et al.,
contains the best results corresponding to the user query. 2003a] which is used to bias the search of the ants towards
                                                      recently visited regions with a strong neighborhood func-
4    Proposed Improvements                            tion. From PACE, the neighborhood functions[Lumer and
                                                      Faieta, 1994] can be obtained as:

                                                      Case 1:
                                                          Δ(i, j)
                                                      1−        , Where α " = α 3 ,0.7 < H (r ) <1
                                                           α "                            m

                                                      Case 2:
                                                          Δ(i, j)
                                                      1−        , Where α ' = α 2 ,0.4 < H (r ) < 0.7
                                                            α'                            m

                                                      Case3:
                                                          Δ(i, j)
                                                      1−        , 0.1<  H (r ) < 0.4
                                                            α               m

                                                      Case 4:
                                                       0, Otherwise

                                                        The power of  is derived experimentally. We modify
                                                      the neighborhood function of PACE and other ant based
                                                      clustering algorithms as,
  Figure 1: Architecture of the Improved Probabilistic Ant based
           Clustering for Distributed Databases                           1           Δ(i, j)
                                                         f (i) = max(0.0,   ⋅ dw∑1−         )         (4)
                                                                           2            α
4.1  Introduction of weights                                             σ      jEL
Depending on the hit ratio, individual or groups of data
items are marked on a scale denoting their relevance to the
                                                        We include dw in the neighborhood function as a measure
query, called as dw or weights. dw denotes the odor associ- of the weight associated with a particular region. This can
ated with an item or a group of items surrounding it. If the
                                                      be modified to include dw for either individual or groups of
odor is strong, then the associated weights are strong and data-items depending on the density of the region as,
hence it makes sense to perform clustering there first. There
is an inherent relationship between the hit ratio and dw de-              1   n          Δ(i, j)
noted by the following equation which holds true for both f (i) = max(0.0,  ⋅ ∑ dwi∑1−          )     (5)
                                                                           2               α
individual or groups of data items,                                      σ    i=1  jEL

                    m
           =                                            Whenever n is the number of data items. By doing either
       dwi   H (rm)∑  Rj                        (3)   or all of the above, the requirements of fast convergence are
                    =
                   j 1                                satisfied as the clusters are formed in the decreasing order of
                                                      the regions with weights. This being so because ants get


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2703attracted to a stronger odor more easily than a weak one. So 4.3 Relationship of Radius of Perception with Zone
clusters tend to be formed first in those regions with a Radius and dw
strong odor and then the remaining thus forming heaps The radius of perception is given by (-1)/2 [Lumer and
which are more relevant to the user queries; the latter them- Faieta, 1994] for the general neighborhood function. For our
selves being a standard set of queries. For Inter-Zone clus- algorithm it depends on the Zone Radius and dw as follows,
tering, an average weight is associated with the clusters and
the same procedure is repeated as above.                               R

                                                             Rp  = R ⋅ ∑ dwm                          (7)
                                                                      m=1
4.2 Familial Pheromone Trails
A Family of Ants which follows their own pheromone trails Where Rp is the radius of perception and R the zone ra-
form clearly defined clusters. Instead of modifying the Ppick dius of that zone where the agent is currently placed. In-
and Pdrop functions, data items picked according to dw are creasing the radius of perception provides a better range for
dropped around regions satisfying both FoA and dw in some the agents to choose from but increases costs. To prevent
measure. We build upon the concepts of PACE and in addi- this, we propose to initially allocate the Radius of Percep-
tion to defining a FoA as a family which is formed around tion depending on the Zone Radius, increase it ‘locally’ for
groups of items, we define each FoA as to having its unique each ant depending on its environment and the values of dw.
pheromone trails. As we shall show later, the effect of this is Thus it is kept as a parameter of the dataset as required by
control over the definitions of-or demarcations between-the [Johnson and Kargupta, 1999]. There is no real need to
clusters formed. If more priority is given to dw then ants modify the neighborhood and threshold functions, Ppick and
may pick up and drop items near highly odoriferous regions Pdrop . Instead of the former, spatial separation between the
leading to overlapping or fused clusters. Alternatively if clusters is maintained throughout by the introduction of
more priority is given to an Ant’s FoA then data items may weights and the familial pheromone trails. Instead of the
be grouped together which are totally unrelated to each latter, done to speed up the clustering process, biasing the
other in certain cases or to the user queries in general. The movements of ants towards their own families and accord-
relationship between FoA and dw is as follows,        ing to the distribution of weights provides a faster conver-
                                                      gence time (See Section 4.1).

               ⎛        ⎞                             4.4    Weighted Agglomeration and Parallel Clus-
             =   AOIMi   ⋅
        FoA    ⎜        ⎟ dw                    (6)   tering
               ⎝ AOIMj  ⎠
                                                      As mentioned earlier, the final heaps formed are arranged in
                                                      a weighted order. For deriving information other than which
  The main advantage of choosing a proper balance be-
                                                      points lie in what clusters, we use two values wmin and wmax
tween FoA and dw is for choosing clearly defined and com- as measures of dissimilarity between any two points in the
pact clusters. By allowing for different groups of ants each heap. They are as follows,
part of their own FoA, considerable spreading of data in the
grid takes place. Each group of ants lies separately in the
                                                            w min = Min(w1, w2)                       (8)
grid without any overlapping of groups. To dampen the ef-
fects of outliers, which are points of non-agglomerative be- w max = Max(w1, w2)                      (9)
havior, we follow a two- stage strategy.

   In the first stage, during the ant colony building algo- wmin is a measure of the minimum difference in weights
rithm, ants tend to cluster around their own families- between any two points. Since the values are absolute and
surrounding groups of data items-hence isolated data items defined for every leaf node of the final heap, there is no
are those not having a strong odor and tend to appear at the need of explicitly calculating it every time like in [Johnson
bottom of the heaps formed by the ants. By this, an iterative and Kargupta, 1999] where the minimum and maximum
agglomeration and re-ordering renders these data items in a distances between any two points in a dendogram were cal-
way that they do not appear earlier to the users than more culated frequently from the final solution. Similarly wmax is
relevant data items. This re-ordering takes place more fre- a measure of the maximum difference in weights between
quently after a number of clusters which have been merged any points and the same principles as wmin apply to it also.
together reduces the clusters to below a certain threshold, To save on processing time and to speed up the clustering,
typically 1/3 of the original number. In the second stage we have proposed the parallelization of the agglomeration
during the final clustering steps when the granularity [Jain process. Intra-zone agglomeration takes place simultane-
and Dubes, 1988;Jain et al, 1999] is very high, again the re- ously in the various sites starting from zones of higher prior-
ordering is performed so that the irrelevant data items and ity as in PACE. Inter-zone agglomeration takes place as and
their clusters, generally very small, are below the other clus- when any zone finishes its own intra-zone process. Thus
ters.                                                 zones in these sites need not wait until all other zones in the


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2704distributed database have finished-thus speeding up the ag- each of the three measures. The above results demonstrate
glomeration process.                                  that in spite of clear cluster structures not being present in
                                                      certain data, I-PACE is quite easily able to identify the cor-
5   Experimental Results                              rect number of clusters. With certain exceptions I-PACE
                                                      performs well for all the three evaluation functions. Though
In this section comparative results of the performance of our k-means shows better performance for the synthetic data, it
improved PACE algorithm  (denoted as I-PACE) are re-  is clearly outmatched with respect to the real data by I-
ported against established clustering algorithms like the k- PACE. Errors in each case for the I-PACE algorithm are
means algorithm, the hierarchical agglomerative algorithm also considerably smaller than the remaining three as shown
and PACE.                                             here in Tables 2, 3 and 4 averaged over 80 runs.

5.1 Experimental Setup                                                      TABLE I
                                                          RESULTS OF EVALUATION FUNCTIONS ON K-MEANS,
The evaluation methodology given here was inspired by      HIERARCHICAL AGGLOMERATIVE AVERAGE LINK
[Handl et al., 2003a; Handl et al., 2003b].The first algo- CLUSTERING, PACE AND I-PACE.THE TABLE SHOWS MEAN AND
rithm we compare against is the well-known k-means algo-  STANDARD DEVIATIONS (IN BRACKETS) FOR 60 RUNS
rithm. Random initialization is used is used in our experi-
ments, and the best result out of a few runs is selected. If
empty clusters arise during the clustering process using the
k-means algorithm [Bishop, 1995], these are reinitialized
using a randomly selected data item. As a second method,
an agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm [Day and
Edelsbrunner, 1984] based on the linkage metric average
link [Jain et al, 1999] is used. The data items are distributed
in a number of toroidal grids with the assumption that the
ants are able to move from one grid to another and that the
edges are spherical to enable movements from all sides.

Synthetic Data
The Square1 dataset is the most popularly used type of data
set used for evaluation purposes in ant based clustering. It is
two-dimensional and consists of four clusters arranged as a                 TABLE II
square. To conform to distributed datasets, the Square1 PARAMETERS AND TEST RESULTS SHOWING THE CLUSTERING
dataset is spread uniformly among the various sites. They QUALITY WITH RESPECT TO ERRORS ON THE IRIS DATA
are generated by the Normal Distributions with correspond-
ing  points as  (N(-5,2),N(-5,2)),(N(5,2),N(5,2)), (N(-
5,2),N(5,2)) and (N(5,2),N(-5,2)) and are each of size 200.

Real Data
The real data collections used were the Iris data, the Wine                 TABLE III
Recognition data and the Yeast data with the description of PARAMETERS AND TEST RESULTS SHOWING THE CLUSTERING
                                                           QUALITY WITH RESPECT TO ERRORS ON THE WINE
each collection in [Blake and Merz, 1998]. Each dataset is             RECOGNITION DATA
permuted and randomly distributed in the sites. Different
evaluation functions proposed in [Handl et al., 2003a] are
adapted for comparing the clustering results obtained from
applying the three clustering algorithms on the test sets. The
F-Measure [Rijsbergen, 1979], Dunn Index [Halkidi et al.,
2000] and Rand Index [Rijsbergen, 1979] are the three                       TABLE IV
measures and their respective definitions also mentioned in PARAMETERS AND TEST RESULTS SHOWING THE CLUSTERING
                                                        QUALITY WITH RESPECT TO ERRORS ON THE YEAST DATA
[Handl et al., 2003b] and each should be maximized.

5.2  Experimental Results
The results of the evaluation functions on both synthetic as
well as the real data are shown in Table 1. It shows the
mean and standard deviation (obtained over 60 runs) for


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2705