      Automatic Decision of Piano Fingering Based on Hidden Markov Models

            Yuichiro YONEBAYASHI, Hirokazu KAMEOKA and Shigeki SAGAYAMA
                        Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
                                        The University of Tokyo
                         {yonebayashi,kameoka,sagayama}@hil.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp


                    Abstract                            Past research on automatic ﬁngering decision seemed to
                                                      focus on the score-to-ﬁngering conversion. Instead, we fo-
    This paper proposes a Hidden Markov Model         cus on another aspect of ﬁngering-to-performanceconversion
    (HMM)-based algorithm for automatic decision of   which can be easily formulated mathematically by introduc-
    piano ﬁngering. We represent the positions and    ing a probabilistic approach.
    forms of hands and ﬁngers as HMM  states and
    model the resulted sequence of performed notes as 2   Automatic Decision of Piano Fingering
    emissions associated with HMM transitions. Opti-
    mal ﬁngering decision is thus formulated as Viterbi 2.1 Formulation of Piano Fingering
    search to ﬁnd the most likely sequence of state tran- Automatic decision of piano ﬁngering can be formulated as a
    sitions. The proposed algorithm models the re-    problem to ﬁnd the most likely ﬁngering adopted by well-
    quired efforts in pressing a key with a ﬁnger fol- trained piano players. It essentially involves probabilistic
    lowed by another key with another ﬁnger, and in   modeling of piano performance.
    two-dimensional positioning of ﬁngers on the piano  The process by which a piano performer plays a sequence
    keyboard with diatonic and chromatic keys. Funda- of notes given in a score or in MIDI format can be considered
    mental functionality of the algorithm was veriﬁed as consisting of the following three steps:
    through experiments with real piano pieces. This   (1) read the input “score”,
    framework can be extended to polyphonic music      (2) decide the “ﬁngering”,
    containing chords.                                 (3) and produce the music sounds (“performance”).
                                                      Direct score-to-ﬁngering conversion (from (1) to (2)) may
                                                      face a difﬁculty in ﬁnding a reasonable local objective func-
1  Introduction                                       tion representing the ease of playing. For example, the sum of
This paper proposes an algorithm for automatic decision of the ﬁngering costs in [Hart et al., 2000; Kasimi et al., 2005]
piano ﬁngering based on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs,   lacks mathematical and well-deﬁned meanings.
see [Huang et al., 2001]). The goal is to formulate the reason- In contrast, we focus on another natural order, i.e., the
able hand motion in a piano performance as well as achieving ﬁngering-to-performance conversion (from (2) to (3)). We
highly reliable decision of piano ﬁngering. This algorithm is will design a ﬁngering model where we can incorporate var-
expected to be utilized for presenting a model performance to ious probabilistic factors representing physical constraints of
piano learners, estimating the required playing skill of piano ﬁngering and can design a local objective function mathe-
pieces, etc. If considered as part of the motion planning of a matically. Considering an imaginary piano performance, we
robot piano player, the proposed approach in this paper may can determine the most likely ﬁngering for producing that
be widely applicable to more general robot’s manipulation imaginary performance through the maximum a posteriori
tasks using robot ﬁngers.                             (MAP) approach. If the imaginary performance perfectly cor-
  A number of existing papers on piano ﬁngering decision responds to the given score, the over-all function becomes au-
dealt with monophonic melodies in a single hand through tomatic ﬁngering decision for the given score.
statistical methods [Noguchi et al., 1996], ﬁngering cost
functions deﬁned in between two notes [Hart et al., 2000; 2.2 Mathematical Model of Fingering with HMM
Kasimi et al., 2005], or rule-based methods [Hayashida and Fingering would be no problem unless music notes were pre-
Mizutani, 2003].In[Kasimi et al., 2005], chords and poly- ceded and/or followed by other notes. Fingering is actually a
phonic melodies in a single hand were also studied. However, problem because one note (or more notes) should be played
the statistical method presented in [Noguchi et al., 1996] re- after another (or others) within the time of the note length
quired score data tagged with ﬁngering information and the assigned to the preceding notes. This implies that ﬁngering
rule-based approach [Hayashida and Mizutani, 2003] needed is essentially a problem of ﬁnding an optimal sequence of
to handle conﬂict resolution between applicable rules. smooth state transition, typically, from a state of one ﬁnger

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2915pressing a key (corresponding a note pitch) to another state of
another ﬁnger pressing another key. Thus, piano performance
can be interpreted as the process of generating a sequence N
of performed notes from a sequence S of states of the posi-
tion and form of hands and ﬁngers, where N contains various
information, such as duration of key pressing, note strength
and tone as well as pitch and note length.
  Conversely, automatic ﬁngering decision is considered as
the problem of estimating the ﬁngering S which an ideal per-
former would adopt most likely for the given sequence N
of performed notes. Here, for the purpose of the model ap-
proximation described later, we factorize the sequence N of
performed notes into a triplet sequence (Y,O,T),whereT is
the sequence of note lengths, Y the sequence of pitches, and
O the sequence of all other information which could include
note strength and tone. Then the problem to be solved is to
calculate the ﬁngering S which maximizes P (S|(Y,O,T))
for a given sequence N =(Y,O,T).
  The most important is the probability whether the player
can make a smooth transition from the current note to the
next note under the state transition from the current state to Figure 1: Piano ﬁngering model using an HMM.
the next state of hands and ﬁngers. Assuming that the state
of hands and ﬁngers at each note ni =(yi,oi,ti) depends
only on the state at its previous note ni−1 and its note length probabilistic structures where the learning process is not al-
ti−1, the probability of ﬁngering S being used for the se- ways essential. We consider physical constraints in ﬁngering
quence N =(Y,O,T)   of performed notes is approximated and give reasonable parameter values to examine our model.
by Bayes’ Theorem as follows:                           Using this formulation, it is also possible to handle with
                                                      expressive performances. Given an (imaginary) expressive
   P (S|(Y,O,T)) ∝ P ((Y,O,T)|S)P (S)
                                                    music performance, the most likely ﬁngering that has pro-
     ≈      P ((yi,oi,ti−1)|(si,si−1)) P (si|si−1) (1) duced such a performance can be estimated according to the
                                                      a posteriori probability maximization principle.
where P (·) denotes probability.
  Consequently, an arc-emission HMM (Mealy machine) ﬁt 2.4 Model Approximation
in very well as a ﬁngering decision model where the states of The ﬁngering decision model described above can typically
the hands and the ﬁngers are hidden states and a sequence of contain a very large number of model parameters. In this pa-
performed notes results from the state transition process. per, as a ﬁrst step, we introduce the following three approxi-
  The output probability function, when transiting from a mations to narrow down the parameters to a small number.
state s1 to a state s2, is represented by bs1,s2 : M → [0, 1]
where M is the set of all the possible note transitions. The Simplifying the States of Hands and the Note

function bs1,s2 indicates the likelihood of a given ﬁngering Information
transition s1 → s2 when playing the respective note transi- We suppose that a ﬁnger (or a set of ﬁngers) playing a note
tions. For example, let s1 be a state using the 4th ﬁnger of the (or a set of notes) at some point in time is the hidden state
right hand and s2 the 5th ﬁnger, and consider the ﬁngering and that pitch transition (e.g., F#→G#) is the output. In other
transition from the 4th to the 5th. Then the fact that perfor- words, we ignore O and T .Thatis:
mance of F#→G is natural while that of A→G is not is shown
                                                         P (S|(Y,O,T))
in Figure 1.                                                                            
                                                            ∝     P ((yi,oi,ti−1)|(si,si−1)) P (si|si−1)
2.3  Model Formulation through HMMs                                            
By using HMMs, ﬁngering decision can be looked as the       ≈     P (yi|(fi,fi−1)) P (fi|fi−1),       (2)
probabilistic inverse problem of estimating the ﬁngering hid-
den behind a sequence of performed notes, which is paral- where fi is the ﬁnger (set of ﬁngers) playing the ith note (set
lel to the principle of modern speech recognition. Fingering of notes). Through this approximation, the set M introduced
decision is thus formulated as the problem of calculating S in Section 2.2 is considered as the set of all the possible pitch
which maximizes the a posteriori probability P (S|(Y,O,T)) transitions.
in formula (1) with Viterbi search (see [Huang et al., 2001]). This approximation is intended to recognize the funda-
  As already stated, the main purpose of our paper is to mental functionality of the decision model by limiting in-
probabilistically formulate the ﬁngering-to-performance pro- put/output data to the pitches (the primary input for ﬁngering
cess which ﬁts well with Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). decision) and the ﬁngers (the primary output to be decided).
Though often misunderstood, HMM represents a class of One can however expect the following drawbacks:

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2916  • Limiting the note information which affects ﬁngering
    to the pitches might miss important factors of ﬁnger-
    ing decision (for example, the decision cannot take note
    lengths into account), and decision accuracy might thus
    decrease.
  • It is impossible to decide the ﬁngering in a broad sense
    (such as the position/form of the hands, elbow motion,
    and so on). Limiting the decided information to ﬁngers
    position might narrow the range of possible applications
    of the algorithm (e.g., estimating the required playing
    skill of piano scores based on ﬁngering information).
  The former problem is expected to be solved by including

note information as parameters of M in the function bs1,s2 :
M  → [0, ∞). The latter is expected to be solved by deﬁning
possible ﬁngerings (in a broad sense) at each point in time as
a discrete set and deﬁning state transitions inside this set.
Ignoring Octave Position                               Figure 2: 2D distribution of the output probability function.
We ignore the octave position of pitches when deﬁning the set
M                                              →
  . This means that, for example, the pitch transition D G 2.5 Setting Model Parameters
performed in the middle of the keyboard is supposed to be
the same as when performed in the right side of the keyboard, It is necessary that not only the structure and the parameters
although the keys are not equally easy to play.       of the ﬁngering decision model but also the speciﬁc values
  This approximation is intended to reduce the domain M taken by the model parameters reasonably explain the mo-
                                                      tion and the structure of hands and ﬁngers in piano perfor-
of the output probability function bs1,s2 : M → [0, ∞).
However, the difﬁculty of playing low/high pitch keys in the mance. Therefore, it is important to choose the values of the
right/left hand cannot then be considered in the ﬁngering de- model parameters such that they reﬂect the physical structure
cision model, which will have a negative effect when deciding of the human hand and the conventions in the actual ﬁnger-
which hand has to be used to play a note. A possible way to ing decision. For example, concerning the physical structure,
deal with this problem is to adjust the output probability func- the ﬁnger lengths and the tendency that the stretch between
tions bs ,s for each octave position of the pitch transitions. the 1st ﬁnger (the thumb) and one of the other ﬁngers is eas-
      1 2                                             ier than that among two of the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th ﬁngers
This adjustment should be done for each bs1,s2 because the
range of keys which can be easily played will differ accord- should be taken into account, while for the decision conven-
ing to the ﬁnger used.                                tions one should model the fact that the distance in a ﬁnger
                                                      pair usually corresponds to the distance in a key pair but that
Simplifying the Output Probability Function           ﬁnger-crossing sometimes occurs.
                                      M                 Speciﬁcally, we should decide the values of the model pa-
We express a pitch−→ transition in the set as a two-
dimensional vector d from a key position to another in order rameters based on the following ideas:
to consider two-dimensional (right/left and back/fore) ﬁnger • The horizontal-direction element of the mean of the out-
position on the keyboard. We suppose that the output prob- put probability function should be close to the distance

ability function bs1,s2 : M → [0, ∞) deﬁned on the contin- in the key pair corresponding to the distance in the ﬁnger
uous space M follows a two-dimensional Gaussian distribu- pair. For example, the transition from the 3rd ﬁnger to
tion.                                                     the 5th ﬁnger corresponds to twice the width of a white

  Figure 2 shows an example of such a distribution bs1,s2 .It key.
shows that if F# (the origin of the plane) is played with the • The depth-direction element of the mean of the output
         = s
3rd ﬁnger ( 1) of the right hand, then the note played next probability function should be close to the difference be-
                 = s
with the 5th ﬁnger ( 2) of the right hand is most likely to tween the distances from the wrist to the ﬁngertips.
be A (the mean of the distribution).
                                                        •
  This approximation is intended to decrease the number of The tendency of the stretch between the 1st ﬁnger and
parameters which enter into the deﬁnition of the function one of the other ﬁngers to be easier should be reﬂected
                                                          by choosing a larger value for the variance of the corre-
bs1,s2 : M →  [0, ∞) for a given hidden state transition
s1 → s2.                                                  sponding output probability function.
  However, this strongly constrains the form of the function • The fact that ﬁnger-crossing likely occurs in the transi-

bs1,s2 (for example, bs1,s2 cannot be locally adjusted), there- tion between the 1st ﬁnger and one of the other ﬁngers
fore accuracy improvement by parameter learning might be  should be reﬂected by choosing a corresponding output
limited. A possible way to solve this problem is to relax the probability function with two distinct peaks. The two
constraint in some way, for example by replacing the Gaus- peaks will correspond to normal ﬁngering and ﬁnger-
sian distribution with a distribution in polygonal form.  crossing respectively.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2917  • The fact that the ﬁngering making a transition between
    the 3rd(4th) and 4th(5th) ﬁngers is often avoided be-
    cause of the limited independency of those ﬁnger pairs
    should be reﬂected by choosing a smaller value for the
    corresponding state transition probability.
3  Experiments
This chapter describes the experiment performed to show the
fundamental functionality of the proposed algorithm.
3.1  Conditions
We used piano scores of monophonic melodies in a single
hand (speciﬁcally, the right-hand monophonic melodies in
Bach’s Inventions No. 1 and 2, which include about 620 notes
in total). We made the three approximations introduced in
Section 2.4. Here, larger amount of piano scores should be
used in experimental evaluations and we plan to increase our Figure 3: Reasonable parts in the decided ﬁngering.
sample data. Our current paper, however, focuses on formu-
lating the ﬁngering decision problem, leaving the parameter
learning issues to our future study.
  We initially set the values of the model parameters as de-
scribed in Section 2.5, and then tuned them manually so that
the decided ﬁngering becomes as likely as possible. As the
manual tuning of model parameters can be regarded as a
primitive learning process, we suppose there is little risk of
over-ﬁtting where only a few parameters are involved in the
manual adjustment.
3.2  Results
The decided ﬁngering is reasonable in many places as can be
seen in Figure 3:
(A) The distance in the key pair corresponds to that of the
    ﬁnger pair,                                           Figure 4: Problematic parts in the decided ﬁngering.
(B) Finger-crossing is introduced in appropriate places,
(C) The difﬁculty of playing a black key with the 1st ﬁnger 3.3 Analysis
    is reﬂected.                                      The reasonable parts (A)–(C) in the decided ﬁngering are
However, the decided ﬁngering is problematic in a few places considered to be resulted from an appropriate choice of model
as shown in Figure 4:                                 parameters described in Section 2.5. Meanwhile, the prob-
(D) It is difﬁcult to play the same key consecutively with the lematic places (D) and (E) are considered to be due to the
    same ﬁnger for some note lengths,                 approximations introduced in Section 2.4. Speciﬁcally :
(E) The distance in the key pair corresponds to that in the (D) The problem comes from the fact that note length infor-
    ﬁnger pair but the hand motion is awkward.            mation T is ignored in the sequence N =(Y,O,T).
                                                       (E) The problem comes from the fact that the set of hidden
                                                          states is lacking of model parameters representing the
Table 3: Experimental values of the state transition probabil- hand motion.
ities.
                                                      The problem (E) may be also caused by the assumption made
                                                      in Section 2.2 that the current state of hands and ﬁngers does
                                                      not depend on the states at the notes before the previous note.
                                                        We can see that the manually-adjusted model parameters
                                                      are not far from the values given by the parameter setting
                                                      guidelines described in Section 2.5 (the values are reproduced
                                                      in Tables 1, 2 and 3). In particular, the tendency to often avoid
                                                      some ﬁngerings because of the limited independency of the
                                                      involved ﬁnger pair is achieved through corresponding state
                                                      transition probabilities which are lower by approximately 30
                                                      percents than other state transition probabilities.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2918  Table 1: Values for the mean of the 2D Gaussian distribution output probability functions.


Table 2: Values for the covariance of the 2D Gaussian distribution output probability functions.


                    Figure 5: Various cases of ﬁngering decision.


                                   IJCAI-07
                                     2919