             Reaching Envy-free States in Distributed Negotiation Settings

   Yann Chevaleyre              Ulle Endriss               Sylvia Estivie           Nicolas Maudet
      LAMSADE                       ILLC                    LAMSADE                    LAMSADE
 Univ. Paris-Dauphine     University of Amsterdam      Univ. Paris-Dauphine       Univ. Paris-Dauphine
        France                The Netherlands                 France                     France


                    Abstract                          discusses how to reach such states by means of distributed
                                                      negotiation. We prove a general convergence theorem for su-
    Mechanisms for dividing a set of goods amongst a  permodular valuations, and show that very simple deals over
    number of autonomous agents need to balance ef-   one resource at a time sufﬁce to guarantee convergence in the
    ﬁciency and fairness requirements. A common in-   modular case. Next, to be able to study how envy evolves
    terpretation of fairness is envy-freeness, while ef- over the course of a negotiation process, we introduce differ-
    ﬁciency is usually understood as yielding maximal ent metrics for the degree of envy in Section 5. We have used
    overall utility. We show how to set up a distributed these metrics in a number of experiments aimed at analysing
    negotiation framework that will allow a group of  how envy evolves in modular domains. The results of these
    agents to reach an allocation of goods that is both experiments are reported in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.
    efﬁcient and envy-free.
                                                      2   Distributed Negotiation Settings
1  Introduction                                       In this section, we brieﬂy review the distributed negotiation
There are often two opposing requirements that we apply framework we adopt in this paper [Endriss et al., 2006].
when judging the quality of an allocation of goods to a num-
ber of autonomous agents: efﬁciency and fairness [Moulin, 2.1 Basic Deﬁnitions
1988]. While the quest for economically efﬁcient outcomes Let A = {1..n} beaﬁnitesetofagents and let R be a ﬁnite
is well aligned with the highly successful approach of mod- set of indivisible resources (which we also refer to as goods).
elling agents as rational players in the game-theoretical sense, An allocation is a partitioning of the items in R amongst the
fairness is much more elusive and has generally achieved far agents in A (i.e. each good must be owned by exactly one
less attention in the AI community (but recent exceptions in- agent). As an example, allocation A,deﬁnedviaA(i)={r1}
clude, for instance, the work of Bouveret and Lang [2005], and A(j)={r2,r3}, would allocate r1 to agent i,andr2 and
Endriss et al. [2006], and Lipton et al. [2004]).     r3 to agent j. The interests of individual agents i ∈Aare
                                                                                         R
  In this paper, we interpret fairness as envy-freeness.An modelled using valuation functions vi :2 → R, mapping
allocation of goods is envy-free if no agent would prefer to bundles of goods to real numbers. Throughout this paper,
receive the bundle assigned to one of its peers rather than we shall make the assumption that all valuations vi are nor-
its own [Brams and Taylor, 1996]. Efﬁciency is interpreted malised in the sense that vi({})=0. Technically, this is not
as maximising utilitarian social welfare, i.e. as maximising a signiﬁcant restriction, but it greatly eases presentation. We
the sum of the utilities of the individual agents [Moulin, sometimes use vi(A) as a shorthand for vi(A(i)),thevalue
1988]. We are interested in identifying those efﬁcient al- agent i assigns to the bundle received in allocation A.
locations of goods to agents that are also envy-free. More Agents negotiate sequences of deals to improve their own
speciﬁcally, we are interested in reaching such allocations by welfare. A deal δ =(A, A) is a pair of allocations (with
means of a distributed negotiation process [Sandholm, 1998; A = A), specifying the situation before and afterwards. Ob-
Endriss et al., 2006; Dunne et al., 2005]. That is, rather than serve that a single deal may involve the reassignment of any
developing a “centralised” algorithm to compute such an allo- number of goods amongst any number of agents. A 1-deal
cation, we want agents to be able to reach the desired state in is a deal involving only a single resource (and hence only
an interactive manner by means of a sequence of deals they two agents). The set of agents involved in the deal δ is de-
negotiate locally, driven by their own interests and without noted as Aδ. Deals may be accompanied by monetary side
regard for the global optimisation problem.           payments to allow agents to compensate others for otherwise
  The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we review disadvantageous deals. This is modelled using so-called pay-
the distributed negotiation framework adopted. Section 3 for- ment functions (PFs): p : A→R, which are required to
mally deﬁnes the concept of envy-freeness and gives a proof satisfy i∈A p(i)=0. A positive value p(i) indicates that
for the existence of efﬁcient envy-free states in the presence agent i pays money, while a negative value means that the
of money, for the case of supermodular valuations. Section 4 agent receives money. We associate each allocation A that is

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1239reached in a sequence of deals with a function π : A→R agents. Estivie et al. [2006] introduce several concrete pay-
mapping agents to the sum of payments they have made so ment functions that agents may choose to adopt. The two sim-
far, i.e. we also have i∈A π(i)=0.Astate of the system plest ones are the locally uniform payment function (LUPF)
is a pair (A, π) of an allocation A and a payment balance π. and the globally uniform payment function (GUPF).
  Each agent i ∈Ais also equipped with a utility function Choosing a PF amounts to choosing how to distribute the
     R                                                                  
ui :2  ×  R →  R mapping pairs of bundles and previous social surplus sw(A ) − sw(A) generated by a deal δ =
                                                           
payments to real numbers. These are fully determined by the (A, A ). It is known that the social surplus is positive iff δ
valuation functions: ui(R, x)=vi(R) − x. That is, utilities is IR [Endriss et al., 2006]. The LUPF divides this amount
                                                                                           δ
are quasi-linear: they are linear in the monetary component, equally amongst the participating agents A ; the GUPF di-
but the valuation over bundles of goods may be any set func- vides it equally amongst all agents A:
                u (A(i),π(i))                  i                                                     δ
tion. For example, i         is the utility of agent in LUPF: p(i)=[vi(A  )− vi(A)] − [sw(A )−sw(A)]/|A |
    (A, π)      u (A(j),π(j))               i                               δ
state     , while i          is the utility that would               if i ∈A and 0 otherwise
experience if it were to swap places with j (in terms of both                             
                                                      GUPF:   p(i)=[vi(A  )− vi(A)] − [sw(A )−sw(A)]/n
the bundle owned, and the sum of payments made so far).
2.2  Individual Rationality and Efﬁciency             3   Envy-freeness
Agents are assumed to only negotiate individually rational An important aspect of fairness is the absence of envy [Brams
(IR) deals, i.e. deals that beneﬁt everyone involved: and Taylor, 1996]. In this section, we give two deﬁnitions of
                                                      envy-freeness: the ﬁrst applies to allocations of goods alone,
                                   
Deﬁnition 1 (IR deals) Adealδ =(A, A ) is called individ- while the second also takes previous payments into account.
ually rational iff there exists a payment function p such that While the ﬁrst may be in conﬂict with efﬁciency require-
    
vi(A ) − vi(A) >p(i) for all agents i ∈A, except possibly ments, for the second deﬁnition there always exists a nego-
                              
p(i)=0for agents i with A(i)=A (i).                   tiation state that is both efﬁcient and envy-free.
While negotiation is driven by the individual preferences of 3.1 Envy-free Allocations of Goods
agents, we are interested in reaching states that are attractive
from a “social” point of view. A common metric for efﬁ- In the context of our negotiation framework, the concept of
ciency is (utilitarian) social welfare [Moulin, 1988]: envy-freeness can be formally deﬁned as follows:
                                                      Deﬁnition 3 (Envy-freeness) An allocation A is called
Deﬁnition 2 (Social welfare) The social welfare of an allo-
                                                      envy-free iff vi(A(i)) ≥ vi(A(j)) for all agents i, j ∈A.
cation A is deﬁned as sw(A)= i∈A vi(A(i)).
                                                      Observe that, were we not to require that all goods be allo-
We also speak of the social welfare of a state (A, π).As
            π(i)        0                             cated, it would be easy to ﬁnd an envy-free allocation: sim-
the sum of all  is always , the two notions coincide, i.e. ply allocate the empty bundle to each agent. On the other
it does not matter whether we deﬁne social welfare in terms hand, it is well-known that if we either require all goods to be
of valuations or in terms of utilities. A state/allocation with allocated (so-called complete allocations), or if we restrict in-
maximal social welfare is called efﬁcient. A central result in terest to allocations that are Pareto optimal, then an envy-free
                                   [    ]
distributed negotiation is due to Sandholm 1998 :     allocation may not always exist (just think of the case of two
Theorem 1 (Convergence) Any sequence of IR deals will agents and a single good). Bouveret and Lang [2005] have in-
eventually result in an efﬁcient allocation of goods. vestigated the computational complexity of checking whether
                                                      a given negotiation problem admits an allocation that is envy-
This result guarantees that agents can agree on any sequence free. One of the simpler results states that checking whether
of deals meeting the IR condition without getting stuck in a there exists a complete and envy-free allocation is NP-hard,
local optimum; and there can be no inﬁnite sequence of IR even if there are only two agents and these agents use the
deals. On the downside, this result presupposes that agents same dichotomous and monotonic valuation function.1
are able to negotiate complex multilateral deals between any
number of agents and involving any number of goods.   3.2  Envy-freeness in the Presence of Money
  A valuation function v is modular iff v(R1 ∪ R2)=
v(R )+v(R   ) − v(R ∩ R )            R  ,R  ⊆R        Deﬁnition 3 is the standard deﬁnition of envy-freeness, which
   1       2      1    2 for all bundles 1 2    .In   applies to domains without transferable utility; that is, it does
modular domains, we can get a much stronger convergence not (yet) take the monetary component of our negotiation
     [                ]
result Endriss et al., 2006 :                         framework into account. Next, we deﬁne envy-freeness with
Theorem 2 (Simple convergence) If all valuation functions respect to full negotiation states:
are modular, then any sequence of IR 1-deals will eventually Deﬁnition 4 (EF states) A state (A, π) is called envy-free iff
result in an efﬁcient allocation of goods.            ui(A(i),π(i)) ≥ ui(A(j),π(j)) for all agents i, j ∈A.
2.3  Payment Functions                                A state that is both efﬁcient and envy-free is called an EEF
                                                      state. This corresponds to Pareto optimal and envy-free allo-
Requiring deals to be IR puts restrictions on what deals are cations without money.
possible at all and it limits the range of possible payments,
but it does not determine the precise side payments to be 1A valuation v is dichotomous iff v(R)=0or v(R)=1for any
made. This is a matter to be negotiated by the participating R ⊆R; v is monotonic iff v(R1) ≤ v(R2) whenever R1 ⊆ R2.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1240  How does the move to a deﬁnition that explicitly accounts Suppose agent 1 holds r in the initial allocation A0.There
for payments affect the existence of envy-free states? In fact, is only a single possible deal, which amounts to passing r to
in the presence of money, states that are both efﬁcient and agent 2, and which will result in the efﬁcient allocation A∗.
envy-free are known to always exist [Alkan et al., 1991]. How should payments be arranged? To ensure that the deal
While the proof given by Alkan et al. is rather involved, in is IR for both agents, agent 2 should pay agent 1 any amount
the case of supermodular valuations we can give a very sim- in the open interval (4, 7). On the other hand, to ensure that
ple existence argument. A valuation v is supermodular iff the ﬁnal state is envy-free, agent 2 should pay any amount in
v(R1 ∪ R2) ≥ v(R1)+v(R2)  − v(R1 ∩ R2) for all bundles the closed interval [2, 3.5]. The two intervals do not overlap.
R1,R2 ⊆R. We show a proof here, as this will be helpful in This means that, while we will be able to reach negotiation
following some of the material later on (cf. Section 4.2). outcomes that are EEF, it is simply not possible in all cases to
Theorem 3 (Existence of EEF states) If all valuations are do so by means of a process that is fully IR.
supermodular, then an EEF state always exists.          For the procedure proposed in the sequel, we are going to
                                                      circumvent this problem by introducing a one-off initial pay-
Proof. There clearly always exists an allocation that is efﬁ- ment that may not be IR for all the agents involved:
cient: some allocation must yield a maximal sum of individ-
                  ∗
ual valuations. Let A be such an efﬁcient allocation. We          π0(i)=vi(A0)    − sw(A0)/n
show that a payment balance π∗ can be arranged such that
         ∗   ∗               ∗                        That is, each agent has to ﬁrst pay an amount equivalent to
the state (A ,π ) is EEF. Deﬁne π (i) for each agent i:
                                                      their valuation of the initial allocation A0, and will then re-
             ∗            ∗        ∗
           π (i)=vi(A      ) − sw(A )/n               ceive an equal share of the social welfare as a kick-back. We
First, note that π∗ is a valid payment balance: the π∗(i) do refer to this as making an initial equitability payment.Note
indeed sum up to 0. Now let i, j ∈Abe any two agents in that this payment does not achieve envy-freeness (and it does
the system. We show that i does not envy j in state (A∗,π∗). not affect efﬁciency at all). All it does is to “level the playing
As A∗ is efﬁcient, giving both A∗(i) and A∗(j) to i will not ﬁeld”. In the special case where none of the agents has an
                                                      interest in the goods they hold initially (vi(A0)=0for all
increase social welfare any further:                  i ∈A
         ∗          ∗             ∗      ∗                 ), the initial payments reduce to 0.
     vi(A (i)) + vj(A (j)) ≥  vi(A (i) ∪ A (j))
                                                      4.2  Convergence in Supermodular Domains
As vi is assumed to be supermodular, this entails:
   v (A∗(i)) + v (A∗(j)) ≥  v (A∗(i)) + v (A∗(j))     We are now going to prove a central result on the reachability
    i          j             i          i             of EEF states by means of distributed negotiation. The result
Adding sw(A∗)/n to both sides of this inequation, together applies to supermodular domains and assumes that initial eq-
                                       ∗    ∗
with some simple rearrangements, yields ui(A (i),π (i)) ≥ uitability payments have been made. It states that, if agents
    ∗     ∗
ui(A (j),π (j)), i.e. agent i does indeed not envy agent j. only implement deals that are individually rational (IR) and
Hence, (A∗,π∗) is not only efﬁcient, but also envy-free. 2 they use the globally uniform payment function (GUPF) each
                                                      time to determine the exact payments, then negotiation will
This is an encouraging result: for the deﬁnitions adopted in eventually terminate (i.e. no more such deals will be possible)
this paper, efﬁciency and fairness are compatible. However, and the ﬁnal state reached will be both efﬁcient and envy-free
the mere existence of an EEF state alone is not sufﬁcient (EEF). Importantly, this will be the case whichever deals (that
in the context of negotiation amongst autonomous agents. are meeting these conditions) the agents choose to implement,
Why should rational decision-makers accept the allocation i.e. we can never get stuck in a local optimum. In short:
and payments prescribed by the proof of Theorem 3? And Theorem 4 (Convergence with GUPF) If all valuations are
even if they do, how can we compute them in practice? Just supermodular and if initial equitability payments have been
ﬁnding an efﬁcient allocation is already known to be NP-hard made, then any sequence of IR deals using the GUPF will
[Rothkopf et al., 1998]. Finally, as argued in the introduction, eventually result in an EEF state.
we are interested in a distributed procedure, where agents
identify the optimal state in an interactive manner.  Proof. We ﬁrst show that the following invariant will be true
                                                      for every state (A, π) and every agent i, provided that agents
4  Reaching Efﬁcient Envy-free States                 only negotiate IR deals using the GUPF:
In this section, we discuss to what extent EEF states can be       π(i)=vi(A)     − sw(A)/n           (1)
reached by means of negotiation in a distributed manner.
                                                      Our proof proceeds by induction over the number of deals
4.1  Envy-freeness and Individual Rationality         negotiated. As we assume that initial equitability payments
                                                      have been made, claim (1) will certainly be true for the initial
In the previous section, we have seen that envy-freeness and                      
                                                      state (A0,π0).Nowletδ =(A, A ) and assume (1) holds for
efﬁciency are compatible in our framework. However, this A                             π
does not necessarily mean that also envy-freeness and indi- and the associated payment balance . We obtain the pay-
                                                      ment balance π associated with A by adding the appropriate
vidual rationality will be compatible. And indeed, the follow-         π
ing example (involving two agents and just a single resource) GUPF payments to :
                                                                                          
shows that this is not the case:                       π (i)=π(i)+[vi(A     )−vi(A)] − [sw(A )−sw(A)]/n
                                                                             
              v1({r})=4   v2({r})=7                          =   vi(A ) − sw(A )/n 

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1241This proves our claim (1). Now, Theorem 1 shows that ne- 5 Degrees of Envy
gotiation via IR deals (whichever PF is used) must eventually The convergence theorems of the previous section show that
terminate and that the ﬁnal allocation will be efﬁcient. Let envy-freeness can be a guaranteed outcome of our negotia-
A∗                       π∗
   be that allocation, and let be the associated payment tion process, under speciﬁc assumptions. But this is of course
                                 (A∗,π∗)
balance. Equation (1) also applies to   .Butaswe      far from being the ﬁnal word on this topic. The PF involved
have already seen in the proof of Theorem 3, the efﬁciency in proving Theorem 4 introduces a non-local element, in the
  A∗                                (A∗,π∗)
of   together with equation (1) applied to  implies   sense that it redistributes the social surplus over the whole
   (A∗,π∗)                                       2
that       must be an EEF state.                      society. How would a local PF, like the LUPF, behave in
                                                      comparison? Also, agents need to start negotiation with a
Theorem 4 may seem surprising. As pointed out elsewhere non-IR payment. But how does this affect the results in prac-
[Endriss et al., 2006], it is not possible to deﬁne a “local” tice? Lastly, the convergence theorems do not say how envy
criterion for the acceptability of deals (which can be checked evolves over the course of negotiation. Because negotiation
taking only the utilities of the agents involved into account) can become very long in practice, it is likely that the process
that would guarantee that a sequence of such deals always will have to be be stopped before completion. In that event, it
converges to an envy-free state. We circumvent this problem would be valuable to be able to guarantee some monotonicity
here by using the GUPF, which adds a (very limited) non- properties—but with respect to what parameter?
local element. Only the agents involved in a deal can ever be To address such questions, not only the mere classiﬁcation
asked to give away money, and all payments can be computed of a society as being envy-free or not is needed. It is important
taking only the utilities of those involved into account. to investigate to what degree we may be able to approximate
                                                      the ideal of envy-freeness. In the remainder of this section,
4.3  Convergence in Modular Domains                   we discuss several options for deﬁning such a metric. We
                                                      propose to analyse the degree of envy of a society as a three-
In modular domains, we can even guarantee convergence to level aggregation process, starting with envy between agents,
an EEF state by means of 1-deals (over one item at a time): over envy of a single agent, to eventually provide a deﬁnition
Theorem 5 (Simple convergence with GUPF) If all valua- for the degree of envy of a society.
tion functions are modular and if initial equitability payments 5.1 Envy between Agents
have been made, then any sequence of IR 1-deals using the
                                                      How much does agent i envy agent j in state (A, π)?Gen-
GUPF will eventually result in an EEF state.
                                                      erally speaking, when assessing the degree of envy between
Proof. This works as for Theorem 4, except that we rely on two agents, we can either focus on agents that we indeed envy
                                                                   epos
Theorem 2 for convergence by means of 1-deals (in place of (positive envy, ), or consider both agents that appear to be
Theorem 1). Note that Theorem 3 still applies, because any better off, of course, but also agents we believe to be in a sit-
                                                                                   etot
modular valuation is also supermodular.          2    uation worse than ours (total envy, ).
                                                             tot
                                                            e  (i, j)=ui(A(j),π(j))   − ui(A(i),π(i))
4.4  Related Work                                          epos(i, j)=max{etot(i, j), 0}
                                                      While the latter option (epos) seems to ﬁt best with our intu-
There has been some work on procedures for ﬁnding EEF                            tot
states in the social choice literature [Alkan et al., 1991; itions about envy, the former (e ) may be justiﬁable if we
Klijn, 2000; Haake et al., 2002], albeit with little or no at- want agents to be able to compensate for envy.
tention to computational issues. The work of Haake et al. 5.2 Degree of Envy of a Single Agent
is particularly interesting. They propose two variants of the                   i       (A, π)
same procedure, the ﬁrst of which assumes that an efﬁcient How envious is a single agent in state ? This notion
allocation is given to begin with. The actual procedure deter- considers the agent in relation with many other agents. A ﬁrst
                                                      option would be to count the number of agents that i envies.
mines compensatory payments to envious agents such that an                             epos
EEF state will eventually be reached. While their solution is This arguably only makes sense when is used to assess
very elegant and intuitively appealing, it fails to address the the envy between two agents.
                                                                             1    ∃j : epos(i, j) =0
main issue as far as the computational aspect of the problem e0−1,pos(i)=       if
is concerned: by taking the efﬁcient allocation as given, the                0  otherwise
problem is being limited to ﬁnding an appropriate payment More ﬁne-grained, quantitative measures would also account
balance. Certainly for supermodular domains, our proof of for how envious an agent is. At least two obvious options
Theorem 3 shows that this is not a combinatorial problem. for doing this come to mind. Firstly, we could measure how
  The second procedure put forward by Haake et al. [2002] much our agent envies the agent it envies the most (emax,op).
interleaves reallocations for increasing efﬁciency with pay- Or we could compute the sum of envies it experiences with
ments for eliminating envy. However, here the authors also respect to all the agents in the system (esum,op).
do not address a combinatorial problem, because they as- emax,op(i)=maxeop(i, j)         op ∈{pos, tot}
                                                                          j        where
sume “exogenously given bundles”. That is, negotiation re- esum,op(i)=     eop(i, j)    op ∈{pos, tot}
lates only to who gets which bundle, but the composition of              j        where
the bundles themselves cannot be altered. This is equivalent Note that these two options can be of interest whatever the op-
to allocating n objects to n agents—not an NP-hard problem. erator chosen to compute the degree of envy between agents.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  12425.3  Degree of Envy of a Society                        For all the experiments reported, the number of agents is
                                                      n =20              |R|
Given the degrees of envy of each individual agent in a sys- . The number    of resources in the system varies
tem for a given negotiation state, we can now deﬁne suit- between 50 and 500, depending on the experiment. For each
able aggregation operators to yield the degree of envy for the agent, we randomly choose 50 distinguished resources. To all
agent society as a whole. As for the aggregation of individual the other resources, the agent in question assigns valuation 0.
preferences to obtain a social preference ordering [Moulin, For each of the distinguished resources, we randomly draw a
                                                                                               {1..100}
1988], there are a multitude of different options available for weight from the uniform distribution over the set to
doing this. Here we just mention two options that appear determine the (modular) valuation function of that agent.
particularly appropriate in our context: the max-andsum-
operators. Using the max operator must be interpreted as 6.2 Envy over Time
focusing on the most envious agent of the society (whatever The ﬁrst set of experiments is aimed at clarifying how envy
operator was chosen to measure that), while the sum (or av- evolves over the course of negotiation. Before turning to the
erage) provides a more global picture of the situation. Lipton experiments, we observe the following fact: If an agent with
et al. [2004], for instance, use emax,max,pos to describe the a modular valuation function makes an IR bilateral deal, this
degree of envy of a society. This is the maximum envy expe- will reduce its envy towards its trading partner. This means
rienced by any agent, where each agent measures their envy that the envy between the two agents cutting a deal will al-
as the difference to the opponent they envy the most. ways reduce. However, non-concerned agents may become
                                                      more envious than before, because one of those two agents
5.4  Discussion                                       may have improved its lot according to their own valuation.
The different measures of envy introduced here are by no
means exhaustive. Other options for aggregating degrees
of envy could be used, e.g. based on the leximin-ordering
[Moulin, 1988]. However, by just combining the options
listed here, we obtain several candidate measures of envy.
Some of them are of course much more natural than oth-
ers, as our discussion already suggested. While this question
would certainly necessitate a deeper discussion, we only pro-
vide here some basic justiﬁcation that supports the choice of
the measure we decided to use in this paper. Note ﬁrst that a
basic requirement of these measures would be that the degree
of envy should be ≤ 0 iff that allocation is envy-free. This al-
ready rules out any measure based on etot. As for the rest, it is
mostly a matter of what aspect you want to study as a priority.
In what follows, we use two measures: the number of envi-
ous agents (esum,0−1,pos), because it gives a good snapshot
of the distribution of envy within the society; and the sum of Figure 1: Evolution of envy over time (150 goods)
the sum of envies (esum,sum,pos), because it also reﬂects the
overall magnitude of envy, which the previous one misses.
                                                      This makes it difﬁcult to predict how overall envy will be
                                                      affected by a deal. A typical example is given in Figure 1.
6  Analysis of Modular Domains                        The ﬁgure shows the sum of positive envies after each deal,
In this section, we report on a ﬁrst experimental analysis of for one particular negotiation process. The payment function
how close we can get to the ideal of an EEF state, if we do used is the LUPF (without any initial payments). As we can
not make the initial equitability payment required by our con- see, after about 320 deals negotiation terminates and we have
vergence theorems; that is, if we use a framework that is fully reached an allocation that is almost envy-free. Figure 1 shows
IR. We restrict ourselves to the case of modular domains. that the degree of envy does not diminish strictly monotoni-
                                                      cally. On the other hand, the graph suggests (and more exten-
6.1  Experimental Setup                               sive experiments, not shown here, clearly demonstrate), that
The experiments discussed in this section have been carried envy does diminish monotonically on average. Further exper-
out using a simple simulation platform. After creating a num- iments show that the GUPF (also without initial payments)
ber of virtual agents and resources, we randomly distribute performs slightly better than the LUPF (faster convergence
the resources amongst the agents and randomly generate val- and lower overall envy in the end).
uation functions for them. Negotiation is simulated by going
for each (randomly chosen) agent through all the goods cur- 6.3 Impact of Number of Resources
rently held by that agent and trying to ﬁnd a potential partner While for the example shown in Figure 1 we do not reach an
with whom an IR 1-deal over that good can be agreed upon. EEF state, it seems nevertheless remarkable that we get rather
This process is repeated until no more IR 1-deals are possi- close. It turns out that how close we can get depends very
ble. As we restrict ourselves to modular valuations, the ﬁnal strongly on the number of goods in the system. This issue is
allocation is known to always be efﬁcient (cf. Theorem 2). analysed in more detail in our second set of experiments. An

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1243