                                Is the Turing Test Good Enough?
                      The Fallacy of Resource-unbounded Intelligence

                     Virginia Savova                               Leonid Peshkin
                 Johns Hopkins University                        Harvard University
                      savova@jhu.edu                           pesha@hms.harvard.edu


                    Abstract                          a judge. At the end of the game, the judge is asked to point
                                                      out the human participant. If under repeated sessions of the
    This goal of this paper is to defend the plausibil- game, the judge is at chance, the machine should be consid-
    ity of the argument that passing the Turing test is ered intelligent.
    a sufﬁcient condition for the presence of intelli-
                                                        It is fairly obvious that passing the Turing test is not a nec-
    gence. To this effect, we put forth new objections
                                                      essary condition of intelligence. For one, most humans have
    to two famous counter-arguments: Searle’s ”Chi-
                                                      never been subjected to such a test. Furthermore, an intelli-
    nese Room” and Block’s ”Aunt Bertha.” We take
                                                      gent agent might fail the test due to temporary impairments,
    Searle’s argument to consist of two points: 1) intel-
                                                      such as being sleepy, hungry or on drugs. Finally, an intelli-
    ligence is not merely an ability to manipulate for-
                                                      gent machine might fail the Turing test because it may believe
    mal symbols; it is also the ability of relating those
                                                      it is in its best interest not to show how intelligent it is.
    symbols to a multi-sensory real-world experience;
    and 2) intelligence presupposes an internal capacity Thus, the Turing test debate in the literature has centered
    for generalization. On the ﬁrst point, while we con- around the question of whether the test represents a sufﬁcient
    cede that multi-sensory real-world experience is not condition for intelligence. Turing himself is fairly uncon-
    captured by the test, we show that intuitions about vinced on this issue. His skepticism derives from the conclu-
    the relevance of this experience to intelligence are sion that the question of machine intelligence is very much
    not clear-cut. Therefore, it is not obvious that the alike the question of other minds. It is impossible, the solip-
    Turing test should be dismissed on this basis alone. sist argument goes, to know for sure whether there exist any
    On the second point, we strongly disagree with the other conscious beings apart from one’s self, since one only
    notion that the test cannot distinguish a machine has direct access to one’s own consciousness. Thus, rather
    with internal capacity for generalization from a ma- than directly arguing in favor of his test as a sufﬁcient condi-
    chine which has no such capacity. This view is best tion, he claims that the test is simply a good approximation
    captured by Ned Block, who argues that a sufﬁ-    to some true characteristic of intelligence, which is both cur-
    ciently large look-up table is capable of passing any rently unknown and impossible to observe.
    Turing test of ﬁnite length. We claim that, contrary But despite Turing’s reluctance to adopt a strong stance,
    to Block’s assumption, it is impossible to construct philosophers have taken this position seriously in both de-
    such a table, and show that it is possible to ensure fending and disproving it, and for a good reason. In the ab-
    that a machine relying solely on such table will fail sence of this strong assertion, the power of the Turing test as
    an appropriately constructed Turing test.         a diagnostic is severely limited, and its status is reduced to a
                                                      dubious replacement for the true deﬁnition of intelligence. In
                                                      other words, why would we take the Turing test more seri-
1  Introduction                                       ously than any other arbitrarily formulated criterion? Its only
The poet James Whitcomb Riley (1849-1916) is often re- advantage appears to be that it would pick out all humans,
membered for his formulation of the “duck criterion”: ”When who constitute- by assumption- the pool of known intelligent
I see a bird that walks like a duck and swims like a duck and entities. However, we can achieve similar success by replac-
quacks like a duck, I call that bird a duck.”         ing the deﬁnition of intelligence with the deﬁnition of feather-
  With a similarly practical attitude, many AI researchers less biped. Countless other criteria would do the same, while
would say a machine that talks intelligently and behaves in- having little to do with our intuition of what intelligence is
telligently should be called intelligent. This assumption was as a trait. That is why it is important to ﬁgure out the ex-
formalized by Alan Turing who proposed a behavioral test tent to which Turing’s criterion can be deemed sufﬁcient for
for determining whether a machine can think [Turing, 1950; ascertaining intelligence.
Turing et al., 1952]. In its original formulation, the Turing Just like Riley’s duck criterion, Turing’s intelligence cri-
test is an imitation game, in which a machine does its best to terion is attractive because the decision is based on purely
imitate a human participant in free-ﬂowing conversation with observable, external characteristics. Thus, without having to

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   545know how intelligence arises or what it is made of, we can as- Finally, the “robot reply” concedes that the Chinese room
certain its presence purely by observing its interactions with or the person inside it cannot claim to possess human-level
the environment. This gives rise to the foundational claim of intelligence because it does not interact with the real world.
AI and cognitive science — that intelligence can be under- The solution is to let the room receive input from the real
stood and reproduced in an abstract computational device. world. Searle’s objection is that there is no way for the input
  But the Turing test’s most attractive aspect is precisely the from the real world to be experienced in a way that a human
one open for most criticism. Powerful objections have been experiences it [Boden, 1988].
raised to the effect that the deﬁnition of intelligence requires The latter two replies pertain to what we will call “the in-
access to the inner workings of the computational mechanism formation content” part of Searle’s argument.
used by the machine, rather than its behavior per se. The
objections are illustrated by two famous thought experiments: 2.2 Two challenges from the Chinese Room
Searle’s Chinese Room and Block’s Aunt Bertha.
                                                      Searle’s thought experiment appears to conﬂate two issues,
                                                      and it is worth teasing those apart. One issue is the issue of
2  The Chinese Room                                   information content. The formal symbol stands for an en-
Searle (1980) imagines a monolingual English speaker locked tity in the real world. Obviously, any machine which has no
in a room with Chinese symbols and a large set of instructions access to the mapping from the formal symbol to the entity
in English about mapping sequences of these symbols to other cannot be said to understand what the formal symbol means.
sequences. His interrogators outside come up with a Chinese The other issue is the type of information storage and ac-
story along with a set of questions about the story. They hand cess. It is our intuition that there is something profoundly
the story and the questions to the person inside the room, who unintelligent about interacting with the environment through
then looks up the sequence of symbols in the instruction man- a look-up table, or by following an externally generated se-
ual and produces what his interrogators might view as a reply. quence of steps. The problem with this scenario is that the
Despite performing adequately on the verbal Chinese test, the intelligence observed in the behavior of the agent originates
person inside the room does not understand Chinese. Instead, outside of the agent, which is in and of itself incapable of
s/he merely appears to understand Chinese, i.e. simulates un- generating novel behavior. This is the issue of generative in-
derstanding of Chinese. Similarly, Searle argues, a machine capacity.
can fake its way out of the Turing Test without satisfying our
deep intuition of what it means to be truly intelligent. 2.3 Objection to the argument from information
                                                           content
2.1  Previous objections to the Chinese Room          The question of information content is really the question of
There have been a number of objections to the Chinese Room the nature of meaning, or real-world knowledge, and its per-
over the years. We will brieﬂy review here the ones most tinence to our intuition about intelligence. Meaning is the re-
relevant to our current discussion.                   lationship between a formal symbol and the entity (or event)
  The “systems reply” states that even if the person inside it stands for. Obviously, if one is without access to sensory
the Chinese Room does not understand Chinese, the room input from the world, or the correspondence relation between
with all its content, does. In effect, the person is to the room the world and the formal symbols, one cannot claim access to
like the CPU is to the computer [Rey, 1986]. Therefore the meaning. We will not argue this point.
correct level of analysis is the room as a whole.       However, we take issue with Searle’s assumption that
  While the “systems reply” by itself may be insufﬁciently meaning is central to our notion of intelligence. To clarify,
effective, it is an important step. Intelligence is perceived let us suppose that locked in the Chinese room is a Chinese
by modern science to be an emergent property of a system, speaker, who by some accident of fate has never encountered
rather than a property of an essential component. Therefore, a hamburger. The interrogators hand him a story involving
the correct level of analysis of the Chinese Room is, indeed, hamburgers, and ask him questions, which s/he answers to
the room.                                             the best of his/her abilities. When asked about properties of
  Since it is generally very difﬁcult to have the right intuition hamburgers that cannot be inferred from the story, s/he claims
about the perceived intelligence of rooms, it is to our advan- ignorance or makes a guess. Obviously, it would not be rea-
tage to reformulate the setup. Searle’s counter-reply allows sonable for us to claim that the Chinese speaker does not
us a way out: assume that the person was not locked inside a understand Chinese simply because s/he does not know the
room, but instead had memorized the rules and symbols com- properties of hamburgers. If anything, we would say that s/he
pletely inside his head. Despite this change, we would still be understands Chinese, but not the world of American diners.
reluctant to say that s/he understands Chinese. We will call Similarly, the fact that the machine does not understand
this version of the experiment “the Chinese impostor”. what a formal symbol’s relationship to the world does not
  The “English reply” states that even if the person does not necessarily imply that it should be labeled “unintelligent.”
understand Chinese, s/he understands something - the rule- Rather, the design limitation of the machine, its different
book, for example. However, Searle claims that this fact is embodiment and experience make it differ from a human in
irrelevant since the Chinese room test is about understand- ways irrelevant to the question at hand, just as a Chinese per-
ing of Chinese in particular, rather than general understand- son who has not been exposed to hamburgers differs from a
ing [Chrisley, 1995].                                 American speaker of Chinese.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   546  Of course, we could claim that knowledge of the real machine with extremely large storage capacity, and programs
world is essential to human intelligence, and that anyone who it to converse by looking up the answer to any question in
exhibits verbal behavior without accompanying knowledge a giant look-up table. This is possible, Block claims, be-
does not qualify as intelligence. However, such an assertion cause the number of questions that can be asked in a 1-hour
is controversial, and can hardly be held to form a central part Turing test is ﬁnite, and of ﬁnite length. He will construct
of our common sense intuition. For example, we usually con- the table by consulting an actual human—Aunt Bertha on all
sider congenitally blind individuals to be just as intelligent possible conversations of some length l. Obviously, the per-
as the rest of us, even though they are deprived from a cer- formance of the machine on the test would not constitute a
tain type of knowledge of the real world. Their inability to proof of its intelligence—it would merely be a testimony to
relate visual-based concepts to the real world is an accident, Aunt Bertha’s intelligence. Hence, Block argues, passing the
and does not bear on their intrinsic intelligence. If we accept Turing test cannot be thought of as a sufﬁcient condition for
that blind (or deaf) individuals are intelligent, the question be- intelligence.
comes, how much real world deprivation can an entity handle To use a different metaphor: one wouldn’t want to adminis-
while still be considered intelligent. Would we be willing to ter the Turing test to a walkie-talkie, which is remotely tuned
set some arbitrary threshold, for example, such that blind peo- in to Aunt Bertha. Obviously, while the answers coming from
ple are intelligent, but deaf and blind people are not, or that the walkie-talkie are intelligent, it is not. Essentially, a ma-
deaf and blind people are intelligent, but deaf and blind peo- chine that recorded the answers of Aunt Bertha is merely a
ple with no haptic sensation are not? While imagining this mechanism for transmitting Aunt Bertha’s intelligence, and
gruesome scenarios is difﬁcult, it would help us understand does not itself possess intelligence.
Searle’s objection.                                     What is missing in both cases is information compression
  Our intuition regarding the intelligence of individuals who and generalization on the part of the device whose intel-
lack any non-verbal stimulation is far from obvious. For ex- ligence we are probing. The Aunt Bertha machine can only
ample, what if a subject of a profoundly unethical cognitive respond to the questions for which it was programmed, and
science were raised conﬁned to a bed, blindfolded and fed the answers to related questions are related only because they
through an IV, but verbally taught to do mathematics? The were so in the mind of Aunt Bertha. Despite this unintelli-
question whether such a person is intelligent is difﬁcult to an- gent organization of information however, the Aunt Bertha
swer, but the intuition is not as clear-cut as Searle would like machine is claimed to be capable of passing the Turing test.
us to believe.                                          Thus, one option is to amend Turing’s deﬁnition of intelli-
                                                      gence as follows:
2.4  The argument of generative incapacity
In addition to the symbol-grounding problem, Sealre’s        If an agent has the capacity to produce a sensi-
thought experiment raises another issue: to what extent are ble sequence of verbal responses to a sequence of
the inner workings of the computing mechanism relevant to verbal stimuli, whatever they may be, and without
intelligence? The intuition that the Chinese room lacks in- requiring storage exponential in the length of the
telligence is partially due to the absence of data compression sequence, then it is intelligent [Shieber, 2006].
and generalization in the symbol manipulation process. The problem with the revised deﬁnition is that it is no longer
  Let us say that two Chinese impostors that differ only in purely behavioral, because it requires us to examine the inter-
the type of instruction manual they have committed to mem- nal workings of the candidate entity. Therefore, Block argues,
ory. The ﬁrst impostor’s manual lists all stories in Chinese of the Turing test is not a sufﬁcient condition of intelligence.
ﬁnite length, and all questions about them, in a giant lookup
table. The second impostor on the other hand has memorized 4 Why a look-up table cannot pass the Turing
a much leaner manual, which instructs the person to analyze
the questions and build answers in a combinatorial fashion. test
While we may be reluctant to say that either person under- We devote the rest of this paper to arguing against the as-
stands what Chinese words mean, it is clear that the latter sertion that the Turing test can be passed by a look-up table.
understands something about how Chinese works, which the There are, in fact, two interpretations of this argument. One
former does not. Thus, our intuitions about the Chinese Room interpretation is that a look-up table can be constructed such
experiment also depend on the way in which - we are told - that it would be guaranteed to satisfy the Turing test. This
information is represented and accessed.              formulation ignores the complication that no entity, even if it
                                                      is intelligent, is guaranteed to pass the Turing test, due to the
3  The Aunt Bertha thought experiment                 natural fallibility of judges. The second interpretation is that,
The concern is legitimate from the point of view of AI. While for any look-up table, regardless of its sophistication, there is
different people might have different intuitions regarding the always a (very small) probability of a false positive result, if
contribution of real-world knowledge to intelligence, we be- the test questions just happen to be the ones recorded in the
lieve that most AI researchers would ﬁnd a look-up table ap- table.
proach to question-answering unintelligent. This intuition is
best clariﬁed by Ned Block in his Aunt Bertha argument. 4.1 The possibility-of-construction fallacy
  Imagine that the length of the Turing test is known to us We begin by attacking the ﬁrst interpretation of this argument,
in advance, e.g. one hour. Now imagine that Block have a namely, that it is possible to construct a look-up table which

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   547can deﬁnitely pass a non-trivial Turing test. By non-trivial who knows nothing of the last twenty-ﬁve years.
we mean a test which is sufﬁciently long to allow the judge However, Block’s reply to this challenge is inadequate. While
to conclude that a human possesses human intelligence. an intelligent system need not have knowledge of current
  To clarify, let us examine the notion of test length, and its events, it should be capable of learning about them and sub-
inﬂuence on the argument. It is obvious that the shorter the sequently commenting on them in the context of the test. A
test is, the easier it is for a machine to pass. In fact, if the machine which relies on a ﬁnite look-up table will not be able
test is sufﬁciently short, it will be passed by any machine. to accomplish this, because it is unable to add previously non-
Suppose the test is as short as one second. No human would existing entries.
be able to say anything in one second, and neither would the The same argument holds even if the length of the test is
machine. Hence, the judge would be at chance on a forced not measured in time but in number of questions. Suppose
choice. Obviously, this type of failure of the Turing test is that Block knows the test is going to contain a single ques-
not a reason for eliminating it as a sufﬁcient condition for the tion. Now he is faced with uncertainty about the length of
presence of intelligence. We tacitly assume that the Turing the question, which he has to assume. Suppose he assumes
test has to be administered for a reasonable period of time. that the longest question the judge can ask is the length of
  This is the ﬁrst step toward exposing the possibility-of- his/her lifetime. Unfortunately, since the judge is still alive,
construction fallacy. We will show that Ned Block’s argu- Block would have to estimate the length of the judge’s life-
ment’s relies on the unwarranted assumption that real-world time from the length of the longest living human to date. Let
time and space limitations are not a factor in the Turing test. us grant Block some way of generating all possible questions
Given that we accept - and we certainly have to - that the Tur- of that length (for example, by generating all possible strings
ing test is only meaningful beyond some minimal length, it of that length). Now he needs to provide human-like answers
becomes an important question whether an appropriate look- to them for his look-up table. Thus let us also assume that
up table can be constructed to pass it.               many human beings from this time on would spend their en-
  Let us review Ned Block’s proposed way of constructing tire lives reading one question of length one lifespan and pro-
the Aunt Bertha machine. He suggests to exhaustively con- viding the answer. Even then, the machine is not guaranteed
duct with Aunt Bertha all conversations of length one hour. to pass the Turing test. This is because, while we know that
Presumably, Aunt Bertha would devote her lifetime to this the judge has a ﬁnite lifespan, his lifespan is unbounded. For
process. But even if Aunt Bertha lives extraordinarily long, example, there is no a priori reason to believe that the judge
this is impossible. Suppose that Block somehow manages to will not live as long as the longest living human today plus
record not only Aunt Bertha’s one hour conversations, but all one day. If he does, Block’s machine will fail the test.
hour long conversations that took place since humans got the Finally, let us assume that there is some maximal length
ability to speak. It is clear that even in this case, the look-up of a question, which greatly surpasses a human lifespan, e.g.
table would not contain all possible one hour conversations. a question can be at most two hundred years long. If Block
This is because a) the set of possible conversations depends could create a table with all questions and answers of this
on the natural, social and cultural environment and evolves length, he would surely win! Not so fast: one should not for-
with it and b) because future conversations can always refer- get that each of the questions of the look-up table should be
ence those conversations that have previously occurred. For given an answer by an actual human being. Since no human
example, while a conversation like:                   being can answer a question which exceeds its own particular
    -Have you heard the new Federline rap song?       lifespan, it follows that the length of any question in Block’s
    -Yes, I have it on my iPod.                       table cannot exceed the life lifespan of the longest-living hu-
is fairly common nowadays, it would have been impossible man to date. Therefore, it is impossible for Block to construct
just ﬁve years ago. Similarly, a conversation about Plato’s his look-up table.
dialogues would have been impossible when Plato was ﬁve What these arguments go to show is that Block’s assertion
years old. Thus, while it is true that the set of all possible that a look-up table machine is guaranteed to pass a Turing
conversations of ﬁxed length is ﬁnite at any given point in test of a given length is based on two improper assumptions:
time, it is not true that it is the same set. Crucially, the set of 1) that the set of possible ﬁnite conversations of given length
all hourlong conversations would change from the time when is constant in time, and 2) that the length of the questions is
Aunt Bertha’a recordings would have ended to the time when bounded in advance. Thus, his argument:
the Turing test would begin.                              If the Turing test is sufﬁcient condition for intelli-
  In fairness, Block does anticipate this counter argu-   gence, all entities that are not intelligent should fail
ment [Block, 1981], but dismisses it on the grounds that the the test.
Turing test is not a test of knowledge, but of intelligence, Premise 1: A look-up table machine is not intelli-
and therefore ignorance of current events does not constitute gent.
grounds for failing:                                      Premise 2: A look-up table machine can pass the
    A system can be intelligent, yet have no knowledge    Turing test.
    of current events. Likewise, a machine can imitate    Therefore, the Turing test is not a sufﬁcient condi-
    intelligence without imitating knowledge of cur-      tion for intelligence.
    rent events. The programmers could, if they liked, is ﬂawed due to the fallacy of the second premise for any
    choose to simulate an intelligent Robinson Crusoe Turing test of unbounded length.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   548  If the length of the test must be limited in advance, prior. Turing discussed the necessity to set up that prior prop-
the question becomes what constitutes a reasonable length erly, so that positive answers are not inherently favored:
(see [Shieber, 2006]). Of course, if we severely limit the
length of the Turing test, or if the length of questions is known We had better suppose that each jury has to
a priori, it might be possible to construct a look-up table with judge quite a number of times, and that sometimes
                                                          they really are dealing with a man and not a ma-
guaranteed success. However, imposing such a limitation is
unwarranted, as it would trivially invalidate the test. In fact, chine. That will prevent them from saying “It must
if the limit is severe enough, the Turing test would be passed be a machine” every time without proper consider-
                                                          ation (Newman, Turing, Jefferson and Braithwaite
by a rock! It is worth saying that the length of the test factors
into validity of the ﬁrst premise as well, since intelligence is 1952).
a feature of a system embeded in space and time. An abstract However, it is true that this occasional fallibility of the test
mathematical construct manifested by a cosmic accident is makes it an insufﬁcient condition for intelligence. Further-
difﬁcult to relate to the common sense behind the notion of more, what is interesting about this particular possibility of a
inteligence.                                          false positive, is that it is not in any way traceable to the fal-
                                                      libility of the judge. That is to say, the judge has no reason to
The limitations of a thought experiment               believe that he has picked the only set of questions which the
It is possible to defend the second premise of Block’s argu- machine has on record. Hence, the judge’s conclusion would
ment by appealing to the idea that a thought experiment is be entirely reasonable on the basis of the machine’s perfor-
not subject to the ordinary space-time limitations of the nat- mance
ural world. Thus, what if we imagine that Block can record It is worth thinking about whether there is a way to guar-
not only all past, but also all future conversations of length antee that the Turing test cannot be passed by a look up table
one hour? Such a question is ill posed and causes the debate (again, leaving aside the issue of judge fallibility). We sug-
to rapidly depart the realm of usefulness. We are interested in gest that the answer is yes, provided that the test is developed
whether or not the Turing test is a sufﬁcient condition for in- with reference to the moment in which the machine is consid-
telligence in this universe, which has the limitation that time ered complete. In a sense, we are reversing Block’s approach.
only goes forward. Indeed, it is completely unclear what the In his thought experiment, he ﬁrst ﬁxed the length of the test,
concept of intelligence would be in a universe in which we and then went about constructing his machine. Here, we ar-
had access to the future as well as the past. If intelligence gue that there is a way to prepare the test after the machine
is the capacity to generate novel behavior from past observa- is complete such that the look-up table can be guaranteed to
tions, it might not exist as a concept in a universe in which fail.
novelty would be as absent from the future, as it is from the The argument hinges on the assumption that we know what
past.                                                 properties a look-up table constructed at time t can and cannot
  Our point is that a thought experiment is like any other have. For example, the longest question such a table can con-
model of reality. It is an abstraction which preserves some tain must be shorter than t. Thus, all it takes for us to make
characteristics of reality and gets rid of those characteristics sure that the machine is not merely using a look-up table is to
which are irrelevant for the question at hand. For example, ask a question which is longer than t. Obviously, this strategy
a papier-mache model of the solar system is useful if we are could be very impractical for the reasons discussed earlier. If
interested in exploring the relative sizes of planets, but is ut- the time it took to construct the machine was greater than one
terly useless if we are interested in exploring their gravita- lifetime, we might not be able to use a question longer than
tional ﬁelds. Similarly, a thought experiment which is meant a lifetime in the test period (unless we have an exceptionally
to aid us in the question of whether the Turing test is a suf- dedicated and longlived judge). Also, we might be unable to
ﬁcient condition for intelligence is only useful if it preserves ascertain the time it took to construct the machine. In these
the kind of real-world characteristics which are relevant to cases however, it is possible to use other consequences of the
intelligence, namely, space-time limitations.         observation that the set of all possible questions is dynam-
                                                      ically evolving. For example, it is possible to ask the ma-
4.2  The very small probability argument              chine questions about events which happened after the ma-
                                                      chine was completed. Note that the machine need not observe
The second interpretation of Block’s argument is that for any the events—it is sufﬁcient that the events are described to it
look-up table, there is always a probability of a false positive by the judge. A human-like intelligent entity would be able to
result. In other words, we do not have to record all possi- answer questions about such stories, but not a look-up table
ble one hour conversations. It is enough for us to record one machine.
such conversation. There is always a chance that the judge It appears that it is at least theoretically possible to make
will lead our machine into this exact conversation, and falsely sure that any Aunt Bertha device will fail the Turing test. The
conclude on the basis of the machine’s verbal behavior, that question of how this could be done in reality is interesting
the machine possesses human intelligence.             and merits further consideration. However, it is important to
  This interpretation is in some ways trivial, because the Tur- bear in mind that the Turing test in practice is like any sci-
ing test has always had a probabilistic element to it. Obvi- entiﬁc measurement, in that it allows for experimental error.
ously, whenever a forced choice situation is set up among Therefore, it is impossible to argue that passing any particu-
two alternatives, the response might simply reﬂect the judge’s lar version of the Turing test is a sufﬁcient condition of intel-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   549