                                        Routing Mediators

                               Ola Rozenfeld    and  Moshe Tennenholtz
                                Technion–Israel Institute of Technology
                                           Haifa 32000, Israel


                    Abstract                          conditioned on the information available to the mediator on
                                                      all agents’ actions.
    We introduce a general study of routing mediators.  This natural setting is different from the one discussed in
    A routing mediator can act in a given multi-agent the theory of mechanism design (see [Mas-Colell et al., 1995;
    encounter on behalf of the agents that give it the Jackson, 2001] for an introduction) where a designer de-
    right of play. Routing mediators differ from one an- signs a new game from scratch in order to yield some de-
    other according to the information they may have. sired behavior. The simplest form of mediator discussed
    Our study concentrates on the use of routing media- in the game theory literature is captured by the notion of
    tors in order to reach correlated strong equilibrium, correlated equilibrium [Aumann, 1974]. This notion was
    a multi-agent behavior which is stable against de- generalized to communication equilibrium by [Forges, 1986;
    viations by coalitions. We study the relationships Myerson, 1986]. Another type of mediators is discussed in
    between the power of different routing mediators in [Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2004]. However, in all these set-
    establishing correlated strong equilibrium. Surpris- tings the mediator cannot act on behalf of the agents.
    ingly, our main result shows a natural class of rout- A more powerful type of mediators, which can perform
    ing mediators that allow to implement fair and ef- actions on behalf of the agents who give the mediator the right
    ﬁcient outcomes as a correlated super-strong equi- of play is considered in [Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006].
    librium in a very wide class of games.            This type of mediators turns out to be a speciﬁc case of the
                                                      mediators discussed in this paper. Namely, in this restricted
                                                      setting the agents need to decide whether to give the mediator
1  Introduction                                       the right of play, while the mediator does not possess any
In many multi-agent systems it makes little sense to assume further information on the agents’ actions.
that agents will stick to their parts when provided with sug- In order to illustrate the power of a reliable mediator con-
gested strategies, if a deviation can increase their payoffs. sider the famous prisoners dilemma game:
While for any multi-agent encounter, represented as a strate-
gic form game, there always exists a strategy proﬁle for which
unilateral deviations are not beneﬁcial, requirements regard-
ing the deviation of multiple players are rarely satisﬁed. In
order to tackle this issue we consider in this paper the use
of routing mediators, extending upon previous work in game
theory and AI.                                          In this classical example we get that in the only equilibrium
  A mediator is a reliable entity that can interact with the both agents will play D, yielding both of them a payoff of 1.
players, and potentially act on behalf of the players that give However, this equilibrium, which is also a dominant strat-
him a permission to do so. However, a mediator can not en- egy equilibrium, is inefﬁcient; indeed, if both agents deviate
force behavior. Indeed, an agent is free to participate in the from D to C then both of them will improve their payoffs.
game without the help of the mediator. This notion is highly Formally, (D, D) is not a strong equilibrium; it is not stable
natural; in many systems there is some form of reliable party against deviations by coalitions. Indeed, there is no strong
that can be used as a mediator. In particular, brokers in ﬁnan- equilibrium in the prisoners dilemma game.
cial markets, bidding club organizers in auctions, as well as Consider now a reliable mediator who offers the agents the
routers in communication networks, can be viewed as medi- following protocol: if both agents agree to use the mediator
ators. Notice that we assume that the multi-agent interaction services then he will play C on behalf of both agents. How-
(formalized as a game) is given, and all the mediator can do ever, if only one agent agrees to use his services then he will
is to perform actions on behalf of the agents that explicitly play D on behalf of that agent. Notice that when accepting
allow it to do so. The mediator’s behavior on behalf of the the mediator’s offer the agent is committed to actual behavior
agents that give it the right of play is pre-speciﬁed, and is as determined by the above protocol. However, there is no

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1488way to enforce the agents to accept the suggested protocol, mation. We distinguish between two types of available infor-
and each agent is free to play C or D without using the me- mation:
diator’s services. Hence, the mediator’s protocol generates 1. Information about the actual action instantiations.
a new game, which we call a mediated game, where a new
strategy M is available for using the mediator services: 2. Information about the agents’ programs (i.e. correlated
                                                          strategies).
                                                        As we will show, having access to the agents’ actions may
                                                      sometimes be more powerful than having access to their pro-
                                                      grams, and vice versa.
                                                        Given the general setting of routing mediators, we prove
                                                      that they can indeed signiﬁcantly increase the set of de-
                                                      sired outcomes that can be obtained by multi-agent behaviors
  The mediated game has a most desirable property: in this which are robust against deviations by coalitions. Namely, we
game there is a strong equilibrium; that is, an equilibrium show that any minimally fair game possesses a fair and efﬁ-
which is stable against deviations by coalitions. In this equi- cient correlated super-strong mediated equilibrium. In a cor-
librium both agents will use the mediator services, which will related super-strong equilibrium, correlated deviations by any
lead them to a payoff of 4 each!                      subset of agents can not beneﬁt one of them without hurting
  Although the above example illustrates the potential power another. A minimally fair game is a game in which all actions
of a mediator who can act on behalf of agents who give him are available to all agents, and agents who select identical ac-
the right of play, the above mediator was very restricted. In tions get identical payoffs. A particular example of minimally
general, a routing mediator possesses information about the fair games are the symmetric games, but the family of min-
actions taken by the agents. Consider a router in a typical imally fair games is much wider. In particular, our results
communication network. Assume that messages submitted are applicable to congestion games and job-shop scheduling,
to the system must pass through this router. In addition, the two major topics of study in the interface between computer
router can suggest a protocol to the agents who may wish to science and game theory.
use its services also in selecting appropriate routes. Hence, in
this situation it is most natural to assume that the router can 2 Preliminaries
observe selected actions of all agents, and not only of those 2.1 Games in strategic form
who give it the right of play. In order to illustrate the power
                                                      A   game   in  strategic form is  a  tuple
of such routing mediator consider the following example:                                          Γ=
                                                      N,(Xi)i∈N , (ui)i∈N , where N is a ﬁnite set of play-
                                                      ers, Xi is the strategy set of player i, and ui : X →is
                                                      the payoff function for player i, where X = ×i∈N Xi.If
                                                      |N| = n, whenever convenient we assume N = {1, ···,n}.
                                                      Γ is ﬁnite if the strategy sets are ﬁnite.
                                                        For every S ⊆ N we denote XS = ×i∈SXi. When the set
                                                      N is clear, XN\S will be also denoted by X−S, and moreover,
                                                      X−{i} will be also denoted by X−i.
  Given the above game, assume we are interested in obtain- When we discuss subsets of a given set we implicitly as-
ing a socially optimal outcome, in which each agent gets a sume non-emptiness unless we specify otherwise. Let Y be
payoff of 6. It is easy to see that the column player can a set. The set of probability distributions with ﬁnite support
guarantee himself an expected payoff of 6.5 by playing B over Y is denoted by Δ(Y ). That is, every c ∈ Δ(Y ) is a
or C with probability 0.5 each. As a result, a routing medi- function c : Y → [0, 1] such that {y ∈ Y |c(y) > 0} is ﬁnite,
ator who is not informed about the pure realizations of the and y∈Y c(y)=1. For every y ∈ Y we denote by δy the
column player’s strategies cannot implement any outcome in probability distribution that assigns probability 1 to y. Let I
which that player gets a payoff less than 6.5. However, a be a ﬁnite set, and let ci ∈ Δ(Yi), i ∈ I, where I is a ﬁnite
routing mediator who can see the pure realizations of the de- set of indexes, and Yi is a set for every i ∈ I. We denote by
viating player and choose the punishment appropriately can ×i∈I ci the product probability distribution on Y = ×i∈I Yi
                   ,
enforce the outcome (6 6) as a strong equilibrium! This can that assigns to every y ∈ Y the probability i∈I ci(yi).
be achieved, for example, by the following protocol: If only Let Γ=N,(Xi)i∈N , (ui)i∈N  be a game in strategic
     i
agent selects the mediator’s services, the mediator will copy form, and let S ⊆ N. Every c ∈ Δ(XS) is called a cor-
the action of the other player, j, on behalf of i; if both agents related strategy for S . A correlated strategy for the set of all
select to use the mediator’s services then the mediator will players N is also called a correlated strategy, and for every
perform C on behalf of both agents.                   i, a correlated strategy for {i} is also called a mixed strategy
  This example illustrates the important role of information for i. Let c ∈ Δ(X) and let S ⊆ N, the marginal probability
in the deﬁnition of a routing mediator. Indeed, routing me- induced by c on XS is denoted by c[S]. That is,
diators can be classiﬁed based on the information they can                    
access about the agents’ actions. In this paper, we formally      c[s](xS)=        c(xS,x−S)

deﬁne routing mediators as a function of their available infor-            x−S ∈X−S

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1489  The expected payoff of i with respect to a correlated strat- ω2(y1)=ω2(y2). That is, an agent with available informa-
egy c is denoted by Ui(c). That is,                   tion Ω1 is informed at least as well as an agent with Ω2.
                                                       The above relation is a partial ordering of the information
               Ui(c)=      ui(x)c(x)                  sets, which forms a lattice: the maximal possible informa-
                       x∈X                            tion on Y is Ωfull = {{y}|y ∈ Y }; having such information
                                                      means that for any choice of y ∈ Y , , the agent knows ex-
  For every i, and for every xi ∈ Xi, the mixed strategy δx
                                                  i   actly which element was chosen. The minimal possible infor-
is called a pure strategy.
                                                      mation on Y is Ω∅ = {Y }; that means that the agent has no
                                                                                           y ∈ Y
2.2  Strong equilibrium concepts                      information at all about any chosen element .
Let Γ=N,(Xi)i∈N  , (ui)i∈N  be a game in strategic form,
and let x ∈ X. We say that x is a pure strong equilibrium 3 Routing mediators
[Aumann, 1959] in Γ if the following holds:           We now introduce routing mediators, a general tool for coor-
  For every subset, S of players and for every yS ∈ XS there
     i ∈ S        u  y ,x    ≤ u  x                   dinating and inﬂuencing agents’ behavior in games. A rout-
exists    such that i( S −s)    i( ).                 ing mediator is always assumed to be reliable, and he is en-
     c ∈    X             c
  Let    Δ(  ). We say that is a correlated strong equi- dowed with a single ability: to play for the players who ex-
librium (see [Rozenfeld and Tennenholtz, 2006]), if for every plicitly give him the right to play for them. The mediator
              S                                 S
subset of players , and for every correlated strategy for , cannot enforce the players to use his services, neither can he
ξ  ∈   X              i ∈ S        U  ξ  × c     ≤
 S   Δ(  S) there exists   such that i( S   [−S])     affect the players’ utility values. However, routing media-
Ui(c).                                                tors differ in the information they have on the strategy proﬁle
  The notion of pure strong equilibrium is the one typically which is being chosen by the players.
studied in the game theory literature when considering devia- Let Γ be a game in strategic form. A routing mediator for
tions by coalitions. The concept of correlated strong equilib- Γ is a tuple m, Ω, Ψ, (cω,ψ)ω∈Ω,ψ∈Ψ, where the following
rium considers also correlated deviations. Of course, a pure holds:
strong equilibrium is not necessarily a correlated strong equi-
librium. Correlated strong equilibrium is a very natural re- • m/∈ Xi for all i ∈ N. m denotes the new strategy
quirement. In an environment in which the players fear/hope that is now available to each player: to send a message
that correlated deviations are possible, we expect a strategy to the mediator, indicating that the player agrees to give
                                                                                          1
proﬁle to be a correlated strong equilibrium in order to be be- the mediator the right of play for him.
lieved/played by the players. In the scope of this article, we • Ω is an information set on Z, where Z = ×i∈N Zi, and
will consider such correlation possible, and therefore when Zi = Xi ∪{m}.  Ω represents the information avail-
we use the term strong equilibrium, we refer to correlated able to the mediator about each pure realization of the
strong equilibrium.                                       players’ correlated strategy.
  The above deﬁnitions assumed that a player would agree to
                                                          Ω reﬁnes Ωbasic, which is deﬁned as follows:
join a deviating coalition only if the deviation would result in
                                                          Given z ∈ Z,letT (z) denote {j ∈ N|zj = m}. That
a strict improvement of his payoff. A much stronger stability
                                                          is, T (z) denotes the players who agree to give the medi-
concept is needed if we fear that players may be persuaded to
                                                          ator the right of play for them in z. Then, Ωbasic is the
join a deviating coalition also in cases where such deviation
                                                          partition induced by the following equivalence relation
would leave their payoff unchanged, but would increase the
                                                          on Z: z1 ≡ z2 iff T (z1)=T (z2) (For ω ∈ Ω we will
payoff of at least one of the other coalition members.
                                                          use T (ω) to denote T (z) for some z ∈ ω).
  We say that c ∈ Δ(X) is a correlated super-strong equi-
                                                          That is, we demand that in each pure realization of the
librium (or super-strong equilibrium) if there is no S ⊆ N
                                                        agents’ strategy the mediator knows exactly which play-
and ξS ∈ Δ(XS), such that: for all i ∈ S, Ui ξS,c[−S] ≥
                                                          ers give him the right of play for them.
Ui (c), and for at least one i ∈ S the inequality is strict.
  A super-strong equilibrium is, in particular, a strong equi- • Ψ is an information set on Δ(Z), which represents the
librium, but not vice versa.                              information available to the mediator about the corre-
                                                          lated strategy of the players. We place no restrictions on
2.3  Information sets                                     Ψ, in particular Ψ may equal Ψbasic = {Δ(Z)}, mean-
   Y                                         Y            ing that the mediator has no such information.
Let  be a set. We say that Ω is an information set on if Ω                                     
             Y
is a partition of .                                     • For every ω ∈ Ω,ψ ∈ Ψ, cω,ψ ∈ Δ  XT (ω) . That is,
  Let y ∈ Y .Byω(y) we refer to the equivalence class of y c is the conditional contract that is offered by the medi-
in Ω, i.e. to P ∈ Ω s.t. y ∈ P .                          ator: it speciﬁes exactly which actions the mediator will
  We use these deﬁnitions in order to model situations in perform on behalf of the players who agree to use his
which an element y ∈ Y is chosen, and an agent has only   services, as a function of the information available to it
partial information about the chosen element. It is assumed about the strategy proﬁle chosen by the agents.
that, if Ω is the information set that is available to such agent,
the agent is informed of ω(y).                           1[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006] show that no power is added
  Let Ω1, Ω2 be information sets on Y . We say that Ω1 if the communication between the mediator and the players includes
reﬁnes Ω2 if for all y1,y2 ∈ Y if ω1(y1)=ω1(y2) then  more than one message type.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1490  Every mediator M for Γ induces a new game Γ(M) in   which the play is only available through the mediator. For
strategic form in which the strategy set of player i is Zi. The example, if the players’ strategies are messages in a network
payoff function of i is deﬁned for every c ∈ Δ(Z) as follows: and the mediator sits on the router, it might be reasonable to
                
                                                      assume that Ω=Ωfull.
       U M  c       c z U c       ,z
         i ( )=      ( ) i( ω(z),ψ(c) [−T (z)])       Observations: Suppose c ∈ Δ(X) is a strong (super-strong)
                z∈Z                                   mediated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ.
  The above deﬁnitions express the following interaction be- 1. Let w(c)=(w1,...,wn) be the payoff vector induced
tween the mediator and the players:                       by c. Then, for any c ∈ Δ(X) such that w(c)=w(c),
                                                           
 1. The players choose a proﬁle c ∈ Δ(Z)                  c is a strong (resp. super-strong) mediated equilibrium
                                                          relatively to Ω, Ψ. In light of this, we will sometimes use
 2. A joint coin ﬂip is issued, determining a pure realization                             w
    z ∈ Z of c                                            the following notation: a payoff vector can be imple-
                                                          mented as a strong (super-strong) mediated equilibrium
                            ω z     ψ c
 3. The mediator is informed of ( ) and ( )               relatively to Ω, Ψ if there exists c ∈ Δ(X) such that
 4. The mediator issues a coin ﬂip to determine a pure real- w(c)=w and c is a strong (resp. super-strong) medi-
    ization δT (z) of cω(z),ψ(c)                          ated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ.
 5. The payoff of each player i is given according to 2. If Ψ=Ψfull, c can be implemented as a strong (resp.
    ui δT (z),z[−T (z)]                                   super-strong) mediated equilibrium relatively to Ω, Ψ
                                       c                  even if the mediator is restricted to use only pure actions
  The payoffs of the players from the proﬁle are assumed             c    ∈ X
to be their expected payoffs from both coin ﬂips in steps 2,4. (i.e. satisﬁes ω,ψ T (ω)).
  The mediator is guaranteed to behave in a pre-speciﬁed 3. If Ω reﬁnes Ω, then c is also a strong mediated equilib-
way, however this behavior is conditional on the actions of rium relatively to Ω, Ψ
                                    U  c
the other agents. For this reason, although i( ) is well de- 4. If  reﬁnes , then c is also a strong mediated equilib-
                 c ∈   Z                                    Ψ        Ψ
ﬁned for any proﬁle Δ(  ), in particular for pure proﬁles rium relatively to Ω, Ψ
z ∈ Z, Ui(c) does not necessarily equal   Ui(z)c(z),
                                      z∈Z               Observations 3, 4 show that the possible values of Ω, Ψ
unless Ψ=Ψbasic. Nevertheless, the concepts of strong
                                                      induce a four-end lattice of strong mediated equilibrium con-
equilibrium can still be applied to Γ(M). 
                                                      cepts, where the strongest (most stable) concept is obtained
  Let Γ be a game in strategic form, m/∈ i∈N Xi, Ω
                                                      from Ωbasic, Ψbasic (since it assumes nothing on the infor-
an information set on Z, Ψ an information set on Δ(Z).
     N                                                mation available to the mediator), and the weakest concept
Let m  denote the pure strategy proﬁle ×i∈N m ∈ Z.A
                                                      is obtained from Ωfull, Ψfull. Part of this lattice is depicted
correlated strategy c ∈ Δ(X) is a strong mediated equi-
                                                      below (arrows mean increase in stability):
librium relatively to Ω, Ψ if there exists a mediator for Γ,
M  =  m, Ω, Ψ, (cω,ψ)ω∈Ω,ψ∈Ψ, with cω(mN ),ψ(mN ) = c,
for which mN is a correlated strong equilibrium in Γ(M).
The notion of super-strong mediated equilibrium can be de-
ﬁned similarly.
  Note that the above deﬁnition coincides with the one of
[Monderer and Tennenholtz, 2006] in the case where Ω=
Ωbasic, Ψ=Ψbasic; i.e. they considered the case in which
the mediator is only informed of the players that chose to del-
                                                        A natural question to ask is whether there exists a general
egate him the right to play for them in step 2; he has no infor-
                                                      relationship between the strong mediated equilibria concepts
mation about the actions of the other players, neither about
                                                      induced by Ωbasic, Ψfull and Ωfull, Ψbasic. The question is,
the correlated strategy that was chosen in step 1.
                                                      what empowers the mediator more – increasing the informa-
  Situations which can be modelled by Ψ=Ψfull    =
                                                      tion available to him on each pure outcome, or increasing the
{{c}|c ∈ Δ(Z)} are situations in which the mediator doesn’t
                                                      information about the correlated strategies?
decide/reveal its action before the players choose theirs. For
                                                        As it turns out, this question does not have a general an-
example, in a computerized setting, where the correlated de-
                                                      swer:
viation is implemented using a program which is submitted
and executed on a server, and the mediator is located on this Proposition 1 There exists a game Γ and a strategy pro-
server, the mediator is fully informed about the correlated ﬁle c which is a strong mediated equilibrium relatively to
strategy of the players. In another example, even if the me- Ωfull, Ψbasic, but not a strong mediated equilibrium rela-
diator is not informed about correlated deviations, the play- tively to Ωbasic, Ψfull.
ers might fear that such information leak is possible. Lastly, An example of such game and such proﬁle appears in the
the players may consider a worst case behavior of the media- introduction. A less intuitive result is the following:
tor, and therefore would agree to deviate only if the mediator Proposition 2 There exists a game Γ and a strategy pro-
can’t possibly harm any one of them.                  ﬁle c which is a strong mediated equilibrium relatively to
  Ω =Ω basic can be used to model all the situations in which
                                                      Ωbasic, Ψfull, but not a strong mediated equilibrium rela-
the mediator does indeed, as the name implies, ”stand be-
                                                      tively to Ωfull, Ψbasic.
tween” the players and the actual game, e.g. situations in

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1491                                                      every player i, for every action proﬁle x ∈ X and for every
                                                      permutation π.
                                                        Needless to say that symmetric games are most popular in
                                                      computerized settings. For example, the extremely rich lit-
                                                      erature on congestion games in computer science deals with
                                                      particular form of symmetric games [Papadimitriou, 2001].
                                                      However, our main result requires a weaker notion of sym-
                                                      metry:
                                                        Let Γ be a game in strategic form. Γ is a minimally fair
                                                      game if for all i, j ∈ N,Xi = Xj and for every action proﬁle
                                                      x ∈ X, xi = xj implies that ui(x)=uj(x).
Proof: (sketch) Let Γ be the 3-person game depicted above,
                                                        That is, a game is minimally fair if players who play the
and let c =(C, C, A). In order to see that c is not a strong
                                                      same strategy get the same payoff. The exact value of the
mediated equilibrium in Γ relatively to Ωfull, Ψbasic, con-
                                                      received payoff may depend on the identities of the players
sider the possible actions of the mediator on behalf of player
                                                      who chose the strategy, as well as on the rest of the proﬁle. In
3 given the proﬁle (A, A, m) ∈ Z. The mediator has to
                                                      particular, every symmetric game is a minimally fair game;
choose a strategy on behalf of player 3 without knowing the
                                                      however, minimally fair games capture a much wider class of
correlated strategy of players {1, 2} that caused the realiza-
                                                      settings. For example, typical job-shop scheduling games are
tion (A, A). No matter what distribution between A and B
                                                      minimally fair games.
will the mediator choose, the total payoff of the deviators
                                                        Note that in a minimally fair game, unlike in a symmetric
will be 12, with player 1 getting more than player 2; note
                                                      game, the symmetric socially optimal payoff is not necessar-
that the pure proﬁle (B,B) guarantees the deviators the pay-
                                                      ily feasible. In order to capture our notion of fair and efﬁcient
offs (0, 12); therefore, no matter what strategy the mediator
                                                      outcomes in such games, we need to deﬁne the notion of lex-
will choose, players {1, 2} will be able to randomize between
                                                      icographic ordering on vectors of payoffs:
(A, A) and (B,B) so that each of them will get a payoff of 6,      n     n
                                                        Let sort :  →    be a function that sorts the elements
making the deviation beneﬁcial for them.                                                              
                                                      of real vectors in increasing order. Given two vectors w, w ∈
  However, note that the players 1, 2 were able to guarantee n            
                                                        we say that w ≺l w (w is lexicographically smaller than
themselves the payoffs (6, 6) as a response to any contract of-                                       
                                                      w ) if there exists 1 ≤ i ≤ n such that sort(w)i <sort(w )i
fered by the mediator. In a sense, the information set Ψbasic                             
                                                      and for all 1 ≤ j<i sort(w)j = sort(w )j.
means that the players are more informed than the mediator –
                                                        Let Γ be a minimally fair game. We say that a vector
the strategy of the mediator in this setting is ﬁxed, and cannot n
                                                      w  ∈   is the max-min fair payoff of Γ if w is the lexico-
depend on the correlated strategy chosen by the players; while
                                                      graphically maximal feasible payoff vector in Γ. It is easy to
their correlated strategy can be a best response to the media-
                                                      see that such vector always exists, and is unique. Also, such
tor’s strategy. When the information set full is considered,
                                  Ψ                   vector is, by deﬁnition, Pareto optimal.
the mediator becomes more informed than the players: he can
                                                        The fairness criterion we use is in fact the well-known
devise a response based on their correlated strategy. In this
                                                      max-min fairness criterion, as discussed in the communi-
example, a mediator who is aware of the exact probabilities
                                                      cation networks literature (see e.g. [Kumar and Kleinberg,
that the players , assign to the proﬁles A, A and B,B
             1 2                   (    )   (     )   2000]).
can always respond by a pure strategy A or B on behalf of
                                                        We are now ready to state our main result:
the third player in a way that will cause one of the players to
get a payoff less than 5, making the deviation not beneﬁcial Theorem 1 Let Γ be a minimally fair game. Then, the max-
for them.                                             min fair payoff of Γ can be implemented as a super-strong
  A formal proof of the above intuition is technically cum- mediated equilibrium relatively to Ωfull, Ψbasic.
bersome, and therefore is left to the full version.   Proof: Let w be the max-min fair payoff vector of Γ. Sup-
                                                      pose w.l.o.g. that the vector w is sorted in increasing order
4  The existence of strong mediated                   and the players in N are renamed appropriately.
                                                        Let m/∈      i∈N Xi.  We deﬁne a routing mediator
   equilibrium                                        M     m,     ,     , c                 
                                                         =     Ωfull Ψbasic ( ω,ψ)ω∈Ωfull,ψ∈Ψbasic as follows:
In this section we present our main result. We show a natural Ψbasic contains a single element, therefore it sufﬁces to deﬁne
class of routing mediators that allow to implement fair and cω(z) for all z ∈ Z. Let z ∈ Z.IfT (z)=N, we deﬁne cω(z)
efﬁcient outcomes as a correlated super-strong equilibrium in to be the strategy proﬁle that implements w. Otherwise, let
a very wide class of games.                           T = T (z), let i =max{N \ T } (i.e. i is the highest indexed
  Some deﬁnitions are needed:                         player among those who don’t cooperate with the mediator in
  A permutation of the set of players is a one-to-one function z), and let a = zi. We then deﬁne cω(z) = ×i∈T δa.
from N to N. For every permutation π and for every action That is, the action of the mediator for each pure realization
proﬁle x ∈ X we denote by πx the permutation of x by π. of the correlated proﬁle is to have all the cooperating players
                                                                                                      w
That is, (πx)πi = xi for every player i ∈ N.          copy the action of the deviator with the highest payoff in .
  Let Γ be a game in strategic form. Γ is a symmetric game Let S ⊆ N,ξS ∈ Δ(ZS). Let ξ = ξS × ×i∈N\Sδm be
if Xi = Xj for all i, j ∈ N and ui (x)=uπ(i) (πx) for the proﬁle in Γ(M) that is obtained from the deviation of S

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1492