   Providing a Recommended Trading Agent to a Population: a Novel Approach

                          Efrat Manisterski   and  Ron Katz    and  Sarit Kraus
                 Computer Science Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
                            {maniste,sarit}@cs.biu.ac.il;katz@biu.013.net.il


                    Abstract                          are unenforceable by the system, similar to many real-life do-
                                                      mains. The game theory approach uses equilibrium agents
    This paper presents a novel approach for provid-  [Da-Jun and Liang-Xian, 2002]. These agents’ strategies are
    ing automated trading agents to a population, fo- in equilibrium, namely no agent will be better off by deviating
    cusing on bilateral negotiation with unenforceable from its equilibrium strategy. However, although the equilib-
    agreements. A new type of agents, called semi-    rium agent guarantees stability of the environment (there is no
    cooperative (SC) agents is proposed for this envi- motivation for any trader to use any other agent), its outcome
    ronment. When these agents negotiate with each    is not always Pareto-optimal, i.e. a solution may exist where
    other they reach a pareto-optimal solution that is some agents obtain higher utilities than they would have ob-
    mutually beneﬁcial. Through extensive experi-     tained by using the equilibrium strategy, while others do not
    ments we demonstrate the superiority of provid-   attain lower utilities. Consider, for example, a seller and a
    ing such agents for humans over supplying equi-   buyer who have reached a sales agreement in a market-place
    librium agents or letting people design their own which does not compel the traders to fulﬁll the agreement
    agents. These results are based on our observa-   (e.g., Ebay). If the traders follow the equilibrium strategy,
    tion that most people do not modify SC agents even both sides will not fulﬁll the agreement they reached, (i.e. the
    though they are not in equilibrium. Our ﬁndings in- seller will not send the goods and the buyer will not send the
    troduce a new factor —human response to provided  money). However, this solution is not Pareto-optimal, since it
    agents — that should be taken into consideration  would be more beneﬁcial, if the agreement would be fulﬁlled
    when developing agents that are provided to a pop- as agreed upon.
    ulation.
                                                        Different from the game theory approach, we present a
                                                      new family of agents called semi-cooperative (SC). These
                                                      SC agents are designed to reach mutually beneﬁcial agree-
1  Introduction                                       ments and to keep their commitments (unless the other side
Designing automated trading agents has received increasing has broken its agreements in prior transactions). In addi-
attention, as trading in many markets (e.g. NASDAQ) has tion when trading with identical SC agents, they achieve a
now become fully electronic [Da-Jun and Liang-Xian, 2002]. pareto-optimal outcome that is beneﬁcial for both sides. Con-
In many domains, such as NASDAQ and e-bay, there is an en- sider the trading environment in the previous example. If
tity which provides a generic agent for a considerable number we would provide an SC agent and traders would adopt it
of traders in the market. This entity might offer the agent for without change, both sides would receive the money or the
a fee or even for free, as a recommended agent. The goal of goods, as agreed. Consequently, traders would achieve bet-
this entity is to provide an agent that maximizes the overall ter results than when using the equilibrium agent. However,
traders’ utility when it is delivered to a population, for two in this example adopting an SC agent may not be beneﬁcial,
reasons: First, one of the entity’s goals is to provide good if many traders modify their SC agents to equilibrium agents
service to its users. Therefore, the entity should aim to max- that do not send money or goods. In such cases the traders
imize the average payoff of all the traders’ agents in the en- that adopt an SC agent without changes will send money (or
vironment. Second, web-marketplaces, such as e-bay, which goods) without receiving goods (or money) in return.
host commercial transactions for a certain percentage of the Conversely, we claim that if a recommended agent is pro-
transaction amount, are interested in increasing the total prof- vided to a population, most people will not modify their
its of all the traders, since they will receive higher fees as a agents, even if their strategies are not compatible with the
result. Nevertheless, in these domains each client who obtains equilibrium strategy. We restrict our argument to low-cost
an agent has his own interests.                       environments, so that if one of the traders breaks the agree-
  In this paper we discuss the question of which agent should ment, the loss for the one that keeps it (e.g. sending the goods
be recommended to a population. We consider environments without receiving consideration) is relatively small. Such sit-
in which the fulﬁllment of the agreements reached by traders uations, where the traded costs of the goods are not very high

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1408(such as books, ﬂowers and cinema tickets) are very common are the ﬁrst to examine how human populations react to the
on the internet. There are several reasons for our claim that existence of recommended computerized agents. Moreover,
people do not tend to modify their agents. First, it is well our approach saves the need of designing and implementing
known that people do not necessarily play according to the a mechanism for the trading environment. Mechanism de-
equilibrium [Grosz et al., 2004]. Social factors such as equal- sign requires many resources, and it is not always applicable.
ity, social welfare and risk taking play very important roles in Consider, for example, what it would take for E-bay to en-
people’s decisions [Gal et al., 2004]. Second, modifying an force all the agreements reached on the site. Our approach,
agent’s code is time consuming and requires an understanding on the other hand, induces cooperation and fairness without
of the given code. For most users in low-cost environments spending any additional resources.
it is simply not worth the effort, especially when the agent’s The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section
code is complex and seems to be reasonable. Moreover, most 2 we discuss related work. In sections 3 and 4 we describe
traders are not programmers and modifying the code would our negotiation environment and broadly present the semi co-
require hiring a programmer thus incurring additional costs. operative agents (SC). Then we discuss the experiments we
Another factor is the credibility of an agent which is recom- conducted in order to evaluate the SC agents’ performance.
mended by an authoritative and experienced entity. It is im- Finally, in section 7 we conclude and suggest directions for
portant to note that despite the above reasons, we believe that future research.
some people will change the recommended agent. However,
we claim that the percentage of people who would change
their agent is small, and thus it is still worthwhile to supply 2 Related work
an SC agent which is more cooperative with others, rather Developing automated agents for a population has received
than the non-cooperative equilibrium agent.           extensive attention in recent years. In addition to equilibrium
  In order to examine our assumption we conducted exten- agents there are approaches which propose designing coop-
sive experiments which included 132 participants. In the ﬁrst erative agent systems, e.g., [Zhang et al., 2000]). In these
experiment, we provided three groups of human subjects with systems the agents cooperate in order to achieve a common
recommended agents for a resource allocation game. This goal, or to maximize the overall system’s utility. However,
game extends the well known Prisoner’s Dilemma to sim- the agents in such systems are indifferent toward their own
ulate a common real-life bilateral negotiation environment. utilities. Therefore, these agent systems are inapplicable in
One group received an equilibrium agent, while the other two our environment, where each agent attempts to increase its
groups received SC agents; one with a simple negotiation client’s utility. Furthermore, there have been efforts to de-
method and the other with a more complex one. All subjects sign a mechanism which induces cooperative behavior among
from the same group received the same initial code. Sub- selﬁsh agents, e.g., [Mui et al., 2002]. However, these mech-
jects were free to make any changes in their recommended anisms require resources and are based on assumptions such
agent. Note that the participants could change their agents as repeated interactions and the ability to detect an agent’s
not only to the equilibrium agent, but even to an agent which identity, which are not appropriate for our environment.
speciﬁcally exploits the recommended agent. The results Some researchers have explored the behavior of evolu-
show that most subjects did not change their agents. More- tional agents that dynamically adapt to their environment,
over, in groups which were given an SC agent as a recom- e.g., [Fatima et al., 2005]. These agents are designated for
mended agent, the overall utility of all the subjects was sig- environments in which learning and adaptation can be done
niﬁcantly higher than in the group that was given the equilib- during long periods. These agents are also used for model-
rium agent. Furthermore, even when giving subjects the op- ing human behavior. However, the evolutionary model re-
portunity to change their agents, after observing the results of quires repeated interactions, while we consider negotiation
playing with other agents in their group, subjects did not tend environments where agents may interact only once. Other
to change their agents and the superiority of the SC agents researchers have considered socially rational agents, whose
remained.                                             utility depends on the overall utility of the society, e.g., [Hogg
  In addition, we compared the overall utility of recommend- and Jennings, 2001]. In our environment, however, as in other
ing an SC agent to the overall utility when there is no rec- e-commerce applications, traders do not take into considera-
ommended agent at all. For this purpose, we asked another tion the overall beneﬁt of the society. Other researchers have
group of subjects to design their own agents without prof- developed non-equilibrium agents for competing against a
fering a recommended agent. We named these agents Peer population of bounded rational agents such as humans, e.g.,
Designed Agents (PDAs). The results show that the group [Gal et al., 2004]. In contrast, we have designed agents desig-
that received a recommended SC agent yielded higher over- nated for the entire population. Moreover, none of the previ-
all payoffs compared to the group which was not provided ous studies have considered human behavior when providing
a recommended agent. Thus, we propose that entities wish- a recommended agent.
ing to maximize the overall utility in the environment offer The concept which is most similar to the recommended
the traders a recommended agent, rather than leave it totally agents considered here is a recommended play, in which sub-
open to the users’ development.                       jects are presented recommendations of how to play a game,
  The innovative contribution of this paper is in presenting a e.g., [Croson and Marks, 2001]). Some of the studies that
new approach for designing recommended agents that takes explore recommended play, present mixed results concerning
human behavior into consideration. To our knowledge we the inﬂuence of the recommended play on people’s behav-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1409ior. However, recommended play is fundamentally different typical economic games.1 This game is a simpliﬁed version
from a recommended agent. First, most studies which exam- of the Colored-Trails framework, which is a paradigm for ex-
ine recommended play induce playing the equilibrium strat- amining negotiation environments which involve automated
egy and are explored in games with simple strategies. In con- agents [Grosz et al., 2004].
trast, we suggest providing non-equilibrium agents and using In our experiment the conﬁguration of the parameters is:
more complex settings which reﬂect real-life negotiations. In n =10, Scoregoal = 200 and Scoreresources =10. Thus,
addition, in order to use the recommended play people must obtaining the target set becomes the most important compo-
actively choose it. However, in our case the recommended nent of the scoring function. We set the initial state in such a
agent can be passively adopted without any additional activ- manner that one player possesses all the resources that com-
ity required. Moreover, modifying the recommended agent prise a target set, which means he is not dependent on the
does actually require effort and time.                resources of the other. The other player, on the other hand,
                                                      is dependent on the other player’s resources. More speciﬁ-
3  Environment Description                            cally, he needs two resources from the other player in order
                                                      to complete the target set. Both players have extra available
In order to simulate a general trading framework, we have resources for which they can negotiate. Our game setting en-
designed a resource allocation game. The advantage of this ables an examination of situations in which the equilibrium
basic game is that it makes very few assumptions, and thus strategy is not Pareto-optimal, and cooperation between the
it can represent many situations in real economical markets. players yields better results for both parties: The dependent
Moreover, such environments are very common and easy to player can obtain the resources he needs to complete the tar-
manage via the Web. In the beginning of our 2-player game, get set, and the independent player can increase the number
each player i (i ∈{1, 2}) is allocated an initial pool of re- of resources he obtains by reaching agreements in which the
        init
sources Ri , which are attributed to several types. The goal number of resources he sends is lower than the number of re-
of the game for each player i is to possess a speciﬁed set of re- sources he receives in return. Moreover, our game setting en-
sources Gi, which includes a certain quantity (zero or more) ables the examination of two different situations: the depen-
of each resource type. There are enough resources for both dent player gains from the exchange of resources signiﬁcantly
                                        init   init
players to satisfy their goals, i.e. G1 ∪ G2 ⊆ R1 ∪ R2 . more than he is required to pay, while the independent player
However, some of the resources needed by one player may be only slightly improves his proﬁt from the exchange. Both
in the possession of the other. Thus, in order to obtain the goal situations are common in real life. Consider for instance, a
set of resources, a player might need to exchange resources researcher who crucially needs to buy some books for an im-
with the other party, according to a certain negotiation pro- portant research she is conducting. The seller will gain some
tocol. The protocol consists of a ﬁnite number of rounds n. money from the transaction. The researcher, however, is go-
Each round l is comprised of two phases: a negotiation phase ing to gain much more from the deal.
and an exchange phase. In the negotiation phase one of the
                     l =(      l      l )
players makes an offer O Ogive1,Ogive2  to exchange   4   Recommending Semi-cooperative Agents
resources with the other player. In his offer the proposer i
                    l
promises to send Ogivei resources to the other player and in A recommended agent for this game can be described by its
                                 l
return requests that player j send Ogivej to him. The receiver strategies, i.e. the agent’s decisions in each possible phase
should inform the proposer whether he accepts or rejects the of the game: the offers the agent makes, its responses to the
offer. Afterwards, there is an exchange phase, in which each offers it receives and the resources it sends. To describe the
                            l                                                                  1
player i sends a set of resources Si to the other player. In this agents, when agent A plays the role of player and agent
game, agreements are not enforced by the game controller, Bisplayer2, we denote the set of resources that player i
                                            l                                                   end(    )
allowing players to break agreements. Therefore Si can be possesses at the end of the game and its score as Ri A, B
                  l                                            (    )                     l
different from Ogivei. The exchange is executed simultane- and scorei A, B , respectively. We use Ni to denote the set
ously, so that no player knows how many resources, if any, of resources that player i needs in round l in order to complete
the other party has actually sent till he has already sent his re- its goal set. Finally, me signiﬁes the index of the player the
sources. The next round is identical to the ﬁrst one except for agent plays and other indicates the index of the other player.
the role of the proposer, which is alternated between the two In our resource allocation game the combination of unen-
players. The performance of each player is determined by its forceable agreements and a ﬁnite horizon of the game leads
score at the end of the game. The score of player i (scorei) to a theoretical equilibrium result that no resources will be
                            end
possessing the set of resources Ri at the end of the game exchanged. Therefore, an equilibrium agent (EA) in the con-
is Scoregoal if the player holds the whole target set. In ad- text of this game is any agent that never sends any resources,
                                                          ∀   ∀   l = ∅
dition, each resource the player possesses imparts him with i.e. i, lSi . As a result, at the end of the game
Scoreres points. Formally                             each player will possess only its initial set of resources, ∀i,
                                                        end(       )=   init
                                                     Ri   EA,EA      Ri   .
           Score    + |Rend|Score      G  ⊆ Rend
 score =         goal    i       Res    i    i
     i     |  end|                                       1
            Ri   ScoreRes             otherwise          The game is similar to the prisoner’s dilemma by having the
                                                      choice of cooperating (sending the promised resources) or not co-
The resource allocation game, supplies a general negotiation operating (not sending the promised resources). However, our game
platform which is more similar to real-life negotiations than also includes negotiation processes to resemble real life situations.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1410  In contrast to the equilibrium agent, we deﬁne a semi co- complexity, as described below.
operative agent (SC) as an agent which
                                                      Description of SC Agents
 1. When the agent plays against an identical agent, both The Simple semi-Cooperative Agent (SCA)
    agents obtain higher scores than the scores they have at In general, this agent is a simple agent in the sense that it
    the beginning of the game.                        agrees to any beneﬁcial offers ( it doesn’t try to increase its
 2. When the agent negotiates with an identical agent, both score by being greedier at the beginning of the game) or try
    agents reach a pareto-optimal solution.           to learn the opponent type (see SSC’s strategy for detecting
 3. It fulﬁlls its agreements as long as the other side does liars). More speciﬁcally:
    not deceive it.                                   Sending strategy: This agent is honest and fulﬁlls its agree-
                                                      ments, unless the other agent deceives it. Once this player has
 4. In each stage of the game, it commits to activities that are been deceived, it stops sending resources.
    beneﬁcial for both sides (for itself and for its opponent). Negotiation strategy: This agent’s logic is quite simple. For
In particular in our game properties 1 and 2 imply that when round l of the game; if the agent has already satisﬁed its
                                                             l   =  ∅
an SC agent plays against an identical agent, both agents goal (Nme  ) it accepts any offer that: (1) Gives the
                    ∀     ⊆    end(      )                                                          l  ⊆
satisfy their goals, i.e. i, Gi Ri SC,SC  . Accord-   other agent resources it needs to satisfy its goal, Ogiveme
                                                        l
ing to property 4, for each round l the SC agent proposes Nother (2) Increases the number of resources it possesses
                                                       |     l   |   |     l |
and accepts agreements that are beneﬁcial to both sides. In ( Ogiveother > Ogiveme ). If the agent hasn’t satisﬁed its
this game, an agreement is beneﬁcial for player i if it in-  l  = ∅
                                                      goal (Nme    ), it accepts any offer which: (1) Promotes it
creases the number of resources it possesses, or if it increases           l   ⊆   l        l    = ∅
                                                      to satisfy its goal, Ogiveother Nme, Ogiveother (2) It
the number of resources it needs in order to satisfy its goal, needs to send only the resources not necessary for it to reach
i.e. |Ogivel  | > |Ogivel | or Ogivel   ∩ N   = ∅.                l  ⊆    l           l
         other         me          other   me         its goal, Ogiveme  Avme,whereAvi   denotes the agent’s
Note that unlike a cooperative agent which agrees to send re- set of available resources.
sources to the other agent for free if it maximizes the joint The Complex semi-Cooperative Agent (CCA)
utility, the SC agent does not accept such an offer. When In general, this agent has a complex logic as it tries to in-
providing an SC agent as a recommended agent, if players crease its score by being greedier at the beginning of the
adopt it without change, the dependent players will satisfy game. In addition, it tries to minimize the damage in case
their goals, and the independent players will obtain additional it plays against a deceiving player. More speciﬁcally:
resources. Therefore both players will beneﬁt more by us- Sending strategy: CCA is honest and usually fulﬁlls its
ing semi-cooperative agents than when both of them use the agreements. However, unlike the SCA, this agent is also cau-
equilibrium agents (in case we provide equilibrium agents). tious and protects itself from agents that do not fulﬁll their
Consequently, providing semi-cooperative agents is superior agreements. CCA identiﬁes situations in which there is a high
over providing equilibrium agents if the users do not modify probability that it will be deceived by the other agent which
           ∀      (       )        (        )
their agents, i scorei SC,SC > scorei EA,EA .How-     will not send the resources agreed upon:(1) In situations in
ever, semi-cooperative agents can obtain a lower score than which the other agent has already satisﬁed its goal and if it
equilibrium agents, if one of the users modiﬁes his recom- will keep the agreement, the CCA agent will satisfy its goal,
mended agent. For example, consider a scenario in which       ⊆       l
                                                      i.e., Nme  Ogiveother. In these situations there is a higher
user US1 adopts the SC recommended agent without change probability that the other agent will not send the promised re-
while user US2 modiﬁes its agent to an equilibrium agent sources, since both agents are about to possess their target sets
that does not send any resources. In this scenario, the agent and no future interactions are expected. In such cases, there
of US1 will send resources to the agent of US2 but will not is no motivation for the other agent to maintain its credibility
receive resources in return. As a result, US1’s score in this and to avoid deceiving. (2) When the other agent has already
game will be lower than if US1 would have used an equilib- deceived in the past. (3) When there are very few rounds till
rium agent, which would have let him at least reserve all his the end of the game. In all the situations mentioned above, the
initial resources. Nevertheless, if most users do not modify CCA waits to send its resources until one round after receiv-
their agents, the revenue of an SC agent in games where both                               l+1 =      l
                                                      ing the resources from the other agent, i.e, Sme Ogiveme
sides use SC agents will compensate for the loss from games  l    =   l
                                                      if Ogiveother Sother.
where the SC agent plays against a modiﬁed agent.     Negotiation strategy: In round l of the game, if the agent
                                                                                 l  =  ∅
                                                      has already satisﬁed its goal (Nme ) it accepts offers in
4.1  Experiment                                       which it promises to send the other agent only one resource
In order to investigate which agent should be provided to a which the other agent needs in order to satisfy its goal, i.e
population, an SC or an equilibrium agent, we conducted the | l | =1         l   ⊆   l
                                                       Ogiveme      and Ogiveme    Nother. The logic behind
following experiment. In this experiment we examined the sending one resource at a time is to minimize the damage
behavior of three groups of programmers who received rec- in case the other side is a liar and does not fulﬁll its agree-
ommended agents’ codes for the resources allocation game. ment. The number of resources it demands for sending this
For this purpose, in addition to the equilibrium agent (EA) resource decreases over time. Similarly, if the agent has not
we designed two SC agents2, distinguished by their level of
                                                      our experiment we used two variations of SC agents: a simple agent
  2The behavior of the recommended SC agents can be any be- that negotiates several resources at a time and a complex agent that
havior that satisﬁes conditions 1-4 in the SC deﬁnition. Indeed in negotiates one resource at a time.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1411satisﬁed its goal (N l = ∅), it accepts any offer in which it
                me                                       290                     290
is promised one resource which it needs to satisfy its goal,
   |     l   | =1  (     l    ⊆     )                    250                     250
i.e. Ogiveother   , Ogiveother  Nme  . The number of
resources it agrees to send in return increases over time. 210                   210
                                                         170                     170
                                                              EA   SCA  CCA          EA  SCA CCA PDA

                                                      Figure 1: (a) Recommended agent’s average score; (b) Average
Experiment Design                                     score of all the agents in the environment.
                                                      4.2  Results
In our experiment 99 subjects were divided to three equal
                                                      The average scores achieved by the agents in the tournaments
groups. Each group was provided with a different recom-
                                                      are presented in Figure 1. The results depicted in Figure 1.a
mended agent’s code3 EA, CCA or SCA. All programmers of
                                                      show that the average scores achieved both by SCA and CCA
the same group received the same initial code. We also pre-
                                                      agents (which were not modiﬁed) are signiﬁcantly higher
sented a short description of the recommended agent’s strat-
                                                      than the EA’s average score (Mann-Whitney test, p<0.01).
egy. The group that received the EA agent was also explained
                                                      Similar results are presented in ﬁgure 1.b, which depicts the
the meaning of their agents being equilibrium agents. We
                                                      average scores of all agents in the environments (including
conveyed to the subjects in all the groups that the provided
                                                      agents modiﬁed to deviate from the recommended agent strat-
agent is recommended. Each programmer was requested to
                                                      egy). The superiority of using the SC agents over using the
submit an agent’s code aiming to maximize its score (as spec-
                                                      EA agents applies to both the dependent and the independent
iﬁed below), which was not necessarily equal to or based
                                                      roles.
upon the recommended agent. They were required to submit
their ﬁnal agents in 10 days. We explained that each agent These results support our hypothesis which claims that pro-
would play in a tournament against all the other 32 subjects’ viding SC recommended agents to a population yields better
agents who had received the same recommended agent. Each results than providing the equilibrium agent. We have based
agent played both as the role of the dependent and the role of our hypothesis mainly upon the assumption that people tend
the independent agent against all the other agents. It is wor- not to change the recommended agents. This assumption was
thy to note that this experimental methodology is innovative supported by the experimental results. In all three groups,
since no one, as far as we know, has ever examined the in- most subjects did not modify their agents. In particular, only
ﬂuence of providing a recommended agent to a population of 5 subjects (of 33) modiﬁed the recommended agent in the EA
programmers.                                          group, 10 in the SCA group and 4 in the CCA group.
                                                        The provided agents’ performance is determined not only
  All subjects who participated in our experiment were by the number of people that change their agents, but also
upper-class undergraduate and graduate computer science by the way they modify their agents. Some changes do
students at Bar-Ilan University, who are experienced pro- not affect the recommended agents’ score and therefore are
grammers. The subjects were motivated to perform well not relevant. Other changes do reduce the recommended
by receiving a course grade. A subject’s grade was calcu- agents’ score. Therefore we classify the modiﬁed agents
lated according to the score obtained by his agent accumu- according to the way they affect the recommended agent’s
lated over all its 64 plays. We emphasized that the grade score, when they play against it. More speciﬁcally the mod-
is based only upon the subject’s own score, and not upon iﬁed agents can be classiﬁed into three types. These types
other agents’ scores - similar to real negotiation environ- are determined by comparing the performance of the mod-
ments, where traders gain money only according to their own iﬁed agent when playing against a recommended agent to
agents’ performance. The game was explained in class and the recommended agent’s performance when playing against
the participants were able to ask questions. In addition, they another recommended agent: (1) Counter agents - agents
received an accurate written description of the game. For de- that achieve higher scores than the recommended agent. The
bugging purposes, we gave participants a server upon which best-response agent is the agent that achieves the highest
they could run their agents. We made sure that each subject score among all the counter agents. (2) Agents with neutral
knew how to run the server and we offered any technical sup- changes- agents that achieve the same score as the recom-
port needed.                                          mended agent. (3) Inferior agents-agents whose scores are
                                                      lower than the recommended agents. In the EA group, all the
  Our main hypothesis was that the groups provided with SC modiﬁed agents were agents of type 2, and no resources were
agents would achieve better results (as speciﬁed below) than sent during the EA group tournament. Unlike the EA group,
a group provided with the equilibrium agents. The results in the SCA and the CCA groups most of the modiﬁed agents
were evaluated based on two aspects: (1) The average score were counter agents (8 out of 10 and 3 out of 4, respectively).
of the players that adopted the recommended agent without Surprisingly, only one subject modiﬁed its agent to the best-
changing it. (2) The overall score of all the agents in the response agent.
environment, including agents that were modiﬁed to deviate Comparing the performance of SCA and CCA groups
from the recommended strategy. This hypothesis was based
on our assumption that people tend not to change their agents, 3The code provided was written in C++ or in Java according to
as explained in the introduction.                     the subject’s preference.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1412