     A Game-Theoretic Analysis of Strictly Competitive Multiagent Scenarios∗

       Felix Brandt     Felix Fischer    Paul Harrenstein                  Yoav Shoham
                  Computer Science Department                     Computer Science Department
                      University of Munich                              Stanford University
                     80538 Munich, Germany                           Stanford CA 94305, USA
             {brandtf,fischerf,harrenst}@tcs.ifi.lmu.de                shoham@cs.stanford.edu

                    Abstract                          trying to give a sound answer (see Section 3 for formal deﬁ-
                                                      nitions of the concepts used in the following paragraphs). In
    This paper is a comparative study of game-theoretic
                                                      the game described above there can be just one winner; all
    solution concepts in strictly competitive multiagent
                                                      the other players lose. As such it is an instance of a subclass
    scenarios, as commonly encountered in the con-
                                                      of ranking games, which were recently introduced as models
    text of parlor games, competitive economic situa-
                                                      of strictly competitive multi-player scenarios [Brandt et al.,
    tions, and some social choice settings. We model
                                                      2006]. Outcomes of a ranking game are related to rankings
    these scenarios as ranking games in which every
                                                      of the players, i.e., orderings of the players according to how
    outcome is a ranking of the players, with higher
                                                      well they have done in the game relative to one another. Play-
    ranks being preferred over lower ones. Rather than
                                                      ers are assumed to generally prefer higher ranks over lower
    conﬁning our attention to one particular solution
                                                      ones and to be indiﬀerent to the ranks of other players. For-
    concept, we give matching upper and lower bounds
                                                      mally, ranking games are deﬁned as normal-form games in
    for various comparative ratios of solution concepts
                                                      which the payoﬀ functions represent the preferences of the
    within ranking games. The solution concepts we
                                                      players regarding lotteries over rankings. In this paper, we
    consider in this context are security level strate-
                                                      conduct a comparative study of game-theoretic solution con-
    gies (maximin), Nash equilibrium, and correlated
                                                      cepts in ranking games.
    equilibrium. Additionally, we also examine quasi-
    strict equilibrium, an equilibrium reﬁnement pro-   It is well-known that two-player strictly competitive games
    posed by Harsanyi, which remedies some appar-     admit a unique rational solution (the maximin solution), i.e.,a
    ent shortcomings of Nash equilibrium when ap-     set of (possibly randomized) strategies for each player so that
                                                                       ﬀ
    plied to ranking games. In particular, we compute each player is best o playing one of the recommended strate-
    the price of cautiousness, i.e., the worst-possible gies. Unfortunately, solution concepts for ranking games with
    loss an agent may incur by playing maximin in-    more than two players are less appealing due to a lack of nor-
    stead of the worst (quasi-strict) Nash equilibrium, mative power. Nash equilibria, for example, which are de-
    the mediation value, i.e., the ratio between the so- ﬁned as proﬁles of strategies that are mutual best responses
    cial welfare obtained in the best correlated equi- to each other, may not be unique. Indeed, the game described
    librium and the best Nash equilibrium, and the en- above possesses numerous Nash equilibria: Raising her hand,
    forcement value, i.e., the ratio between the highest not raising her hand, and mixing uniformly between both
    obtainable social welfare and that of the best corre- actions are all optimal strategies for Alice in some equilib-
    lated equilibrium.                                rium. The only pure, i.e., non-randomized, equilibrium of
                                                      the game tells Alice not to raise her hand based on the belief
                                                      that Bob will raise his hand and Charlie will not (see Fig-
1  Introduction                                       ure 1 for an illustration). This assumption, however, is un-
Consider the following three-player game. Alice, Bob, reasonably strong. Both Bob and Charlie may deviate from
and Charlie independently and simultaneously are to decide their respective strategies to any other strategy without de-
whether to raise their hand or not. Alice wins if the number creasing their chances of winning. After all, they cannot do
of players raising their hand is odd, whereas Bob wins if it any worse than losing. This weakness is due to the indiﬀer-
is even and positive. Should nobody raise his hand, Charlie ence of losers, which is inherent to ranking games. In fact,
wins. What would you recommend Alice to do?           we argue that pure Nash equilibria are particularly weak so-
  Clearly, this question lies at the heart of game theory, and lutions of such games and conjecture (and prove for certain
game-theoretic solution concepts should be called upon when sub-cases) that every single-winner game possesses at least
  ∗                                                   one non-pure equilibrium, i.e., an equilibrium where at least
   This material is based upon work supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft under grants BR 2312/1-1 and one player randomizes.
BR 2312/3-1, and by the National Science Foundation under ITR Returning to the example given at the beginning of this
grant IIS-0205633.                                    section, it is still unclear which strategy Alice should adopt

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1199in order to maximize her chances of winning. We consider 1986; Sturtevant, 2004]. In extensive-form games, players
three solution concepts in addition to Nash equilibria: maxi- move consecutively and a pure (so-called subgame perfect)
min strategies, quasi-strict equilibria, and correlated equilib- Nash equilibrium is guaranteed to exist [see, e.g., Myerson,
ria. By playing her maximin strategy, Alice can guarantee 1991]. Normal-form games are more general than (perfect-
a certain chance of winning, her so-called security level,no information) extensive-form games because every extensive-
matter which actions her opponents choose. Alice’s security form game can be mapped to a corresponding normal-form
level in this particular game is 0.5 and can be obtained by game, while the opposite is not the case.
randomizing uniformly between both actions. The same ex- Ranking games were introduced by Brandt et al. [2006],
pected payoﬀ is achieved in the worst quasi-strict equilibrium who also showed that ﬁnding Nash equilibria of ranking
of the game where Alice and Charlie randomize uniformly games with more than two players is just as hard as for gen-
and Bob invariably raises his hand (see Figure 1). We will eral games and thus unlikely to be feasible in polynomial
see that this equivalence is no mere coincidence, since in any time. This further underlines the importance of alternative
single-winner game where a player has just two actions, the solution concepts such as maximin strategies and correlated
payoﬀ in his worst quasi-strict equilibrium equals his (pos- equilibria which can both be computed eﬃciently via linear
itive) security level. However, none of the aforementioned programming.
solution concepts oﬀers a solution for multi-player ranking Most work on comparative ratios in computational game
games that is as obviously right as maximin is for strictly theory has been inspired by the literature on the price of an-
competitive two-player games. We nevertheless facilitate the archy [Koutsoupias and Papadimitriou, 1999], i.e., the ratio
analysis of ranking games by evaluating the following com- between the highest obtainable social welfare and that of the
parative ratios:                                      best Nash equilibrium. Similar ratios for correlated equilibria
  • the price of cautiousness, i.e., the worst-possible loss an (the value of mediation and the enforcement value) were in-
    agent may face when playing maximin instead of the troduced by Ashlagi et al. [2005]. To our knowledge, Tennen-
    worst Nash equilibrium,                           holtz [2002] was the ﬁrst to conduct a numerical comparison
                                                      of Nash equilibrium payoﬀ and the security level. This work
  •
    the price of cautiousness for quasi-strict equilibria, i.e., is inspired by an intriguing example game due to Aumann
    the worst-possible loss an agent may face when playing [1985] where the only Nash equilibrium yields each player
    maximin instead of the worst quasi-strict equilibrium, no more than his security level, but the equilibrium strategies
  • the mediation value, i.e., the ratio between the social are actually diﬀerent from the maximin strategies. In other
    welfare obtainable in the best correlated equilibrium and words, the equilibrium merely yields security level payoﬀs
    the best Nash equilibrium, and                    but fails to guarantee them.
  • the enforcement value, i.e., the ratio between the highest
    obtainable social welfare and that of the best correlated 3 Preliminaries
    equilibrium.                                      3.1  Ranking Games
Each of these values obviously equals 1 in the case of two- An accepted way to model situations of conﬂict and social in-
player ranking games, as these form a subclass of constant- teraction is by means of a normal-form game [see, e.g., My-
sum games. The interesting question is how these values un- erson, 1991].
fold for games with more than two players.
  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. After Deﬁnition 1 (Normal-form game) A game in normal-form
reviewing related work in Section 2, we formally introduce is a tuple Γ=(N, (Ai)i∈N , (pi)i∈N ) where N is a set of players
                                                                         ∈
ranking games and game-theoretic solution concepts in Sec- and for each player i N, Ai is a nonempty set of actions
                                                                                         →  R
tion 3. Section 4 discusses a weakness of the Nash equilib- available to player i, and pi :( i∈N Ai) is a function
rium concept that is characteristic for ranking games. Sec- mapping each action proﬁle of the game (i.e., combination of
tions 5 and 6 introduce and evaluate the price of cautiousness actions) to a real-valued payoﬀ for player i.
and the value of correlation, respectively. The paper con-
cludes with Section 7.                                                  c1            c2
                                                                     b1   b2        b1  b2
2  Related Work
                                                                a1   3    1         1   2
Game playing research in AI has largely focused on two-
                                      ﬀ
player games [see, e.g., Marsland and Schae er, 1990]. As       a2   1    2         2   1
a matter of fact, “in AI, ‘games’ are usually of a rather
specialized kind—what game theorists call deterministic,
turn-taking, two-player, zero-sum games of perfect informa- Figure 1: Three-player single-winner game. Alice (1)
tion” [Russell and Norvig, 2003, p. 161]. Notable exceptions chooses row a1 or a2, Bob (2) chooses column b1 or b2, and
include cooperative games in the context of coalition forma- Charlie (3) chooses matrix c1 or c2. Outcomes are denoted by
tion [see, e.g., Sandholm et al., 1999] and complete informa- the winner’s index. The dashed square marks the only pure
tion extensive-form games, a class of multi-player games for Nash equilibrium. Dotted rectangles mark a quasi-strict equi-
which eﬃcient Nash equilibrium search algorithms have been librium in which Alice and Charlie randomize uniformly over
investigated by the AI community [e.g., Luckhardt and Irani, their respective actions.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1200Unless stated otherwise, we will henceforth assume that ev- 3.2 Solution Concepts
                        ﬀ
ery player has at least two di erent actions. A combination Over the years, game theory has produced a number of so-
           ∈   =
of actions s A     i∈N Ai is also called a proﬁle of pure lution concepts that identify reasonable or desirable strategy
strategies. This concept can be generalized to mixed strategy proﬁles in a given game. Perhaps the most cautious way for
        ∈   =
proﬁles s S     i∈N S i, by letting players randomize over a player to play a game is to try to maximize his own payoﬀ
                   =Δ
their actions. Here, S i (Ai) denotes the set of probability regardless of which strategies the other player choose, i.e.,
distributions over player i’s actions, or mixed strategies avail- even when the other players (collaboratively) try to minimize
                  ﬀ
able to player i. Payo functions naturally extend to mixed his payoﬀ. Such a strategy is called a maximin strategy, and
strategy proﬁles, and we will frequently write pi(s) for the ex- the corresponding (guaranteed minimum) payoﬀ is called the
          ﬀ                  =
pected payo of player i,andp(s) i∈N pi(s) for the social maximin payoﬀ or security level of that player.
welfare, under proﬁle s. In the following, we further write
n = |N| for the number of players in a game, A−i and S −i for
                                                      Deﬁnition 4 (Maximin strategy) A strategy si ∈ S i is called
the set of action or strategy proﬁles for all players but i, si for a maximin strategy for player i ∈ Nif
the ith strategy in proﬁle s, s−i for the vector of all strategies
                                                                     s ∈ arg max min p (r , t− ).
in s but si, and si(a) for the probability assigned to action a      i      ∈   ∈   i i  i
by player i in strategy proﬁle s.                                          ri S i t S
                                                        =                  ,
  The situations of social interaction this paper is concerned vi maxri∈S i mint∈S pi(ri t−i) is called the security level for
with are such that outcomes are related to a ranking of the player i.
players, i.e., an ordering of the players according to how well
                                                                          Γ               Γ
they have done in the game relative to one another. We as- Given a particular game , we will write vi( ) for the security
                                                                       Γ
sume that players generally prefer higher ranks over lower level of player i in . In the game of Figure 1, Alice can
                                                                                .
ones and that they are indiﬀerent to the ranks of other players. achieve her security level of 0 5 by uniform randomization
                                                                                                       .
Moreover, we hypothesize that the players entertain qualita- over her actions, i.e., by raising her hand with probability 0 5.
tive preferences over lotteries, i.e., probability distributions The security level for players 2 and 3 is zero.
over ranks [cf. von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947]. For One of the best-known solution concepts is Nash equilib-
example, one player may prefer to be ranked second to having rium [Nash, 1951]. In a Nash equilibrium, no player is able
                                                                       ﬀ
a ﬁfty-ﬁfty chance of being ranked ﬁrst or being ranked third, to increase his payo by unilaterally changing his strategy.
whereas another player may judge quite diﬀerently. We arrive
at the following deﬁnition of the rank payoﬀ to a player. Deﬁnition 5 (Nash equilibrium) A strategy proﬁle s ∈ Sis
                                                      called a Nash equilibrium if for each player i ∈ N and each
                                                               ∈
Deﬁnition 2 (Rank payoﬀ) The rank payoﬀ of a player i is strategy si S i,
                    1 2     n    n                                                   
deﬁned as vector ri = (r , r ,...,r ) ∈ R such that                         ≥      ,
                    i i     i                                           pi(s) pi((s−i si )).
     k ≥ k+1         ∈{ , ,..., − }         1 > n
    ri  ri   for all k 1 2    n  1 ,    and ri  ri .  A Nash equilibrium is called pure if it is a pure strategy pro-
                                                      ﬁle.
For convenience, we assume rank payoﬀs to be normalized so
    1 =       n =
that ri 1 and ri 0.                                   Nash [1951] has shown that every normal-form game pos-
                                                      sesses at least one equilibrium. There are inﬁnitely many
In other words, higher ranks are weakly preferred, and for at
                                            k         Nash equilibria in the single-winner game of Figure 1, the
least one rank the preference is strict. Intuitively, ri repre- only pure equilibrium is denoted by a dashed square.
                 ﬀ
sents player i’s payo for being ranked in kth. Building on A weakness of Nash equilibrium as a normative solution
Deﬁnition 2, deﬁning ranking games is straightforward. concept (besides the multiplicity of equilibria) is that players
                                                      may be indiﬀerent between actions they play with non-zero
Deﬁnition 3 (Ranking game) A ranking game is a game   probability and actions they do not play at all. For example, in
where for any strategy proﬁle s ∈ S there is a permutation
                                      π               the pure Nash equilibrium of the game in Figure 1, players 2
π ,π ,...,π                        =   i      ∈
( 1 2      n) of the players so that pi(s) ri for all i N. and 3 might as well deviate without decreasing their chances
                                                      of winning the game. Quasi-strict equilibrium as introduced
A binary ranking game is one where each rank payoﬀ vec-
                                                      by Harsanyi [1973]1 tries to alleviate this phenomenon by
tor only consists of zeros and ones. An important subclass
                                                      demanding that every best response be played with positive
of binary ranking games are single-winner games, i.e., games
                                                      probability. (It follows from the deﬁnition of Nash equilib-
where r =  (1, 0,...,0) for all i ∈ N. When considering
      i                                               rium that every action played with positive probability yields
mixed strategies, the expected payoﬀ in a single-winner game
                                                      the same expected payoﬀ.)
equals the probability of winning. An example single-winner
game with three players—the game introduced at the begin-
                                                      Deﬁnition 6 (Quasi-strict Nash equilibrium) A Nash equi-
ning of this paper—is given in Figure 1. A convenient way
                                                      librium s ∈ S is called quasi-strict if for all i ∈ N and all
of representing these games is to just denote the index of the
                                                      a, b ∈ A with s (a) > 0 and s (b) = 0,p(s− , a) > p (s− , b).
winning player for each outcome. For general ranking games,  i     i          i        i  i      i  i
                       , ,...,
we will sometimes write [i1 i2 in] to denote the outcome 1Harsanyi originally referred to quasi-strict equilibrium as
where player i1 is ranked ﬁrst, i2 is ranked second, and so “quasi-strong”. However, this term has been dropped to distinguish
forth.                                                the concept from Aumann’s strong equilibrium.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1201Figure 1 shows a quasi-strict equilibrium of the game be-               c1            c2
tween Alice, Bob, and Charlie.2 While quasi-strict equilib-
                                                                     b1   b2        b1  b2
ria have recently been shown to always exist in two-player
games [Norde, 1999], this is not the case for games with more   a1   2    1         3   1
than two players (see Footnote 3).
  Nash equilibrium assumes that players randomize between       a2   1    2         1   1
their actions independently from each other. Aumann [1974]
introduced the notion of a correlated strategy, where players
are allowed to coordinate their actions by means of a device Figure 2: Three-player single-winner game. Dashed boxes
or agent that randomly selects one of several action proﬁles denote all Nash equilibria (one player may mix arbitrarily in
and recommends the actions of this proﬁle to the respective boxes that span two outcomes).
players. The corresponding equilibrium concept is deﬁned as
follows.                                              one ranked lowest—in any outcome, who receives his min-
                                                      imum payoﬀ  of zero and therefore has no incentive to actu-
Deﬁnition 7 (Correlated equilibrium) A correlated strat- ally play that particular action. As a consequence, all pure
egy μ ∈ Δ(A) is called a correlated equilibrium if for all i ∈ N, equilibria are weak in this sense, especially in single-winner
si, ai ∈ Ai,                                          games where n−1 players are indiﬀerent over which action to
                                                     play. Quasi-strict equilibrium mitigates this phenomenon by
                μ        −     ,   ≥
                 (s)(pi(s) p(s−i ai)) 0.              additionally requiring that actions played with positive proba-
             ∈
            s−i A−i                                   bility yield strictly more payoﬀ than non-equilibrium actions.
                                                      Thus, quasi-strict equilibrium can be used to formally illus-
In other words, a correlated equilibrium of a game is a prob- trate the weakness of pure Nash equilibrium.
ability distribution μ over the set of action proﬁles, such that,
if a particular action proﬁle s is chosen according to this dis-
                                                      Fact 1 Quasi-strict equilibria in ranking games are never
tribution, and every player i ∈ N is only informed about his
                                                      pure, i.e., in any quasi-strict equilibrium there is at least one
own action s ∈ A , it is optimal for i to play s , given that the
          i   i                       i               player who randomizes over some of his actions.
other players play s−i. Correlated equilibrium is based upon
the assumption that there exists a trustworthy party who can There is at least one quasi-strict equilibrium in every two-
recommend behavior but cannot enforce it.             player game (and thus also in every two-player ranking
  It can easily be seen from the deﬁnition that the Nash equi- game) [Norde, 1999]. In games with more than two play-
libria of any game form a subset of the correlated equilib- ers, there may be no quasi-strict equilibrium. Figure 2 shows
ria, with the additional property of being a product of strate- that this even holds for single-winner games.3
gies for the individual players. The existence result by Nash It appears as if most ranking games possess non-pure equi-
[1951] thus carries over to correlated equilibria. Again con- libria, i.e., mixed strategy equilibria where at least one player
sider the game of Figure 1. It is easily veriﬁed that the cor- randomizes. We prove this claim for three subclasses of rank-
related strategy that assigns probability 0.25 each to action ing games.
proﬁles (a1, b1, c1), (a1, b2, c1), (a2, b1, c1), and (a2, b1, c2)is
                                            ﬀ    .
a correlated equilibrium in which the expected payo is 0 5 Theorem 1 The following classes of ranking games always
               .
for player 1 and 0 25 for players 2 and 3. In this particular possess at least one non-pure equilibrium:
case, the correlated equilibrium is a convex combination of
Nash equilibria, and correlation can be achieved by means of (i) two-player ranking games,
a publicly observable random variable. Perhaps surprisingly, (ii) three-player single-winner games where each player has
Aumann [1974] has shown that in general the (expected) so- two actions, and
cial welfare of a correlated equilibrium may exceed that of ev-
                                                ﬀ     (iii) n-player single-winner games where the security level of
ery Nash equilibrium, and that correlated equilibrium payo s at least two players is positive.
may in fact be outside the convex hull of the Nash equilib-
rium payoﬀs. This is of course not possible if social welfare Proof: Statement (i) follows from Fact 1 and the existence re-
is identical in all outcomes, as it is the case for the game in sult by Norde [1999]. For reasons of completeness, we give a
Figure 1.                                             simple alternative proof. Assume for contradiction that there
                                                      is a two-player ranking game that only possesses pure equi-
4  Equilibrium Points in Ranking Games                libria and consider, without loss of generality, a pure equilib-
                                                      rium e in which player 1 wins. Since player 2 must be inca-
As we have already seen in Section 1, the stability of some pable of increasing his payoﬀ by deviating from e, player 1
Nash equilibria in ranking games is questionable because los- has to win no matter which action the second player chooses.
ing players are assumed to play certain strategies even though
they could as well play any other strategy without decreasing 3There are few examples in the literature for games without
their payoﬀ. By deﬁnition, there is at least one player—the quasi-strict equilibria (essentially there is one example by van
                                                      Damme [1983] and another one by Cubitt and Sugden [1994]). For
  2Observe that Charlie plays a weakly dominated action with pos- this reason, the game depicted in Figure 2 might be of independent
itive probability in this equilibrium.                interest.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1202As a consequence, the strategies in e remain in equilibrium case of multiple equilibria, it is unclear which one to play;
even if player 2’s strategy is replaced with an arbitrary ran- coalitions might beneﬁt from jointly deviating; and recent
domization among his actions.                         complexity-theoretic results indicate that there might exist no
  As for (ii), consider a three-player single winner game with polynomial-time algorithm for ﬁnding Nash equilibria [Chen
actions A1 = {a1, a2}, A2 = {b1, b2}, and A3 = {c1, c2}. As- and Deng, 2006]. Adding the indiﬀerence of players, which
sume for contradiction that there are only pure equilibria in is particularly problematic in ranking games, a compelling
the game and consider, without loss of generality, a pure question is how much worse a player can be oﬀ when revert-
equilibrium e = (a1, b1, c1) in which player 1 wins. In the ing to the most defensive choice—his maximin strategy—
following, we say that a pure equilibrium is semi-strict if at instead of hoping for an equilibrium outcome. We refer to
least one player strictly prefers his equilibrium action over this value by the price of cautiousness. In the following, let
all his other actions given that the other players play their G denote the set of all normal-form games and for Γ ∈Glet
equilibrium actions. In single-winner games, this player has N(Γ) denote the set of Nash equilibria of Γ.
to be the winner in the pure equilibrium. We ﬁrst show that
if e is semi-strict, i.e., player 1 does not win in action proﬁle Deﬁnition 8 Let Γ be a normal-form game with non-negative
                                                          ﬀ    ∈                      Γ  >
(a2, b1, c1), then there must exist a non-pure equilibrium. For payo s, i N a player such that vi( ) 0. The price of
                                                                             Γ
this, consider the strategy proﬁles e1 where player 2 mixes cautiousness for player i in is deﬁned as
uniformly between e and (a , b , c ) and e where player 3                     {    |  ∈   Γ }
                        1 2  1      2                                Γ  = min  pi(s) s N(  )
mixes uniformly between e and (a1, b1, c2). Since player 1        PCi( )                     .
                                                                                 vi(Γ)
does not win in (a2, b1, c1), he will not deviate from either e1
or e2 even when he wins in (a2, b2, c1) and (a2, b1, c2). Conse- For any class C⊆Gof games involving player i, we further
quently, player 3 must win in (a1, b2, c2) in order for e1 not to write PCi(C) = supΓ∈C PCi(Γ). In other words, the price of
be an equilibrium. Analogously, for e2 not to be an equilib- cautiousness of a player is the ratio between his minimum
rium, player 2 has to win in the same action proﬁle (a1, b2, c2), payoﬀ in a Nash equilibrium and his security level, thus cap-
contradicting the assumption that the game is a single-winner turing the worst-case loss the player may experience by play-
game. Thus, the existence of a semi-strict pure equilibrium ing his maximin strategy instead of a Nash equilibrium. For
implies that of a non-pure equilibrium. Conversely assume a player whose security level is zero, every strategy is a max-
that e is not semi-strict. When any of the action proﬁles in imin strategy. Since we are mainly interested in a comparison
E = {(a2, b1, c1), (a1, b2, c1), (a1, b1, c2)} is a pure equilibrium, of normative solution concepts, we will only consider games
this also yields a non-pure equilibrium because two pure equi- where the security level of at least one player is positive.
libria that only diﬀer by the action of a single player can As already mentioned in Section 1, the price of cautious-
be combined into inﬁnitely many mixed equilibria. For E ness in two-player ranking games is 1 due to the Minimax
not to contain any pure equilibria, there must be (exactly) Theorem [von Neumann and Morgenstern, 1947]. In general
one player for every proﬁle in E who deviates to a proﬁle ranking games, the price of cautiousness is unbounded. The
in D = {(a2, b2, c1), (a2, b1, c2), (a1, b2, c2)} because the game proof of the following theorem is omitted for reasons of lim-
is a single-winner game and because e is not semi-strict. This ited space.
                                  
implies two facts: First, action proﬁle e = (a2, b2, c2)isa
pure equilibrium because no player will deviate from e to Theorem 2 Let R be the class of ranking games with more
                                           
any proﬁle in D. Second, the player who wins in e strictly than two players that involve player i. Then, PCi(R) = ∞,
prefers the equilibrium outcome over the corresponding ac- even if R only contains games without weakly dominated
tion proﬁle in D, implying that e is semi-strict. The above actions.                                  
observation that every semi-strict equilibrium also yields a
non-pure equilibrium completes the proof.               We proceed to show that, due to the structural limitations
  As for (iii), recall that the payoﬀ a player obtains in equilib- of binary ranking games, the price of cautiousness in these
rium must be at least his security level. Thus, a positive secu- games is bounded from above by the number of actions of the
rity level for player i rules out all equilibria in which player i respective player. We also derive a matching lower bound.
receives zero payoﬀ, in particular all pure equilibria in which
                                                      Theorem 3  Let R be the class of binary ranking games with
he does not win. If there are two players with positive secu-        b
                                                      more than two players involving a player i with exactly k ac-
rity levels, both of them have to win with positive probability
                                                      tions. Then, PC (R ) = k, even if R only contains single-
in any equilibrium of the game. In single-winner games, this        i  b             b
                                                      winner games or games without weakly dominated actions.
can only be the case in a non-pure equilibrium.  
We were unable to ﬁnd a single-winner game that only con- Proof: By deﬁnition, the price of cautiousness takes its max-
                                                                            ﬀ
tains pure equilibria, even when employing a computer pro- imum for maximum payo in a Nash equilibrium, which is
gram that checked tens of thousands of games. However, a bounded by 1 in a ranking game, and minimum security level.
general existence result has so far tenaciously resisted proof. By the requirement that the security level must be strictly
                                                      positive, we have that for every opponent action proﬁle s−i
                                                                                            ,    >
5  The Price of Cautiousness                          there must be some action ai such that pi(ai s−i) 0, i.e.,
                                                      pi(ai, s−i) = 1. It is then easily veriﬁed that player i can en-
Despite its conceptual elegance and simplicity, Nash equilib- sure a security level of 1/k by uniform randomization over
rium has been criticized on various grounds. In the common his k actions, resulting in a price of cautiousness of at most k.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1203