    Extracting Keyphrases to Represent Relations in Social Networks from Web
          Junichiro Mori   and  Mitsuru Ishizuka                   Yutaka Matsuo
                    Universiry of Tokyo                    National Institute of Advanced
                 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku                   Industrial Science and Technology
                  Tokyo 113-8656, Japan                          Sotokanda 1-18-13
                jmori@mi.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp                    Tokyo 101-0021, Japan
                 ishizuka@i.u-tokyo.ac.jp                        y.matsuo@aist.go.jp

                    Abstract                            Given social network extraction using the methods de-
                                                      scribed above, the next step would be to explore underlying
    Social networks have recently garnered consider-  relations behind superﬁcial connections in those networks. In
    able interest. With the intention of utilizing so- the ﬁeld of social network analysis, it has been shown that
    cial networks for the Semantic Web, several stud- rich information about underlying social relationships engen-
    ies have examined automatic extraction of social  ders more sophisticated analysis [Scott, 2000].However,
    networks. However, most methods have addressed    most automatic methods to extract social networks merely
    extraction of the strength of relations. Our goal provide a clue to the strength of relations. For example, a
    is extracting the underlying relations between en- link in Flink [Mika, 2005a] is only assigned the strength of
    tities that are embedded in social networks. To this its relation. A user might wonder what kind of underlying
    end, we propose a method that automatically ex-   relation exists behind the link.
    tracts labels that describe relations among entities. One reason for the lack of information about underlying
    Fundamentally, the method clusters similar entity relations is that most automatic extraction methods [Mika,
    pairs according to their collective contexts in Web 2005a; Alema-Meza et al., 2006; Matsuo et al., 2006b] use a
    documents. The descriptive labels for relations are superﬁcial approach (e.g. co-occurrence analysis) instead of
    obtained from results of clustering. The proposed profound assessment to determine the type of relation. Mat-
    method is entirely unsupervised and is easily in- suo et al. deﬁnes four kinds of relations in a research com-
    corporated with existing social network extraction munity and classiﬁes the extracted relations. They adopt a
    methods. Our experiments conducted on entities in supervised machine learning method, which requires a large
    researcher social networks and political social net- annotated corpus which costs great deal of time and effort to
    works achieved clustering with high precision and construct and administer. In addition, it is necessary to gather
    recall. The results showed that our method is able domain-speciﬁc knowledge a priori to deﬁne the extracted re-
    to extract appropriate relation labels to represent re- lations.
    lations among entities in the social networks.
                                                        Our goal is to extract underlying relations among entities
                                                      (e.g., person, location, company) from social networks (e.g.,
                                                      person-person, person-location network). Thereby, we are
1  Introduction                                       aiming at extracting descriptive labels of relations automat-
Social networks have recently attracted considerable interest. ically such as afﬁliations, roles, locations, part-whole, social
For the Semantic Web, there is great potential to utilize so- relationships. In this paper, we propose a method that au-
cial networks for myriad applications such as trust estimation tomatically extracts the labels that describe relations among
[Golbeck and Hendler, 2004], ontology construction [Mika, entities in social networks. We obtain a local context in which
2005b], and end-user ontology [Brickley and Miller, 2005]. two entities co-occur on the Web, and accumulate the context
  Aiming at using social networks for AI and the Seman- of the entity pair in different Web pages. Given the collec-
tic Web, several studies have addressed extraction of social tive contexts of each entity pair, the key idea is clustering all
networks automatically from various sources of information. entity pairs according to the similarity of their collective con-
Mika developed a system for extraction, aggregation, and texts. This clustering using collective contexts is based on
visualization of online social networks for a Semantic Web our hypothesis that entity pairs in similar relations tend to oc-
community, called Flink [Mika, 2005a]. In that system, so- cur in similar contexts. The representative terms in context
cial networks are obtained using Web pages, e-mail messages, can be regarded as representing a relationship. Therefore, the
and publications. Using a similar approach, Matsuo et al. de- labels to describe the relations among entities are extracted
veloped a system called Polyphonet [Matsuo et al., 2006b; from the clustering process result. As an exemplary scenario
2006a]. In line with those studies, numerous studies have ex- for our approach, we address two kinds of social network. a
plored automatic extraction of social networks from the Web researcher social network and a political social network.
[Alema-Meza et al., 2006].                              The proposed method is entirely unsupervised. For that

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2820reason, our method requires neither a priori deﬁnition of rela-
tions nor preparation of large annotated corpora. It also re-
quires no instances of relations as initial seeds for weakly
supervised learning. Our method uses context information
that is obtained during extraction of social networks. Conse-
quently, the proposed method contributes to
  • incorporating into existing methods of social network
    extraction and enriching the social network by adding
    relation labels.
In addition, as a Web mining approach our method con-
tributes to
  • extracting information from the Web and bootstrapping
    the Semantic Web by annotating relation information to
    social networks and Web contents.
  The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Sec-
tion 2 compares our approach to other ongoing relevant re-
search in social network extraction, relation extraction, and Figure 1: Political social network extracted from the Web: a
ontology population. Section 3 describes basic ideas of our circular node represents a location entity and a ellipse node
approach and detailed steps of the proposed method. Sec- represents a person entity. Each edge in the network implies
tion 4 describes our experiment. Section 5 describes results that there is relation between entities.
and evaluation. We end our presentation with a discussion of
future work, after which we provide concluding remarks in
section 6.                                            assess contextual features such as syntactic, semantic, and co-
                                                      occurrence. Several studies have employed contextual verb
2  Related Work                                       arguments to identify relations in text [Kavalec et al., 2004;
                                                      Schutz and Buitelaar, 2005], assuming that verbs express a
Aiming at extracting underlying relations in social networks relation between two ontology classes that specify a domain
from the Web, our method is related closely to existing ex- and range. Although verbs are relevant features to iden-
traction methods of social networks. Several studies have tify relations, it assumes that syntactic and dependency anal-
addressed extraction of social networks automatically from yses are applicable to text collections. Because the Web
various sources of information such as the Web, e-mail, and is highly heterogeneous and often unstructured, syntactic
contacts [Alema-Meza et al., 2006; McCallum et al., 2005; and dependency structures are not always available. For
Mika, 2005a; Matsuo et al., 2006a]. While most approaches that reason, we employed context model that uses a bag-of-
for social network extraction have focused on the strength of words to assess context. Therefore, the method is applica-
the relation, few studies have addressed automatic identiﬁca- ble to any unstructured documents in the Web. As shown
tion of underlying relations. Matsuo et al. employed a su- in our experiment, the simple context model performed well
pervised machine learning method to classify four types of to extract descriptive relation labels without depending on
relations in a research community [Matsuo et al., 2006b]. any syntactic features in text. In the ﬁeld of NLP, several
There have also been several important works that have studies have proposed relation extraction from a large lan-
examined supervised learning of relation extraction in the guage corpus using a bag-of-words of context [Turney, 2005;
ﬁeld of natural language processing and information ex- Hasegawa et al., 2004]. Our method can be considered as an
traction [Zelenko et al., 2003; Culotta and Sorensen, 2004; application of relation extraction methods in NLP to social
Kambhatla, 2004]. However, a supervised method requires networks and a Web mining. We are aiming at easily incor-
large annotated corpora, which cost a great deal of time and porating into extraction methods of social network from the
effort. In addition, it is necessary to gather the domain spe- Web. Therefore, our method uses context information that is
ciﬁc knowledge a priori to deﬁne extracted relations. obtained during extraction of social networks. Consequently,
  Identifying underlying relations has been also addressed in it serves to enrich such networks by adding relation labels.
ontology population [Buitelaar et al., 2005]. Particularly, the
current approaches for relation extraction in ontology popula-
tion are classiﬁable into two types: those that exploit certain 3 Method
patterns or structures, and those that rely on contextual fea- 3.1 Concept
tures. Pattern-based approaches [Cimiano et al., 2005] seek
phrases or sentence structures that explicitly show relations In this paper, as an exemplary scenario for our approach, we
between instances. However, most Web documents have a use two types of social network: a researcher network that is
very heterogeneous in structure, even within individual web composed of researcher entities and a political social network
pages. Therefore, the effectiveness of the pattern-based ap- that is composed of two types of entities: politicians and geo-
proach depends on the domain to which it is applied.  political-entities. Figure 1 shows a political social network
  Rather than exploiting patterns or structures, context-based that was automatically extracted from the Web using Mika
approaches [Kavalec et al., 2004; Schutz and Buitelaar, 2005] and Matsuo’s method [Mika, 2005a; Matsuo et al., 2006b].

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2821Table 1: Keywords obtained from each local context of four
kinds of entities pairs: Junichiro Koizumi-Japan, Yoshiro
Mori-Japan, Junichiro Mori-Kanagawa, and Yoshiro Mori-
Ishikawa
  (1) Junichiro Koizumi-Japan
  pathology, Fujiwara, prime minister, Koizumi, Kobun-sha,
  politics, visit, page, products, cabinet,...

  (2) Yoshiro Mori-Japan
  rugby, prime minister, chairman, bid, minister,             Figure 2: Outline of the proposed method
  association, science, administration, director, soccer, Africa,...
                                                      with another of his keywords (3), we ﬁnd that different key-
  (3) Junichiro Koizumi-Kanagawa                      words appear because of their respective links to different lo-
  election, prime minister, Yokosuka, candidate,
  congressional representative, Saito,                cations: Japan and Kanagawa. (although both keywords are
  Liberal Democratic Party, Miura,..                  Koizumi’s.)
                                                        Based on the observations described above, we hypothe-
  (4) Yoshiro Mori-Ishikawa                           size that if the local contexts of entity pairs in the Web are
  Ichikawa, Yasuo, prime minister,election,           similar, then the entity pairs share a similar relation. Our
  Liberal Democratic Party, Okuda, candidate, komatsu, hypothesis resembles previously tested hypotheses related to
  congressinal representative,...                     context [Harris, 1968; Schutze, 1998]: words are similar to
                                                      the extent that their contextual representations are similar.
                                                      According to that hypothesis, our method clusters entity pairs
The social network was extracted according to co-occurrence according to the similarity of their collective contexts. Then,
of entities on the Web.                               the representative terms in a cluster are extracted as labels to
  Given entity pairs in the social network, our present goal describe the relations of each entity pair in the cluster, assum-
is to extract labels to describe the relations of respective en- ing that each cluster represents different relations and that the
tity pairs (to discover relevant keyphrases that relate enti- entity pair in a cluster is an instance of a certain relation. The
ties). The simple approach to extract the labels that are use- key point of our method is that we determine the relation la-
ful for describing relations in social networks is to analyze bels not by examining the local context of one single entity
the surrounding local context in which entities of interest co- pair, but by the collective local contexts of all entity pairs of
occur on the Web, and to seek clues to describe that rela- interest. In the following section, we explain the precise steps
tion. Local context is often used to identify entities or re- of our proposed method.
lations among entities in tasks of natural language process-
ing or information extraction [Grefenstette, 1994; Lin, 1998; 3.2 Procedure
Schutze, 1998].                                       Our method for extraction of relation labels in social net-
  Table 1 shows keywords 1 that were extracted from lo- works includes the following steps.
cal contexts of four entity pairs (Junichiro Koizumi-Japan, 1. Collect co-occurrence information and local context of
Yoshiro Mori-Japan, Junichiro Koizumi-Kanawaga, Yoshiro   an entity pair
Mori-Ishizuka) using keyword extraction method [Matsuo et
                                                        2. Extract a social network that is composed of entity pairs.
al., 2006b]. The keywords were extracted from the collec-
tive local contexts where co-occurrence of each entity pair is 3. Generate a context model of each entity pair.
found. For each entity pair, the local contexts from 100 Web 4. Calculate context similarity between entity pairs.
pages were collected. The keywords are ordered according
to TF-IDF-based scoring, which is a widely used method in 5. Cluster entity pairs.
many keyword extraction methods to score individual words 6. Select representative labels to describe relations from
within text documents to select concepts that accurately rep- each cluster.
resent the documents’ contents. The keywords scored by TF- Figure 2 depicts the outline of our method. Our method
IDF can be considered as a bag-of-words model to represent requires a list of entities (e.g., personal name, location name)
the local context surrounding an entity pair.         to form a social network as the input; it then outputs the so-
  If we examine the common keywords (shown in bold type- cial network and a list of relation labels for each entity pair.
face in the table) shared by (1) and (2) or (3) and (4), we note Although collection of a list of entities is beyond the scope of
that the keywords that describe the relations of each entity this paper, one might use named entity recognition to identify
pair, such as “prime minister” and “candidate”, are commonly
      2                                               entities and thereby generate a list of entities of interest.
shared . In contrast, if we compare Koizumi’s keywords (1) As shown in Fig. 2, our method (upper box) can be pro-
  1In our experiment, we mainly used Web pages in Japanese. cessed in parallel with existing methods of social network
Therefore, keywords in the table are translated from their original Yoshiro Mori is a former Prime Minister. Kanagawa is the prefecture
Japanese.                                             where Koizumi was elected and Ishikawa is the prefecture where
  2Junichiro Koizumi is the current Prime Minister of Japan and Mori was elected.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2822extraction (bottom box). The ﬁrst step is to collect co- 3.4 Clustering and Label Selection
occurrence and local contexts of each entity pair from the Calculating the similarity between the context models of en-
Web. Many existing methods of social network extraction tity pairs, we cluster all entity pairs according to their sim-
use a search engine and its query hit counts to obtain co- ilarity. This is based on our hypothesis: the local contexts
occurrence information of entities from the Web [Matsuo, of entity pairs in the Web are similar, the entity pairs share a
                                         3
Mika]. In line with such methods, we use Google to collect similar relation.
co-occurrence information and generate a social network, as In our clustering process, we do not know in advance
shown in Fig. 1.                                      what kinds of relation pertain and therefore how many clus-
  Using co-occurrence information, we also collect local ters we should make. Therefore, we employ hierarchical
contexts in which elements of an entity pair of interest co- agglomerative clustering. Several clustering methods exist
occur within a certain contextual distance of one another for hierarchical clustering. According to our exploratory
within the text of a Web page. For this, we downloaded experiment, complete linkage performs well because it is
the top 100 web pages included in the search result of cor- conservative in producing clusters and does not tend to
responding search query to each entity pair (in our example generate a biased large cluster. In complete linkage, the
of a politician and location name, the query is “Junichiro similarity between the clusters CL1,CL2 is evaluated by
Koizumi AND Japan”). This can be accomplished in the  considering the two most dissimilar elements as follows.
                                                                                    
process of collecting co-occurrence information, which uses minC ∈CL ,C ∈CL sim(Ci,j ,Ci,j ).
search query hit counts.                                   i,j  1  i,j  2
                                                        The clustering process terminates when cluster quality
                                                      drops below a predeﬁned threshold. The cluster quality is
3.3  Context Model and Similarity Calculation         evaluated according to two measures [Kannan et al., 2000]:
                                                      the respective degree of similarity of entity pairs within clus-
For each entity pair, we accumulate the context terms sur- ters and among clusters. After the clustering process termi-
rounding it; thereby, we obtain the contexts of all entity pairs. nates and creates a certain number of clusters, we extract the
As the next step, to calculate the similarity between collec- terms from a cluster as labels to describe the relations of each
tive contexts of each entity pair, we require a certain model entity pair in the cluster. This is based on our assumption
that represents the collected context. In our method, we pro- that each cluster represents a different relation and each en-
pose a context model that represents the context using a bag- tity pair in a cluster is an instance of similar relation. The
of-words and a word vector [Raghavan and Wong, 1998]. term relevancy, as a cluster label, is evaluated according to a
We deﬁne the context model as a vector of terms that are TFIDF-based measure in the same manner as weighting the
likely to be used to describe the context of an entity pair terms in a context model. However, in this process, the term
(e.g., the keywords list shown in Table 1 can be considered frequency is determined for all contexts of a cluster. The un-
as an example of the context model.). A context model Ci,j derlying idea is to extract terms that appear in the cluster, but
of an entity pair (ei,ej) is deﬁned as the set of N terms which do not appear in other clusters. With a cluster CL’s
t1, ..., tN that are extracted from the context of an entity pair labels l1, ..., ln scored according to the term relevancy, an en-
as Ci,j (n, m)=t1, ..., tN , where both n and m are parame- tity pair, ei and ej, that belongs to the CL can be regarded as
ters of the context window size, which deﬁnes the number of holding the relations described by l1, ..., ln.
terms to be included in the context. In addition, m is the num-
ber of intervening terms between ei and ej; n is the number 4 Experiment
of words to the left and right of either entity.
                                  (    )              Using our proposed method, we extracted labels to describe
  Each term ti in the context model Ci,j n, m of an entity relations of each entity pair in a social network. We chose 143
pair (ei,ej) is assigned a feature weight according to TF-IDF-
                       ( ) ·   ( )           ( )      distinct entity pairs (pair of a politician and a geo-political
based scoring deﬁned as tf ti idf ti .Therein,tf ti is entity) from a political social network and 421 entity pairs
deﬁned by the term frequency of term ti in all the contexts
              (     )               ( )               (pair of Japanese AI researchers) from a researcher network
of the entity pair ei,ej .Furthermore,idf ti is deﬁned as [Matsuo et al., 2006a].
log(|C|/df(ti))+1, where |C| is the number of all context
            ( )                                         We created a context model of each entity pair using nouns
models and df ti is the number of context models including and noun phrases from part-of-speeches (POS) of surround-
term ti. With the weighted context model, we calculate the
                                                     ing entity pairs in a Web page. We exclude stop words, sym-
            (        )
similarity sim Ci,j ,Ci,j between context models accord- bols and highly frequent words. For each entity pair, we
                                             
ing to the cosine similarity as follows: sim(Ci,j ,Ci,j )= download the top 100 web pages in the process of collecting
                                                    co-occurrence information for extraction of social network.
Ci,j Ci,j /(|Ci,j ||Ci,j |).
                                                      For the context size, we used two parameters, m and n,as
  In our exploratory experiment we  tried probability explained in Sect. 3.3. As a baseline of the context size, we
distribution-based scoring and several similarities such as L1 assigned 10 and 5, respectively, to m, n.
                                     [        ]
norm, Jensen-Shannon and Skew divergence Lin, 1998 .Ac- We used complete-linkage agglomerative clustering to
cording to that results, TFIDF-based cosine similarity per- cluster all entity pairs. Thereby, we created ﬁve distinct clus-
forms well.                                           ters for the political social network and twelve distinct clus-
                                                      ters for the researcher network according to the predeﬁned
  3http://www.google.com                              thresholds of two quality measures within the clusters and

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2823              Table 2: Cluster label (left) and automatically extracted relation labels from a cluster (right)
   political social network (5 clusters)
   1  mayor         mayor, citizen, hosting, president, affairs, ofﬁcer, mutter, answer, city, conference
   2  president     president, administration, world, Japan, economics, policy, war, principle, politics, Iraq
   3  prime minister prime minister, administration, politics, article, election, prime minister, government, peace
   4  governor      prefectural governor, president, prefectural government, committee, Heisei, prefectural administration, mayor
   5  congressional congressional representative, election, Liberal Democratic Party, candidate,
      representative lower house, Democratic Party, proportional representation

       researcher social network (6 representative clusters among 12 clusters)
       1   co-authorship of conference paper paper, author, conference venue, presentation, title, program
       2   co-authorship of book       edit, book, publishing, programming, recommendation, co-author
       3   co-edit of book             edit, revision, article, publishing, educational material, editor
       4   collaborative project       representative person, contributor, minister, acceptance
       5   co-authorship of journal paper journal, Shogi, distribution, computer, information processing society of Japan
       6   same afﬁliation             University of Tokyo, metropolitan, techonolgy, University, science


     1.2
                               window size between entities
                              window size at sides of entities Table 3: Clustering performance in parameters of context

      1                                               window size
                                                        Context window size n, m Precision Recall F-measure
                                                        n =10, m =30             0.992  0.995      0.994
     0.8                                                n =5, m =10               0.88   0.85       0.86
                                                        All terms in a Web page   0.76  0.677      0.716
     0.6
   averaged  F measure
     0.4                                              pairs EPcl,total in the cluster cl. Next, for each relation label
                                                      l, we counted the number of entity pairs EPl,correct that have
     0.2                                              the relation label l whose cluster label is l. We also counted
                                                      the entity pairs EPl,total that have the relation label l. Then,
      0                                               precision and recall of the cluster were calculated as:
       5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45
                    window size (the number of POS)
                                                                        EPcl,correct             EPl,correct
                                                      precision =Σcl∈CL            ,recall=Σl∈L           .
Figure 3: F measure of clustering results vs. Context window             EPcl,total              EPl,total
size                                                  According to precision and recall, we evaluated clusters
                                                      basedontheF  measure.
among the clusters explained in Sect. 3.4. To evaluate the The graph depicted in Fig. 3 shows that the clustering re-
clustering results and the extracted labels, two human sub- sults vary depending on the context size. Consequently, to
jects analyzed the context terms of each entity pair and man- ﬁnd the optimal context size, we calculate the F-measure by
ually assigned the relation labels (three or fewer possible la- changing two size parameters: m and n. Expanding the con-
bels for each). Then, a cluster label was chosen as the most text size from the minimum, the F-measure takes an optimal
frequent term among the manually assigned relation labels value when m is around 30 and n is around 10 (Fig. 3 and Ta-
of entity pairs in the cluster. The manually assigned relation ble 3) . We employed this optimal context size to extract the
labels are used as ground truth in the subsequent evaluation relation labels in our experiment. After reaching the peak,
stage.                                                the value of the F-measure decreases as the context size in-
  In Table 2, the left column shows the label of each clus- creases. The wider context window tends to include noise
ter. The right column shows the highly-scored terms4 that are terms that are not appropriate to represent the context, thus
extracted automatically from each cluster, which can be con- rendering the similarity calculation between the contexts ir-
sidered as the labels to describe relations of each entity pair relevant. The optimal context size depends on the structural
in the cluster. The terms are sorted by relevancy score. nature of language. Consequently, we must choose the con-
                                                      text size carefully when applying our methods to a different
5  Evaluation                                         language.
                                                        To evaluate the automatically extracted relation labels, we
We ﬁrst evaluated the clustering results using a political so-
                                                      compared the cluster label (left column of Table 2) with the
cial network. For each cluster cl, we counted the number of
                                                      automatically extracted relation labels (right column of Table
entity pairs EPcl,correct whose manually assigned relation la-
                                                      2). For a political social network, we found that the relation
bels include the label of cluster cl. We also counted the entity
                                                      label that has the highest score is equal to the corresponding
  4Terms in the table are translated from their original Japanese. cluster’s relation label. Precision of the clustering results in

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2824