Preface


     hese proceedings contain the papers accepted for  The reviewers and PC members were asked to recommend
     presentation at the Twentieth International Joint Con- papers for distinction. We were pleased to see several pa-
Tference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI-07) to be held pers that were identiﬁed, out of which a subcommittee of
in Hyderabad, India, January 6–12, 2007. The theme of the the SPC selected three as the IJCAI'07 distinguished papers.
conference is “AI and its beneﬁts to society” with the aim of They are "Performance Analysis of Online Anticipatory Al-
highlighting and guiding our research interests toward prob- gorithms for Large Multistage Stochastic Integer Programs,"
lems of direct relevance to society. We hope that readers of by Luc Mercier and Pascal Van Hentenryck; “Building Struc-
these proceedings will be able to discern the theme of the ture into Local Search for SAT,” by Duc Nghia Pham, John
conference in these papers, and use the work presented Thornton, and Abdul Sattar;  and “Automated Heart Wall
herein toward realization of that goal.                Motion Abnormality Detection from Ultrasound Images Us-
                                                       ing Bayesian Networks" by Maleeha Qazi, Glenn Fung, Sri-
We were pleased to receive an unprecedented number of  ram Krishnan, Romer Rosales, Harald Steck, R. Bharat Rao,
papers. A total of 1,365 papers were submitted by authors Don Poldermans, and Dhanalakshmi Chandrasekaran. 
from 45 different countries. We accepted 470 papers (34.4
percent), with 212 accepted for oral presentation (15.5 per- I would like to thank Cynthia Breazeal and Carles Sierra for
cent) and 258 for poster presentation (18.9 percent). No putting together the excellent tutorial and workshop pro-
distinction was made between oral and poster presentation grams, respectively. Being a program chair involves a signiﬁ-
papers in these proceedings.                           cant amount of organizational effort. I could not have done
                                                       it without the help of several people to whom I would like
The reviewing process represented an enormous amount of to express my deep gratitude: April Foster for her adminis-
work by many volunteers in our international research com- trative support; Maayan Roth for her tremendous technical
munity. I acknowledge every single one of them for their ex- support handling e-mail and all the conference databases;
tensive reviewing work over this past summer. The papers Thomas Preuss for his consistent, prompt, and most effective
were distributed among a senior program committee (SPC) help with ConfMaster; the past IJCAI program chairs for the
of 23 members, a program committee (PC) of 86 members, useful information passed to me; and all the IJCAI'07 organi-
and a set of 997 reviewers. By early July, I had assigned each zational committees. My special thanks go to Ramon López
paper to one supervisor SPC member and one PC member,  de Mántaras, the conference chair for IJCAI'07, who was al-
who then further assigned them to three reviewers. When ways available to help when needed.
completed, the reviews were made available to the authors
who had a chance to rebut them. Each PC member then    Through this IJCAI'07 program chairing process, I got to
held an anonymous discussion of the authors’ rebuttals with know and to truly enjoy the rich research community and
the reviewers, and ﬁnally made a deﬁnite or undecided rec- wide variety of excellent work in a very special and priv-
ommendation for each paper in agreement with the corre- eleged manner. My ﬁnal words are to all the contributors
spondent SPC member. An SPC meeting was held Septem-   and students of this volume: thank you to all for the great
ber 16-17, where all the undecided papers were carefully research in this fantastic ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence!
discussed. At the end of the meeting, all papers had a deﬁ-
nite decision. The ﬁnal notiﬁcations were sent out to au-
                                                                              Manuela M. Veloso
thors on September 18. At the meeting, all the SPC mem-
                                                                              Carnegie Mellon University 
bers enthusiastically agreed to the proposed new
                                                                              IJCAI'07 Program Chair
conference presentation format, in which posters were di-
vided by topic and presented in the same sessions as the
oral presentations. 


                                                    vi