      Appearance based Recognition Methodology for Recognising Fingerspelling 
                                          Alphabets

                                      M.G.Suraj, D.S.Guru
                            Department of Studies in Computer Science  
                                University of Mysore, Mysore, India 
                     Email: mgsuraj@yahoo.com, dsg@compsci.uni-mysore.ac.in 

                   Abstract                      pensive micro accelerometers to extract postures of hand as 
                                                 3-D patterns. Classification into sub classes was done by 
    In this paper, a study on the suitability of an ap-
                                                 projecting the vectors on to different planes, and hierarchi-
    pearance based model, specifically PCA based 
                                                 cal decision tree was used to classify within subclasses. 
    model, for the purpose of recognising fingerspel-
                                                 They report an excellent success rate for majority of signs of 
    ling (sign language) alphabets is made. Its recogni-
                                                 fingerspelling alphabets. [Fang et al., 2004] report the use of 
    tion performance on a large and varied real time 
                                                 cyber gloves to capture features and classify large vocabu-
    dataset is analysed. In order to enhance the per-
                                                 lary of signs using Fuzzy Decision trees. Recently [Chale-
    formance of a PCA based model, we suggest to in-
                                                 chale et al., 2005] reported the use of geometric and mo-
    corporate a sort of pre-processing operation both 
                                                 ment based properties of fingerspelling hand postures to 
    during training and recognition. An exhaustive ex-
                                                 classify them using Bayesian rule assuming Gaussian 
    periment conducted on a large number of finger-
                                                 distribution of the properties. They report a very good 
    spelling alphabet images taken from 20 different 
                                                 success rate, but it needs to be mentioned that they use ges-
    individuals in real environment has revealed that 
                                                 tures of single user with black background and wearing 
    the suggested pre-processing has a drastic impact 
                                                 black cloth up to wrists. All the above mentioned 
    in improving the performance of a conventional 
                                                 approaches put restrictions on the user and the environment 
    PCA based model. 
                                                 for the systems to work. 
                                                   [Kang et al., 2005] declare that although several aspects 
    Keywords: Appearance based recognition, PCA 
                                                 of directing computers using human gestures/postures have 
    model, Histogram equalisation, fingerspelling al-
                                                 been studied in the literature, gesture/posture recognition is 
    phabet, sign language recognition. 
                                                 still an open problem. This is due to significant challenges 
                                                 in response time, reliability, economical constrains, and 
 1 Introduction                                  natural intuitive gesticulation restrictions. 
 Automatic sign language recognition has enormous social Apart from the above mentioned image processing ap-
 significance. It would lead to integration of people with proaches for feature extraction, appearance based method-
voice and hearing disability to communicate and interact ologies have been reported primarily in the area of face rec-
with the society. Sign language recognition is being actively ognition. Appearance based methods started with the work 
pursued by the research community around the world. A of [Turk and Pentland, 1991] on face recognition using a 
survey of techniques adopted for recognition [LaViola, well known statistical technique called Principal Component 
1999; Pavlovic et al, 1997] give a review of techniques used Analysis (PCA). Since then, various extensions and modifi-
in the broader area of hand gesture recognition. Pioneering cations have been proposed to the PCA method for face 
work in this area was by [Starner and Pentland, 1995] using recognition, resulting in 2 Dimensional PCA: 2D PCA 
                                                                                             2
Hidden Markov Models (HMM) which recognises 40 signs [Yang et al, 2004], 2 Directional 2 Dimensional PCA: (2D)
 from American Sign Language by extracting a feature vec- PCA [Zhang and Zhou, 2005] and Diagonal PCA [Zhang et
 tor describing the hand shape, orientation and trajectory. al., 2006] methods improving the recognition rates and 
 Hand modeling was avoided by tracking the coloured hand memory requirements over PCA. Not much research has 
 gloves worn by the user and in addition the usage of HMM been reported regarding the application of appearance based 
 gave the time context. [Gao et al., 2000] use cyber gloves approach for sign language recognition, [Birk and Moes-
 and positional trackers to get features for recognising the lund, 1996] mention PCA based approach for sign language 
 user signs employing HMM, Artificial Neural Network and recognition and [Birk et al., 1997] gave an introductory 
 Dynamic Programming techniques. To overcome the expen- work to fingerspelling recognition using PCA, although the 
 sive cost of cyber gloves, [Hernández et al., 2002] use inex- system gave excellent results of 98.4% recognition rate (de-


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              605 fined as number of correct recognitions / total number of get the covariance matrix C of the column vectors, and is 
test samples), the system was trained using sign images of given by 
single user with a black background. They reported the ex- C [A A][A A]T
ploration of the system using two users and mention good having the dimensions N 2 N 2 . Eigen vectors E of the 
results, but it should be taken that the hand structure of the 
                                                 covariance matrix C are computed. E is a matrix of 
 second user is similar to the first user in light of the experi- N 2 N 2 dimensions, and eigen vectors are sorted on the 
 ments using more users in this work.            basis of corresponding eigen values  
  In this paper, overcoming the complexity and variability 
 of signs in a large dataset thereby improving the perform-
                                                   V   v1 ,v2 ,v3 v 2
 ance of the PCA algorithm using standard image processing      N
 techniques is explored. Image processing methods like of the eigen vectors, to result in the transformation matrix X
                                                 where 
 smoothing and contrast enhancement of the images are ap-      2
 plied before using them in training and recognition phases. X [X 1 , , X N ]
 A novel approach to enhance the performance of the ap- Here the corresponding eigen values of the vectors in X
 pearance based methodology of using PCA in general con- are ordered such that 

 ditions is presented. No restrictions on the user and the envi- v 1 v 2 v 2
 ronment are imposed except that of a plain background. In X X  X N
 fact, the proposed method overcomes the reduced perform- The data matrix A is projected on to the eigen space to get 
                                                 P consisting n columns, where 
 ance of PCA due to its usage in general environment. An T
 extensive experimentation is done using PCA for recogni- P X A
                                                 and each column in P signifies a transformed point in the 
 tion of fingerspelling alphabets on a large dataset created by 2 2
 capturing 24 fingerspelling alphabets made by 20 users, eigen space of N N  dimensions. 
 with 6 samples of each alphabet, resulting in 2880 signs. The advantage of transforming the image into eigen space 
                                                 is that the dimensions required to represent the image can be 
 Experiments show that the proposed image processing           2
 methodology gives better results compared to conventional reduced to m << N , that is, the top m co-ordinate points of a 
 PCA.                                            transformed column vector in P matrix would represent the 
  The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives an image with very little loss of information. 
 overview of PCA. The proposed method is described in Sec- In the recognition phase, the image I to be recognised is 
 tion 3.  Section 4 contains the experimental details and re- converted to 1-D vector form J as mentioned above and is 
 sults. The paper concludes with discussions and future ave- projected on to the eigen space to get Z where 
                                                        T
 nues in Section 5.                                Z  X  J
                                                 and the Euclidian distance measure d between Z and all the 
 2  Appearance based recognition using PCA:      projected samples in P is computed,  
                                                                          m
                                                             k       k          k 2
    An Overview                                    d  dist Z P  Z  P        Z  Pj
 The concept of Eigen Faces, an appearance based recogni-                 j 1
 tion methodology was given by [Turk and Pentland, 1991]. the sample label k of the sample in P with minimum d is 
 The PCA procedure consists of an offline training phase and taken as the recognised label of  Z.
 online recognition phase. 
  In the training phase, the samples of the data on which the 3 Proposed scheme 
 system needs to recognise are used to create an Eigen matrix PCA has been used for recognition on constrained dataset. 
 which transforms the samples in the image space into points Using PCA on real data with good recognition rate is a chal-
 in the Eigen space. Let S s , s , s s  be a set of n
                        1  2 3   n               lenge. Towards that goal, the proposed scheme incorporates 
image samples of size N N  taken for training the system. a pre-processing step in the training and recognition phase 
The image samples are taken as gray scale images and are of the PCA model. The images are processed and then are 
transformed from 2-D matrix to 1-D column vector of size used for training and recognition. Smoothing and contrast 
 N 2 1 by placing the image matrix columns consecutively. 
                                   2             enhancement of images are the processing steps that are 
 The transformed vector denotes a point in N  dimensional proposed to be incorporated. 
 space. These column vectors of n images are placed column 
                                    2              A well known adaptive process known as wiener filter is 
 wise to form the data matrix A of dimensions N n . used for smoothing, where the process adapts itself to local 
       1  n
   A  aa,                                        image variance. When the variance is large, the wiener filter 
 and A  be the mean vector of the data vectors in the matrix performs little smoothing, when the variance is small, it 
 A given by                                      performs more smoothing, thereby preserving edges in the 
      1                                          images. The results are often better than linear filtering, 
   A      a ( k )                                however, it does require more computation time than linear 
      n
        k                                        filtering.
  The vectors of the data matrix A are centred by subtract- The other proposed process extends the use of sobel filter. 
ing the mean vector A from all the columns vectors of A to The sobel filter has the property of detecting the edges in the 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              606 horizontal or vertical direction as specified. In this work, it Step 2:  Transform the training images into column vector 
 is first used to get the horizontal edge mapped image which by appending the columns in the image consecu-
 is added back to the image to get an enhanced image. Hori- tively.
 zontal edge detecting sobel mask S is given as  Step 3: Build the data matrix A of image column vectors 
        1   2   1                                      with a label vector L having the corresponding al-
                                                       phabet names of the image columns in A.
   S    0   0   0                                Step 4: Get mean column vector M of the data matrix A.
        1   2   1                                Step 5: Subtract mean M from each of the columns of A to 
                                                       result in mean centered matrix A.
 Block wise application of the above mentioned mask on an                                  T
 image results in horizontal edge image. A filter can be de- Step 6: Compute the covariance matrix C of A as C = AA .
 fined over block wise application of the mask on the image I Step 7: Obtain eigen vectors matrix E and eigen values vec-
 as to get an edge image E,                            tor V of C.
   E  filter(S, I)                               Step 8: Rearrange the eigen vector columns in E as the cor-
                                                       responding eigen values in V are sorted in descend-
 which is in turn is added to the original image I to get an ing order. 
enhanced image K, where                          Step 9: Project the centered matrix A onto E to get feature 
   K  I  E                                             matrix P = ETA.
 The resulting image K is used in training and recognition Training ends. 
phases. 
  Another image processing technique is histogram equali- Following is the algorithm designed for recognition.
sation of images. This process results in a contrast adjusted Algorithm: Recognition 
image by increasing the local contrast. This process employs Input: Fingerspelling image I to be recognised, number of 
a monotonic, non-linear mapping which re-assigns the gray dimensions to be considered m, feature matrix P, eigen vec-
values of pixels in the input image such that the output im- tors matrix E, mean vector M, labels vector L
age contains a uniform distribution of gray values (i.e. a flat Output: Classification label of input image 
histogram). This technique is useful in comparison proc- Method: 
esses because of its effective detail enhancement.  Step 1: Apply the respective pre-processing technique on I
  A gray levels reduction technique is also proposed, it in- Step 2: Transform the processed image I into a column vec-
creases the contrast in the image by reducing the number of tor J by placing the columns in the image consecu-
gray levels in the image from 256 to 3 levels. This reduction tively.
in image gray levels is done by partitioning the gray level Step 3: Subtract the mean vector M from the image vector J,
range into 3 sub ranges.                               J = J – M.

  Let I  g1 , g 2 , g 3 g r  be an image containing r gray Step 4: Project the image vector J onto the eigen matrix E to 
 levels. If the gray levels are in predefined ranges, they are get the feature vector Z= ETJ.
 re-assigned to arbitrarily unique 3 gray levels L1, L2, and L3, Step 5: Compute the Euclidian distance d between the fea-
i.e.,                                                  ture vector Z and all the column vectors in the fea-

       g i L1 i 1, p                                   ture matrix P considering only m elements in the 
   I   g  L   i p  1, q                                vectors and identify the column having the mini-
        i  2                                           mum distance d.
       g i L3 i q  1, r                          Step 6: Obtain the label from vector L corresponding to the 
 The resulting image I contains only 3 gray levels and high column identified in P having the minimum distance 
contrast. After extensive experimentation, the gray level sub to Z.
range markers p and q are taken as 99 and 174 respectively Recognition ends. 
and substituting gray levels L1, L2, and L3 are taken as 50, 
150 and 200 respectively. All the images used in the ex- 4 Experimental Results 
periment have 256 gray levels. 
                                                 This section presents the results of the experiments con-
  After application of the image processing technique, the 
                                                 ducted to substantiate the performance enhancement of PCA 
resulting images are used for the training and recognition 
                                                 using the proposed methodology. 
phases of the PCA model. 
                                                   To robustly test the performance of the proposed work, 
  Thus, the system training algorithm is as follows.  
                                                 large dataset of fingerspelling signs is built up. 
 Algorithm: Training 
 Input: Fingerspelling training images  
 Output: Fingerspelling image features, eigen vector matrix, 4.1 Dataset of fingerspelling signs 
 feature matrix                                  User images were captured by a web cam with plain back-
 Method:                                         ground. The alphabets ‘j’ and ‘z’ are dynamic signs consist-
 Step 1: Apply any of the discussed pre-processing tech- ing of hand movement and thus, only static signs are con-
      niques to the training images.             sidered in this work. Hence those two alphabet signs are not 
                                                 considered. Signs of 24 fingerspelling alphabets made by 20 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              607 users were captured, with 6 samples of each alphabet, result-
 ing in 2880 signs. A few sample images are given in Figure 
 1.
  The sign images were cropped to get hand area images, 
 Figure 2 shows the result of cropping the sample images in 
 Figure 1. Since PCA requires all the vectors to be of same 
 size, all the images are resized to 50 50  dimensions, Fig-
ure 3 presents the resized sample images. Figure 4 shows Figure 5: Result of extended sobel filter operation 
the result of application of smoothing using wiener filter to 
the samples images. Result of extended sobel filter applica-
tion is in Figure 5.  Histogram equalisation result is in Fig-
ure 6 and Figure 7 shows the result of gray levels reduction. 


                                                 Figure 6: Result of Histogram equalisation  


 Figure 1: Captured images of alphabets a,b,c,d,e,f,g and h 
                                                 Figure 7: Application of gray levels reduction operation. 

                                                   Out of the 6 samples for each alphabet from each user in 
                                                 the above mentioned dataset, 4 samples are considered for 
                                                 training the model (totalling 1920 images). Remaining 2 
                                                 samples for each alphabet from each user is considered for 
                                                 testing in recognition phase (totalling 960 images).  
                                                   During recognition, various dimensions (m) are consid-
                                                 ered while computing the Euclidian distance measure. Rec-
 Figure 2: Segmented images of the alphabets     ognition rate is defined as the ratio of successful recognition 
                                                 of sample image to the number of samples used for testing 
                                                 in recognition phase. Results of the experiments are tabu-
                                                 lated in Table 8. The best performances of different methods 
                                                 are highlighted. 

                                                 Image 
                                                               Dimensions used for Recognition phase 
                                                 Processing
                                                 Methods   5   10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
                                                 Original
 Figure 3: Resized images of the segmented images         55.6 74.8 78.8 81.1 82.7 83.6 83.4 84.3 
                                                 PCA
                                                 PCA with 
                                                          55.9 74.7 79.1 81.4 83.1 83.9 84.5 84.2 
                                                 Smoothing 
                                                 PCA with 
                                                 extended 60.4 77.6 82.4 85.5 85.8 85.3 85.9 86.4 
                                                 sobel filter 
                                                 PCA with 
                                                 Histogram 55.1 75.1 80.0 81.8 83.8 85.4 85.6 85.6 
                                                 equalisation
                                                 PCA with 
 Figure 4: Result of smoothing operation using wiener filter. gray levels 57.8 77.1 81.0 84.5 84.4 86.7 86.5 86.2 
                                                 reduction 
                                                 Table 8: Recognition rates in percentages on application of 
                                                        image-processing techniques. 

                                                   Performance results of various techniques are graphically 
                                                 represented in Figure 9. From Table 8 and Figure 9 it is 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                              608clear that the proposed method achieves better result than     Performance Results
                                                    95
standard processes that too at lower dimensions.                          Original Method
                                                                          With wiener filter
                                                                          With Extended Sobel filter
               Performance Results                                        With Histogram Equalisation
    90
                                                                          With Gray levels Reduc tion

    85                                              90

    80

    75

                                                    Recognition Rate Recognition 85

    70
   Recognition  Rate
    65
                         PCA                        80
                         PCA + wiener filter            PCA      2D PCA  (2D)2 PCA Diagonal PCA
    60                   PCA + extended sobel filter
                         PCA + histogram equalisation 
                         PCA + gray levels reduction Figure 11: Performance rates in percentages on application 
    55
     5    10   15   20   25   30   35   40              of image-processing techniques 
                   Dimensions
Figure 9: Performance in percentages on application of im- From Table 8, Table 10, Figure 9 and Figure 11, it is ap-
       age processing techniques                parent that the proposed filter procedure increases the 
                                                performance of the appearance based methods. 
 [Salzberg, 1997] outlines an approach for experimental 
data setup to make a robust comparative analysis of classify- 5 Discussion and Conclusion: 
ing methods. Similar to it, the dataset of signs is divided 
into different combinations of subsets for training and test- Application of image processing techniques definitely helps 
ing phases of the methods. The dataset has 6 samples from in increasing the performance of appearance based method-
each of the 20 users for each alphabet, out of which 4 sam- ologies for fingerspelling recognition. Techniques like 
ples are taken for training and 2 samples are taken for test- smoothing and contrast enhancement using wiener filter, 
                                                extended sobel filter, histogram equalisation techniques and 
ing. Totally we get 15 (=6C4 ) combinations for dividing the 
dataset into a training set of 4 samples and remaining 2 a novel gray levels reduction technique are applied resulting 
                                                in much improvement in performance of PCA. To further 
samples for testing in recognition phase. After 15 runs of                                  2
each algorithm on different sub sets, the average of the rec- show its effectiveness, other methods like 2D PCA, (2D)
ognition rates is taken as the overall performance of the PCA and Diagonal PCA are considered and their perform-
method.                                         ances are compared, further reinforcing the effectiveness of 
 This experimental setup is used to test the effectiveness the application of pre-processing techniques. 
of the proposed method, it is used along with the standard Although the gray sub range bounds in gray level reduc-
techniques mentioned above for comparing the performance tion technique are chosen experimentally, further work in 
of other appearance based procedures like 2D PCA, (2D)2 this direction would definitely give a basis for choosing the 
PCA and Diagonal PCA and its effectiveness is apparent bounds and thereby making the technique adaptive. 
from Table 10 and its chart in Figure 11. 
                                                References 
                   Appearance Based Methods 
Image Process-                                  [Birk and Moeslund, 1996] Henrik Birk and Thomas B. 
                       2D     (2D)2  Diagonal     Moeslund. Recognizing Gestures From the Hand Alpha-
ing Methods    PCA
                      PCA     PCA     PCA         bet Using Principal Component Analysis, Master Thesis,
Original method  86.17  88.66  84.52  88.98       1996. 
Wiener filter  86.45  88.74   84.38   88.91     [Birk et al., 1997] Henrik Birk, Thomas B. Moeslund and 
Extended sobel                                    Claus B. Madsen. Real-Time Recognition of Hand Al-
               88.75  89.68 86.68     90.12 
Filter                                            phabet Gestures Using Principal Component Analysis, In 
Histogram                                         Proceedings of the 10th Scandinavian Conference on 
               87.03 89.52    86.1    90.17
equalisation                                      Image Analysis (SCIA’97), Lappeenranta, Finland, 1997. 
Gray levels 
               88.16  89.74 86.86     90.08     [Chalechale et al., 2005] Abdolah Chalechale, Farzad Sa-
reduction
                                                  faei, Golshah Nagdy and Prashan Premaratne. Hand pos-
Table 10:  Recognition rates in percentages on application 
                                                  ture analysis for visual-based human-machine interface, 
        of image-processing techniques  
                                                  In Proceedings of the Workshop on Digital Image Com-
                                                  puting WDIC2005, pages 91-96. 2005. 


                                           IJCAI-07
                                             609