       Hybrid Elections Broaden Complexity-Theoretic Resistance to Control∗

       Edith Hemaspaandra               Lane A. Hemaspaandra                    Jorg¨ Rothe
     Dept. of Computer Science         Dept. of Computer Science            Inst. f¨ur Informatik
  Rochester Institute of Technology     University of Rochester      Heinrich-Heine-Univ. D¨usseldorf
     Rochester, NY 14623, USA         Rochester, NY 14627, USA          40225 D¨usseldorf, Germany
        www.cs.rit.edu/∼   eh       www.cs.rochester.edu/∼     lane  rothe@cs.uni-duesseldorf.de

                    Abstract                          2003]. Indeed, in these days of a massive internet with many
                                                      pages, many surfers, and many robots, of intra-corporate
    Electoral control refers to attempts by an elec-
                                                      decision-making potentially involving electronic input from
    tion’s organizer (“the chair”) to inﬂuence the out-
                                                      many units/individuals/warehouses/trucks/sources, and more
    come by adding/deleting/partitioning voters or can-
                                                      generally of massive computational settings including many
    didates. The groundbreaking work of Bartholdi,
                                                      actors, it is easy to note any number of situations in which
    Tovey, and Trick [1992] on (constructive) control
                                                      elections are natural and in which the number of candidates
    proposes computational complexity as a means of
                                                      and/or voters might be massive. For example, suppose ama-
    resisting control attempts: Look for election sys-
                                                      zon.com were to select a “page of the week” via an election
    tems where the chair’s task in seeking control is it-
                                                      where the candidates were all its web pages and the voters
    self computationally infeasible.
                                                      were all visiting surfers (with preferences inferred from their
    We introduce and study a method of combining two  page-viewing times or patterns); such an election would have
    or more candidate-anonymous election schemes in   an enormous number of candidates and voters. All these ap-
    such a way that the combined scheme possesses     plications are exciting, but immediately bring to a theoreti-
    all the resistances to control (i.e., all the NP- cian’s mind the worry of whether the complexity of imple-
    hardnesses of control) possessed by any of its con- menting election systems is satisfyingly low and whether the
    stituents: It combines their strengths. From this and complexity of distorting (controlling or manipulating) elec-
    new resistance constructions, we prove for the ﬁrst tion systems is reassuringly high.
    time that there exists an election scheme that is re-
    sistant to all twenty standard types of electoral con- Since the complexity of elections is a topic whose impor-
    trol.                                             tance has made itself clear, it is natural to ask whether the
                                                      standard tools and techniques of complexity-theoretic study
                                                      exist in the context of elections. One important technique in
1  Introduction                                       complexity is the combination of problems. For example, for
Elections are a way of, from a collection of voters’ (or sets in complexity theory, a standard approach to combina-
agents’) individual preferences over candidates (or alterna- tion is the join (also known as the disjoint union and as the
tives), selecting a winner (or outcome). The importance of marked union): A ⊕ B = {0x | x ∈ A}∪{1y | y ∈ B}.
and study of elections is obviously central in political sci- In some sense, our work in this paper can be thought of as
ence, but also spans such ﬁelds as economics, mathemat- simply providing, for elections, an analog of the join. That is,
ics, operations research, and computer science. Within com- we will propose a method of combining two (or more) elec-
puter science, the applications of elections are most promi- tions in a way that will maintain desirable simplicity proper-
nent in distributed AI, most particularly in the study of multi- ties (e.g., if all of the constituent elections have polynomial-
agent systems. For example, voting has been concretely pro- time winner algorithms then so will our combined election)
posed as a computational mechanism for planning [Ephrati while also inheriting quite aggressively desirable hardness
and Rosenschein, 1991; 1993] and has also been suggested as properties (we will show that any resistance-to-control—in
an approach to collaborative ﬁltering [Pennock et al., 2000]. the sense that is standard [Bartholdi et al., 1992] and that
However, voting also has received attention within the study we will provide a deﬁnition of later—possessed by even one
of systems. After all, many distributed algorithms must of the constituent elections will be possessed by the com-
start by selecting a leader, and election techniques have also bined election). One cannot directly use a join to achieve
been proposed to attack the web page rank aggregation prob- this, because the join of two sets modeling elections is not
lem and the related issue of lessening the spam level of re- itself an election. Rather, we must ﬁnd a way of embedding
sults from web searches [Dwork et al., 2001; Fagin et al., into election speciﬁcations—lists of voter preferences over
  ∗Supported in part by DFG grants RO 1202/9-1 and RO 1202/9- candidates—triggers that both allow us to embed and switch
3, NSF grants CCR-0311021 and CCF-0426761, and the Alexander between all the underlying election systems and to not have
von Humboldt Foundation’s TransCoop program.          such switching go uncontrollably haywire when faced with

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1308electoral distortions such as adding/deleting/partitioning vot- maintains their simplicity while inheriting each resistance-to-
ers/candidates, since we wish hardness with respect to control control possessed by any one of its constituents. Thus, it in ef-
by such mechanisms to be preserved.                   fect unions together all their resistances—thus the “broaden”
  We above have phrased this paper’s theme as the develop- of our title. We mention in passing that in the quite differ-
ment of a way of combining multiple election systems—and ent setting of election manipulation (which regards not ac-
in doing so, have desirable types of simplicity/complexity in- tions by the chair but rather which regards voters altering their
heritance. However, this paper also has in mind a very spe- preferences in an attempt to inﬂuence who becomes the win-
ciﬁc application—both for its own interest and as a sounding ner) [Bartholdi et al., 1989a], there has been some work by
board against which our election hybridization scheme can be Conitzer and Sandholm [2003] regarding making manipula-
tested. This application is the control of election systems. tion hard, even for systems where it is not hard, by chang-
  In election control, we ask whether an election’s orga- ing the system by going to a two-stage election in which a
nizer (the chair) can by some speciﬁc type of manipulation single elimination pre-round is added, and Elkind and Lip-
of the election’s structure (adding/deleting/partitioning vot- maa [2005] have generalized this to a sequence of elimination
ers/candidates) cause a speciﬁed candidate to be the (unique) rounds conducted under some system(s) followed by an elec-
winner.  As mentioned earlier, the complexity-theoretic tion under some other system. Though the latter paper like
study of control was proposed by Bartholdi, Tovey, and this paper uses the term “hybrid,” the domains differ sharply
Trick [1992]. We will closely follow their model. In this and the methods of election combination are nearly opposite:
model, the chair is assumed to have knowledge of the vote Our approach (in order to broaden resistance to control) em-
that will be cast by each voter, and there are ten different beds the election systems in parallel and theirs (in order to
types of control (candidate addition, candidate deletion, voter ﬁght manipulation) strings them out in sequence. Of the two
addition, voter deletion, partition of candidates, run-off par- approaches, ours far more strongly has the ﬂavor of our sim-
tition of candidates, and partition of voters [Bartholdi et al., ple motivating example, the join.
1992]—and for each of the three partition cases one can have The previous work most closely related to that of this pa-
subelection ties promote or can have subelection ties elimi- per is the constructive control work of Bartholdi, Tovey, and
nate, see [Hemaspaandra et al., 2005a]).              Trick [1992] and the destructive control work of Hemaspaan-
  Of course, the dream case would be to ﬁnd an election sys- dra, Hemaspaandra, and Rothe [2005a]. Work on bribery
tem that has the desirable property of having a polynomial- is somewhat related to this paper, in the sense that bribery
time algorithm for evaluating who won, but that also has can be viewed as sharing aspects of both manipulation and
the property that for every single one of the ten standard control [Faliszewski et al., 2006]. Of course, all the clas-
types of control it is computationally infeasible (NP-hard) sical [Bartholdi et al., 1989b; 1989a; Bartholdi and Orlin,
to assert such control. Unfortunately, no system yet has 1991] and recent papers (of which we particularly point
been proven resistant to all ten types of control. In fact, out, for its broad framework and generality, the work of
given that broad “impossibility” results exist for niceness Spakowski and Vogel [2000]) on the complexity of election
of election systems (e.g., Arrow’s Theorem [Arrow, 1951 problems share this paper’s goal of better understanding the
revised edition 1963]) and for nonmanipulability of elec- relationship between complexity and elections.
tion systems (e.g., the Gibbard–Satterthwaite and Duggan– We here omit proofs due to lack of space, but detailed
Schwartz Theorems ([Gibbard, 1973; Satterthwaite, 1975; proofs are available in the full version of this paper [Hema-
Duggan and Schwartz, 2000], see also [Taylor, 2005])), one spaandra et al., 2006].
might even momentarily wonder whether the “dream case”
mentioned above can be proven impossible via proving a the- 2 Deﬁnitions and Discussion
orem of the following form: “For no election system are
all ten types of control NP-hard.” However, such a claim 2.1 Elections
is proven impossible by our work: Our hybrid system in An election system (or election rule or election scheme or
fact will allow us to combine all the resistance types of the voting system) E is simply a mapping from (ﬁnite though
underlying elections. And while doing so, it will preserve arbitrary-sized) sets (actually, mathematically, they are mul-
the winner-evaluation simplicity of the underlying elections. tisets) V of votes (each a preference order—strict, transitive,
Thus, in particular, we conclude that the “dream case” holds: and complete—over a ﬁnite candidate set) to (possibly empty,
There is an election system—namely, our hybridization of possibly nonstrict) subsets of the candidates. All votes in a
plurality and Condorcet elections—that is resistant to all ten given V are over the same candidate set, but different V ’s of
types of constructive control. We also show—by building course can be over different (ﬁnite) candidate sets. Each can-
some artiﬁcial election systems achieving resistance to de- didate that for a given set of votes is in E’s output is said to
structive control types for which no system has been previ- be a winner. If for a given input E outputs a set of cardinality
ously proven resistant and then invoking our hybridization one, that candidate is said to be the unique winner. Election
machinery—that there is an election system that is resistant to control focuses on making candidates be unique winners and
all ten types of destructive control (in which the chair’s goal on precluding them from being unique winners.
is to preclude a given candidate from being the (unique) win- Throughout this paper, a voter’s preference order will be
ner) as well as to all ten types of constructive control (Theo- exactly that: a tie-free linear order over the candidates. And
rem 3.8).                                             we will discuss and hybridize only election systems based on
  Our hybridization system takes multiple elections and preference orders.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1309  We now deﬁne two common election systems, plurality hybridize just two election systems and decided to do so by
voting and Condorcet voting. In plurality voting, the win- using the ﬁrst election system exactly if the ﬁrst voter’s most
ners are the candidates who are ranked ﬁrst the most. In Con- disliked candidate’s name is lexicographically less than the
dorcet voting, the winners are all candidates (note: there can ﬁrst voter’s second-most-disliked candidate’s name. Note
be at most one and there might be zero) who strictly beat that if, as part of our control problem, that voter is deleted,
each other candidate in head-on-head majority-rule elections that might suddenly change the system to which the problem
(i.e., get strictly more than half the votes in each such elec- is routed. Or, as another example, if we use the modulo k
tion). For widely used systems such as plurality voting, we value of the name of the lexicographically smallest candidate
will write plurality rather than Eplurality.          to control switching between the k election systems, then that
  We say that an election system E is candidate-anonymous hybridization approach would be very sensitive to jumping
if for every pair of sets of votes V and V , V  = V , between systems if, as part of our control problem, that can-
such that V  can be created from V by applying some one- didate is deleted. These examples give some idea of why we
to-one mapping h from the candidate names in V onto new chose the approach we did, though admittedly even it can in
candidate names in V  (e.g., each instance of “George” in some cases be nudged into jumping between systems—but
V is mapped by h to “John” in V  and each instance of at least this happens in very limited, very crisply delineated
“John” in V is mapped by h to “Hillary” in V  and each in- cases and in ways that we will generally be able to appropri-
stance of “Ralph” in V is mapped by h to “Ralph” in V )it ately handle.
holds that E(V )={c | (∃c ∈E(V )) [h(c)=c]}.In-      Finally, we come to what we allow ourselves to use to
formally put, candidate-anonymity says that the strings we control the switching, what we choose not to use, and what
may use to name the candidates are all created equal. Note price we pay for our choices. What we use (as is allowed in
that most natural systems are candidate-anonymous. For the [Bartholdi et al., 1992] model) are the candidates’ names
example, both the election systems mentioned immediately and only the candidates’ names. We use absolutely nothing
above—plurality-rule elections and the election system of else to control switching between elections. We do not use
Condorcet—are candidate-anonymous.                    voters’ names. Indeed, in the [Bartholdi et al., 1992] model
                                                      that we follow, voters (unlike candidates) do not even have
2.2  Our Hybridization Scheme                         names. But since the votes are input as a list, their ordering it-
We now deﬁne our basic hybridization scheme, hybrid.  self could be used to pass bits of information—e.g., we could
                                                      look at whether the ﬁrst vote in the list viewed as a string is
                 E , E ,...,E
Deﬁnition 2.1 Let  0 1      k−1  be   election rules  lexicographically less than the last vote in the list viewed as a
that take as input voters’ preference orders. Deﬁne   string. We in no way “cheat” by exploiting such input-order
hybrid(E , E ,...,E )
        0  1     k−1  to be the election rule that does information, either for the votes or for the list of candidates
the following: If there is at least one candidate and all can- (as per [Bartholdi et al., 1992], formally the candidate set is
didate names (viewed as natural numbers via the standard passed in separately to cover a certain boundary case). Our
               Σ∗      N                      k
bijection between  and  ) are congruent, modulo ,to   “switch” is based purely on candidates’ names and just can-
i         i 0  ≤ i ≤  k − 1                     E
 (for some ,               ) then use election rule i. didates’ names. This also points to the price we pay for this
                          E
Otherwise use, by convention, k−1 as the default election choice: Even when all its constituent elections are candidate-
rule.                                                 anonymous, hybrid may not possess candidate-anonymity.
  Having deﬁned our system there is much to discuss. Why
did we choose this system? What are its properties? What 2.3 Types of Constructive and Destructive Control
other approaches did we choose not to use, and why? What Constructive control problems ask whether a certain class of
aspects of the input is our method for switching between elec- actions by the election’s chair can make a speciﬁed candidate
tion systems using, and what aspects is it choosing not to ex- the election’s unique winner. Constructive control was ﬁrst
ploit, and what are the costs associated with our choices? deﬁned and studied by Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick [1992].
  As to the properties of this system, Section 3 is devoted Destructive control problems ask whether a certain class of
to that, but most crucially we will see that this system pos- actions by the election’s chair can make a speciﬁed candi-
sesses every resistance-to-control property possessed by even date fail to be a unique winner of the election. Destructive
one of its constituents. And this will hold essentially due to control was deﬁned and studied by Hemaspaandra, Hema-
the fact that hybrid is a close analog of the effect of a join: It spaandra, and Rothe [2005a], and in the different context of
splices the constituents together in such a way that key ques- electoral manipulation destruction was introduced even ear-
tions about the constituent systems can easily be many-one lier by Conitzer, Lang, and Sandholm [Conitzer and Sand-
                       p
polynomial-time reduced (≤m-reduced or reduced, for short) holm, 2002; Conitzer et al., 2003].
to questions about their hybrid.                        Bartholdi, Tovey, and Trick’s [1992] groundbreaking pa-
  As to why we chose this particular system, note that hybrid per deﬁned seven types of electoral control. Among those
“switches” between constituent systems via wildly redundant seven, three are partition problems for which there are two
information. This will let us keep deletions/partitions of vot- different natural approaches to handling ties in subelections
ers/candidates from causing a switch between the underlying (see [Hemaspaandra et al., 2005a] which introduced these tie-
systems (if the starting state routed us to a nondefault case). handling models for this context): eliminating tied subelec-
Note that some other approaches that one might take are more tion winners (the “TE” model) or promoting tied subelection
sensitive to deletions. For example, suppose we wanted to winners (the “TP” model). Thus, there are (7−3)+2·3=10

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1310different standard types of constructive control, and there are and a set V of voters, is there a partition of V into V1 and V2
essentially the same ten types of destructive control. such that c is (not) the unique winner in the hierarchical two-
  Since it is exceedingly important to not use a slightly dif- stage election in which the survivors of (C, V1) and (C, V2)
ferent problem statement than earlier work whose results we run against each other with voter set V ?
will be drawing on, we will state the seven standard construc-
tive control types (which become ten with the three parti- 2.4 Immunity, Susceptibility, Vulnerability, and
tion control types each having both “TE” and “TP” versions) Resistance
and their destructive analogs using word-for-word deﬁnitions
from [Hemaspaandra et al., 2005a; 2005b], which themselves Again, to allow consistency with earlier papers and their
                                                                                      [
are based closely and often identically on [Bartholdi et al., results, we take this deﬁnition from Hemaspaandra et al.,
                                                                  ]
1992] (see the discussion in [Hemaspaandra et al., 2005a; 2005a; 2005b , with the important exception regarding re-
2005b]).                                              sistance discussed below Deﬁnition 2.2. It is worth noting
                                                      that immunity and susceptibility both are “directional” (can
  Though V , the set of votes, is conceptually a multiset as
                                                      we change this?) but that vulnerability and resistance are, in
in the previous related work, we take the view that the votes
                                                      contrast, outcome-oriented (can we end up with this happen-
are input as a list (“the ballots”), and in particular are not
                                                      ing?) and complexity-focused.
directly input as a multiset in which cardinalities are input
in binary (though we will mention later that our main result Deﬁnition 2.2 We say that a voting system is immune to con-
     hybrid
about      holds also in that quite different model). trol in a given model of control (e.g., “destructive control via
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Adding Candi-   adding candidates”) if the model regards constructive con-
dates: Given a set C of qualiﬁed candidates and a distin- trol and it is never possible for the chair to by using his/her
guished candidate c ∈ C,asetD of possible spoiler candi- allowed model of control change a given candidate from be-
dates, and a set V of voters with preferences over C ∪ D, ing not a unique winner to being the unique winner, or the
is there a choice of candidates from D whose entry into the model regards destructive control and it is never possible for
election would assure that c is (not) the unique winner? the chair to by using his/her allowed model of control change
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Deleting Candi- a given candidate from being the unique winner to not being a
dates: Given a set C of candidates, a distinguished candidate unique winner. If a system is not immune to a type of control,
c ∈ C,asetV  of voters, and a positive integer k<C,is it is said to be susceptible to that type of control.
there a set of k or fewer candidates in C whose disqualiﬁca- A voting system is said to be (computationally) vulnerable
tion would assure that c is (not) the unique winner?  to control if it is susceptible to control and the corresponding
                                                      language problem is computationally easy (i.e., solvable in
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Partition of Candi- polynomial time).
dates: Given a set C of candidates, a distinguished candidate
                                                        A voting system is said to be resistant to control if it is sus-
c ∈ C,andasetV  of voters, is there a partition of C into C1
                                                      ceptible to control but the corresponding language problem
and C2 such that c is (not) the unique winner in the sequen-
                                                      is computationally hard (i.e., NP-hard).
tial two-stage election in which the winners in the subelection
(C1,V) who survive the tie-handling rule move forward to We have diverged from all previous papers by deﬁning
                  C               V                                                            p
face the candidates in 2 (with voter set )?           resistance as meaning NP-hardness (i.e., NP-≤m-hardness)
                                                                                          p
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Run-Off Partition rather than NP-completeness (i.e., NP-≤m-completeness).
of Candidates: Given a set C of candidates, a distinguished In [Bartholdi et al., 1992], where the notion was deﬁned, all
candidate c ∈ C,andasetV of voters, is there a partition of problems were trivially in NP. But control problems might
C into C1 and C2 such that c is (not) the unique winner of the in difﬁculty exceed NP-completeness, and so the notion of
election in which those candidates surviving (with respect to resistance is better captured by NP-hardness.
the tie-handling rule) subelections (C1,V) and (C2,V) have An anonymous IJCAI referee commented that even
a run-off with voter set V ?                          polynomial-time algorithms can be expensive to run on sufﬁ-
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Adding Voters:  ciently large inputs. We mention that though the comment is
Given a set of candidates C and a distinguished candidate correct, almost any would-be controller would probably much
c ∈ C,asetV of registered voters, an additional set W of yet prefer that challenge, solving a P problem on large inputs, to
unregistered voters (both V and W have preferences over C), the challenge our results give him/her, namely, solving an NP-
and a positive integer k ≤W , is there a set of k or fewer complete problem on large inputs. We also mention that since
voters from W whose registration would assure that c is (not) the hybrid scheme is designed so as to inherit resistances from
the unique winner?                                    the underlying schemes, if a hybrid requires extreme ratios
                                                      between the number of candidates and the number of voters
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Deleting Voters: to display asymptotic hardness, that is purely due to inheriting
                     C                       c ∈ C
Given a set of candidates , a distinguished candidate , that from the underlying systems. Indeed, if anything the hy-
    V                             k ≤V  
aset  of voters, and a positive integer   ,istherea   brid is less likely to show that behavior since, informally put,
     k               V
set of or fewer voters in whose disenfranchisement would if even one of the underlying systems achieves asymptotic
         c
assure that is (not) the unique winner?               hardness even away from extreme ratios between the number
Constructive (Destructive) Control by Partition of Voters: of candidates and the number of voters, then their hybrid will
Given a set of candidates C, a distinguished candidate c ∈ C, also.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  13112.5  Inheritance                                      3.2  Resistance
We will be centrally concerned with the extent to which We now come to the most important inheritance case, namely,
hybrid(E0, E1,...,Ek−1) inherits the properties of its con- that of resistance. Since our hope is that hybrid elections will
stituents. To do so, we formally deﬁne our notions of in- broaden resistance, the ideal case would be to show that re-
heritance (if all the constituents have a property then so does sistance is strongly inherited. And we will indeed show that,
their hybrid) and of strong inheritance (if even one of the con- and from it will conclude that there exist election systems that
stituents has a property then so does the hybrid).    are resistant to all twenty standard types of control.
                                Γ                       We ﬁrst state the key result, which uses the fact that hybrid
Deﬁnition 2.3 We say that a property is strongly inherited                                 ≤p
(respectively, inherited)byhybrid if the following holds: Let can embed its constituents to allow us to m-reduce from
k ∈ N+     E , E ,...,E                               control problems about its constituents to control problems
      .Let  0  1     k−1 be candidate-anonymous elec-      hybrid
tion systems (each taking as input (C, V ), with V a list of pref- about .
                         hybrid(E , E ,...,E  )                            +
erence orders). It holds that    0  1      k−1  has   Theorem 3.3 Let k ∈ N  and let E0, E1,...,Ek−1 be elec-
       Γ
property if at least one of its constituents has (respectively, tion systems. Let Φ be one of the standard twenty types of
                            Γ
all its constituents have) property .                 (constructive and destructive) control. If for at least one i,
  Deﬁnition 2.3 builds in the assumption that all constituents 0 ≤ i ≤ k −1, Ei is candidate-anonymous and resistant to Φ,
                                                                                              1
are candidate-anonymous. This assumption isn’t overly oner- then hybrid(E0, E1,...,Ek−1) is resistant to Φ.
ous since as mentioned earlier candidate-anonymity is very Corollary 3.4 hybrid strongly inherits resistance to each of
common—but will be used in many of our proofs.        the standard twenty types of control.
  Though we will build candidate-anonymity into the as-
sumptions underlying inheritance, we will often try to let in- Before we turn to applying this corollary, let us note that
terested readers know when that assumption is not needed. Theorem 3.3 and Corollary 3.4 are both, as is this entire pa-
In particular, when we say “inherited (and ﬂexibly so)” or per, within the most natural, most typical model: Votes are
“strongly inherited (and ﬂexibly so),” the “(and ﬂexibly so)” input as a list (“nonsuccinct” input) and each vote counts
indicates that the claim holds even if in Deﬁnition 2.3 the equally (“unweighted” votes). We mention that for each of
words “candidate-anonymous” are deleted. For example, the the other three cases—“succinct, weighted,” “succinct, un-
following easy but quite important claim follows easily from weighted,” and “nonsuccinct, weighted”—Theorem 3.3 and
the deﬁnition of hybrid.                              Corollary 3.4 both still hold.
Proposition 2.4 “Winner problem membership  in  P,”     Let us apply Corollary 3.4 to obtain election systems that
“unique winner problem membership in P,” “winner prob- are broadly resistant to control.
lem membership in NP,”  and “unique winner problem    Corollary 3.5 There exist election systems—for example,
                                            hybrid
membership in NP” are inherited (and ﬂexibly so) by . hybrid(plurality, Condorcet)—that are resistant to all the
                                                      standard ten types of constructive control.
3  Inheritance and Hybrid Elections: Results
                                                        To make the same claim for destructive control, a bit more
In this section we will discuss the inheritance properties of work is needed, since for three of the standard ten types of
hybrid with respect to susceptibility, resistance, immunity, destructive control no system has been, as far as we know,
and vulnerability. Table 1 summarizes our results for the proven to be resistant. So we ﬁrst construct an (artiﬁcial)
cases of constructive control and destructive control. (This system having the missing three resistance properties.
table does not discuss/include the issue of when “(and ﬂex-
ibly so)” holds, i.e., when the candidate-anonymity assump- Lemma 3.6 There exists a candidate-anonymous election
                                                             E
tion is not needed, but rather focuses on our basic inheritance system, not-all-one, that is resistant to (a) destructive control
deﬁnition.)                                           by deleting voters, (b) destructive control by adding voters,
                                                      and (c) destructive control by partition of voters in the TE
3.1  Susceptibility                                   model.
We ﬁrst note that susceptibility strongly inherits. We remind Corollary 3.7 There exist election systems that are resistant
the reader that throughout this paper, when we speak of an to all ten standard types of destructive control.
election system, we always implicitly mean an election sys-
tem that takes as input (C, V ) with V a list of preference 1An anonymous IJCAI referee presented a “counterexample”
orders over C.                                        that, though incorrect, is worth refuting so that no other reader need
                     +                                have the same worry. Brieﬂy put, the referee noticed that if E0 and
Theorem 3.1 Let k ∈ N  and let E0, E1,...,Ek−1 be elec- E                                        E
               Φ                                       1 are candidate-anonymous election systems such that 0 is resis-
tion systems. Let be one of the standard twenty types of tant to control type Φ and E1 is not, then hybrid(E0, E1) will be
                                                 i
(constructive and destructive) control. If for at least one , routed to E1 unless all candidate names are even, and then said that
0 ≤ i ≤ k − 1, Ei is candidate-anonymous and susceptible since it will not always be the case that all candidate names are even,
to Φ,thenhybrid(E0, E1,...,Ek−1) is susceptible to Φ. this showed that the hybrid was not resistant. The error in this rea-
             hybrid                                   soning is the incorrect implicit claim that NP-hard problems cannot
Corollary 3.2      strongly inherits susceptibility to each have subcases—sometimes even quite broad ones—in P. They in
of the standard twenty types of control.              fact can, e.g., 2CNF-SAT is in P.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1312