                     Description Logics with Approximate Deﬁnitions
                             Precise Modeling of Vague Concepts

           Stefan Schlobach   and  Michel Klein                     Linda Peelen
            Department of Artiﬁcial Intelligence         Department of Medical Informatics
               Vrije Universteit Amsterdam             Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam
            {schlobac,michel.klein}@few.vu.nl                  l.m.peelen@amc.uva.nl

                    Abstract                          and upper approximations. In the spirit of Rough Set theory
                                                      [Pawlak, 1982], two concepts approximate an underspeciﬁed,
    We extend traditional Description Logics (DL) with vague, concept as particular sub- and super-concepts, describ-
    a simple mechanism to handle approximate concept  ing which elements are deﬁnitely, respectively possibly,el-
    deﬁnitions in a qualitative way. Often, for example ements of the concept. The following picture illustrates the
    in medical applications, concepts are not deﬁnable general idea:
    in a crisp way but can fairly exhaustively be con-
    strained through a particular sub- and a particular                         Septic
    super-concept. We introduce such lower and up-                              Septic
    per approximations based on rough-set semantics,                            Septic
    and show that reasoning in these languages can be
    reduced to standard DL satisﬁability. This allows
    us to apply Rough Description Logics in a study     Each square denotes a set of domain elements, which can-
    of medical trials about sepsis patients, which is a not further be discerned by any available criterion. Then, the
    typical application for precise modeling of vague circled line denotes the set of septic patients, i.e., the vague
    knowledge. The study shows that Rough DL-based    concept which we are incapable to formally deﬁne. If we cap-
    reasoning can be done in a realistic use case and ture this lack of criteria to discern between two objects as a
    that modeling vague knowledge helps to answer     indiscernibility relation dis∼, we can formally deﬁne the up-
    important questions in the design of clinical trials. per approximation as the set of patients that are indiscernible
                                                      from at least one septic patient.
                                                                              ∼
1  Introduction                                       Septic ≡{pat1 |∃pat2:dis (pat1,pat2)&pat2 ∈ Septic}.
Many existing knowledge modeling techniques are best  Similarly, we can deﬁne the lower approximation as the set
suited for modeling crisp knowledge. In practice, however, of patients containing all, and only those patients, for which
it is not always possible to make clear-cut distinctions. A it is known that all indiscernible patients must be septic.
                                                                              ∼
modeler frequently has to account for borderline cases. Ap- Septic ≡{pat1 |∀pat2:dis (pat1,pat2) → pat2 ∈ Septic}
proaches that do take such uncertainty or vagueness into ac-
count often do this via some kind of weighting mechanism In our picture, the upper approximation is depicted as the
or an approach based on fuzzy sets. A drawback of these ap- union of the dark squares (the lower approximation), and the
proaches is that uncertainty is introduced in the model, which gray squares, the boundary. This semantics can be transferred
often has the consequence that no crisp answers can be given to Rough DL approximations in a straightforward way: the
to queries on the model. This paper introduces a complemen- patients in the concept Septic are the deﬁnitely septic pa-
tary mechanism that allows for modelling of vague knowl- tients, those that are unmistakably septic, the concept Septic
edge by crisp speciﬁcation of approximations of a concept. models the possibly septic patients, as opposed to the white
  Medicine is a typical domain where concepts cannot al- squares, which model deﬁnitely not septic patients. These
ways be described in a crisp manner. E.g., the deﬁnition of a approximations are to be deﬁned in a crisp way.
disease is not always clear-cut, especially if a single marker is Technically, Rough DL are very simple languages, as they
lacking that distinguishes a patient with a disease from a pa- can be simulated with traditional DL without added expres-
tient without the disease. This is common in psychiatry and siveness. This means that reasoning can be performed by
in diseases in which the underlying pathology of the disease translation, and subsequent use of a common DL reasoner.
is unclear. An example of the latter is sepsis. Rough Descrip- We consider it a big advantage of our approach that we can
tion Logics (Rough DL) provides us with the possibility to use an optimised DL reasoner without having to develop new
describe such diseases for which a crisp deﬁnition is lacking. ad-hoc decision procedures and implementations. In other
  Rough DL extends classical Description Logic ([Baader words, our Rough DL’s are strictly speaking not more expres-
et al., 2003]) by two modal-like operators, called the lower sive than traditional DL’s, but the notions that we introduce

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   557are useful modeling devices for speciﬁc types of knowledge those who fulﬁll the Bone criteria and have severe multiple
(namely non-crisp concepts).                          organ failure. We will refer to these patients as the deﬁnitely
  Our current research was motivated by a recent study of the septic patients and deﬁne them as fulﬁlling the strict criteria:
deﬁnitions for sepsis used in clinical trials. Before a medical the Bone criteria plus at least three of the following symptoms
treatment can be used in daily clinical practice, its effect and of organ failure:
impact on the patient have to be investigated in a clinical trial. • pH ≤ 7.30
When several trials have been performed it is interesting to •           <         3
compare the results of those trials. Unfortunately, the nine thrombocyte count 80,000 mm
different trials that were investigated in [Peelen et al., 2005] • urine output < 0.5 ml/kg body weight/hour (provided the pa-
showed too much variation in their deﬁnitions of severe sepsis tient is not on chronic dialysis),
patients to enable a fair comparison of trial results.  • PaO2/FiO2 ≤ 250, and

  We show how to use Rough DL to formalise and compare  • systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg OR vaso-active medication.
sepsis deﬁnitions used in different trials. Describing sepsis
through approximations enforces powerful semantic conse- 3 Rough DL for vague knowledge
quences. Rough DL turns out to be an appropriate logical
representation language to model vague concepts and provide We now present a conservative extension of Description Log-
crisp answers to queries, and can thereby assist in the valida- ics (DLs), i.e. an extension which improves the modeling
tion of existing and, ultimately, the construction of new trials. capacities without changing the expressive power of the lan-
  The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. First, guage. More concretely, we will introduce two modal-like
                                                               (·)   (·)
we introduce our use-case, the medical condition sepsis. In operators and for lower and upper approximations to
Section 3, Rough DL is deﬁned as an extension to standard describe elements which either belong deﬁnitively or possi-
DL for modeling vague knowledge. We give some logical bly to the concepts under its scope. These operators introduce
consequences of the semantics of the extension, and explain a notion of approximation without effectively increasing the
how reasoning can be done by reducing Rough DL to stan- expressiveness of the language. Thus, we get extra modeling
dard DL reasoning. In Section 4, we use Rough DL to model facilities for free, without having to develop new calculi, and
deﬁnitions of severe sepsis used in different clinical trials. without paying an extra price in computational complexity.
Based on real patient data we evaluate the design of the trials.
                                                      3.1  Description Logics
2  Sepsis: a condition with a vague deﬁnition         Description Logics (DL) are a well-studied family of set-
                                                      description languages which usually come with (some or
Severe sepsis is our example for vague information through- all) Boolean operators and limited quantiﬁcation, and which
out the paper. Therefore, we will brieﬂy provide some medi- can be extended with additional functionality in a modular
cal background. Sepsis is a disease in which the immune sys- way. This way properties on relations (such as symmetry,
tem of the patient overreacts to an infection. Due to this reac- transitivity or inclusion hierarchies), number restrictions, or
tion the patient becomes severely ill, which easily results in even some form of data-types (Concrete Domains) are of-
organ failure and eventually death. The cause and underlying ten included. Description Logics have a well-deﬁned model-
cellular pathways of this disease are unclear, which hinders theoretic semantics, and the last two decades the computa-
the precise characterization of the sepsis patient. Therefore, tional properties of a wide variety of DLs has been studied.
a consensus deﬁnition of sepsis was established in 1992 to Formally, we introduce the DL ALC, which is sufﬁcient
deﬁne several stages of sepsis [Bone, R.C., 1992].Thisdeﬁ- to model our case-study. The general deﬁnition of approxi-
nition does not provide a precise deﬁnition of sepsis, but gives mations, however, will be independent of any particular DL.
the criteria for which there was a consensus that they should ALC is a simple DL with conjunction C  D, disjunction
at least hold for a patient with severe sepsis. In this paper C D, negation ¬C and universal ∀r.C and existential quan-
we focus on the patients with severe sepsis, but for brevity tiﬁcation ∃r.C. The semantics is given as follows:
we will refer to these patients as septic. The consensus state- I =(U,  ·I )                       U
ment deﬁnes patients with severe sepsis as ‘patients having Def. 1 Let     be an interpretation, where is a
                                                      universe, and ·I a function mapping concept names to subsets
a conﬁrmed infection with at least two out of four Systemic                      U
Inﬂammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) criteria:        and role names to relations over . It extends to the Boolean
                                                      operators as usual and to the quantiﬁer as follows:
  •          >   ◦              <  ◦
    temperature 38 C OR temperature 36 C                • (∃R.C)I = {i ∈ U |∃j ∈ U :(i, j) ∈ RI & j ∈ CI }
  • respiratory rate >20 breaths/min OR PaCO2<32 mmHg
                                                        • (∀R.C)I = {i ∈ U |∀j ∈ U :(i, j) ∈ RI → j ∈ CI }
  • heart rate >90 beats/minute
                                                                        T
  •             <        3    >         3               In a terminology  (called TBox) the interpretations of
    leucocyte count 4,000 mm OR 12,000 mm             concepts can be restricted to the models of T by axioms of the
and organ dysfunction, hypoperfusion, or hypotension. From form C   D or C=˙ D. Based on this model-theoretic seman-
now on we refer to these criteria as the Bone criteria. tics, concepts can be checked for unsatisﬁability:whether
  Patients who have this combination of symptoms may have they are necessarily interpreted as the empty set. Another
sepsis, however, this is not necessarily the case. We refer to useful semantic implication is subsumption of two concepts
these patients as being possibly septic. On the other hand, we C and D (a subset relation of CI and DI w.r.t. all models I
can deﬁne a group of patients that are septic for sure, namely of T ) denoted by T|= C   D.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   558  A knowledge base Σ=(T   , A) extends a TBox T with  base. In this sense, DL is inappropriate to model vague infor-
an assertional component (usually called ABox) A,whichis mation, as there is a stronger semantic relations underlying
a set of assertions i : C and R(i, j) for individual names i, j, the approximations of a concept. With Rough Description
a relation R and a concept C. The semantics is a straightfor- Logics (Rough DL), which we are about to introduce, we at-
ward extention of the previous deﬁnition: an interpretation tempt to close this gap in a conceptually simple way.
I is a model for a assertions i : C and R(i, j) if, and only, Before providing formal semantics it is worth pointing out
iI ∈ CI and RI(iI,jI ). Then, a knowledge base is consis- that approximations have very distinct properties. The upper
tent, if there is a model for both its TBox and ABox. approximation is the set of patients with a strong indication
                                                      that they might be septic. Formally, this means that for every
3.2  Rough Description Logics                         patient pat1 in Possibly Septic, there must be at least one sep-
                                                      tic patient pat2, for which there are no criteria to explain why
Description Logics are suitable for modeling crisp knowledge pat     pat     pat                   pat
but are often too rigid for approximate information. For ex- 2 differs from 1,i.e. 1 is indiscernible from 2.
                                                        Rough DL is not restricted to a particular DL, and will be
ample, no explicit mechanism is in place when a deﬁnition is                             DL
not commonly agreed upon, or when exceptions need to be deﬁned for an arbitrary Description Logic .
captured. The sepsis use-case provides an example for such Def. 2 The language RDL of Rough DL is the smallest set
vaguely deﬁned classes, for which no agreed upon criteria of concepts containing DL, and for every concept C ∈RDL
exist to determine whether a patient is indeed septic or not. also the upper approximation C ∈RDLand the lower ap-
  The basic idea is rather straightforward: even though we proximation C ∈RDL.
fail to formally deﬁne the class of septic patients, we can ap- The notions of rough T- and ABox, as well as rough knowl-
proximate it by giving an upper and a lower bound. The upper edge base extend the usual notions in the expected way.
approximation of the set of septic patients is formed by the set                                   ∼  I
of patients that fulﬁll the Bone criteria, i.e. the possibly septic Def. 3 Let a rough interpretation be a triple I =(U, R , · ),
                                                      where U is a universe, ·I an interpretation function, and R∼
patients. Orthogonally, the lower approximation of the set of                                I
septic patients is the set of patients that are deﬁnitely septic, an equivalence relation over U. The function · maps RDL
i.e. the patients that fulﬁll the strict criteria.    concepts to subsets and role names to relations over the do-
                                                           U
  Traditionally, in DLs this is modeled using primitive deﬁ- main . It extends to the new constructs as follows:
nitions, i.e. axioms of the form C   D,whereC is restricted • (C)I = {i ∈ U |∃j ∈ U :(i, j) ∈ R∼ & j ∈ CI }
by D without being fully deﬁned. The relation between the    I                         ∼        I
                                                        • (C)  = {i ∈ U |∀j ∈ U :(i, j) ∈ R → j ∈ C }
concept Septic and its approximations is in the pure DL mod-
eling just Deﬁnitely Septic   Septic   Possibly Septic. Intuitively, the upper approximation of a concept C cov-
                                                      ers the elements of a domain with the typical properties of
                                                      C, whereas the lower approximation contains the prototypi-
Rough  DL: Approximations, Syntax    and Semantics    cal elements of C.
Modelling vague concepts with the traditional approach has What did we gain? Even if it is impossible to formally
its limits when the vague concept of Septic patients needs to deﬁne a concept, such as Septic, we can often specify the ap-
be deﬁned. Let us consider a special type of sepsis where the proximations. In our use-case, the upper approximation can
renal system fails. In DL terms, the relation between renal be deﬁned using the “Bone criteria”, the lower approxima-
sepsis and sepsis would be modeled by an axiom RenalSep-
                                                      tion, using the set of “Strict criteria” described in Section 2.
tic  Septic. Again, renal sepsis is not deﬁnable in a crisp In Rough DL we now model vague knowledge in a precise
way, but there could be an approximation describing patients way; with explicit formal semantics.
which have possibly renal sepsis. Now, the question arises
whether possibly renal septic patients should be possibly sep-
tic, i.e. whether Possibly RenalSeptic   Possibly Septic or Some logical consequences of the semantics Consider a
not. In traditional DL it is possible to have all typical prop- simplistic Rough DL terminology, which models sepsis by
erties of the renal sepsis, but not the typical properties of a its approximations. Concretely, having an infection is a cer-
sepsis. What is missing is automatic inheritance of the ap- tain property of possibly septic patients , i.e. the upper ap-
proximations in a monotonic way.                      proximation Septic is a subconcept of Inf. Also, septic pa-
                                                      tients must have an organ failure (OF) in at least one organ
              Possibly            Possibly
                    RenalSeptic ???    Septic         system. Furthermore, deﬁnitely septic patients must have
                                                    multiple organ failure. This gives the following terminology:
                                                      T  ={Septic=˙ Bone, Septic=˙ Strict, Septic  Inf, Septic 
                  RenalSeptic    Septic
                                                      OF, Septic  MOF}  With the implicit semantics of RDL
                                                    there are logical consequences, some of which we will dis-
                                                      cuss in more detail.
             Deﬁnitely RenalSeptic ??? Deﬁnitely Septic
                                                        • Possibly septic patients must be deﬁnitely infected. In
  In our motivating picture there should be subsumption re- logical terms, we have T|= Septic   Inf. Why is this
lations at the “???” positions, i.e. that Deﬁnitely RenalSeptic the case? Take a patient pat with all the typical proper-
   Deﬁnitely Septic and Possibly RenalSeptic   Possi-     ties of sepsis, including an infection. Assume that he has
bly Septic should be a logical consequence of the knowledge an atypical infection, i.e., that there is a similar patient

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   559    pat2 without an infection. But pat being typically sep- Let C be a rough concept. We deﬁne a translation func-
                                                             t                                    t
    tic means that there must be a septic patient pat3 similar tion (·) : RDL → DL for concepts with A = A
                                                                                  t      ∼           t
    to pat,towhichpat2 is also similar because of transi- for atomic concepts A,and(C) = ∃r .C,and(C)  =
                                                        ∼                           ∼
    tivity. Then pat2 is similar to a septic patient, and must ∀r .C for C ∈RDLwhere r is a new role sym-
    belong to the upper approximation Septic.Bythishe bol, and where the translation function is inductively ap-
    must have all the typical properties of sepsis, including plied on subconcepts for all other constructs. This deﬁ-
    an infection, which is a contradiction.           nition can be extended to axioms (C   D)t =  Ct   
                                                        t                                            t
  •                                                   D   and TBoxes T  =  {ax1,...,axn} as follows: T =
    Possibly septic patients must have possible organ fail-  ∼        ∼         ∼    t       t
                                  T|=                 {refl(r ),sym(r  ),trans(r ),ax1,...,axn}.
    ure. Formally, we can conclude that Septic OF.                 DL
    This means that if we know that organ failure is part of For any DL with universal and existential quantiﬁca-
    the proper deﬁnition of sepsis, patients that are possibly tion, and symmetric, transitive and reﬂexive roles, there is no
    septic must at least have some condition that resembles increase in expressive power, i.e. Rough DL can be simulated
    organ failure. A similar result holds for the lower ap- in (almost) standard DL.
    proximation Septic and multiple organ failure.    Prop. 1 Let RDL  be the rough extension of a Description
                                                                                     t
    The following ﬁgure shows the taxonomy of axioms  Logic DL, T an RDL  TBox, and (·) the above given trans-
    based on the subsumption hierarchy w.r.t. the rough DL lation. An RDL concept C is satisﬁable in a rough interpre-
                                                                                              t
    semantics, where the relations with the boldly printed tation w.r.t. T iff C is DL-satisﬁable w.r.t. T . Formally:
                                                                     t     t
    concepts are implicitly derived.                  T|=  C = ⊥ iff T |= C = ⊥.
                   Inf                                The proof is by contradiction: assume that T|= C = ⊥ in
                                                                                                  I     t
                                    OF                Rough DL, but that there is a DL model I =(U, (·) ) of T
                      Inf                             such that (Ct)I = ∅. It follows from the construction of the
                                                                         t             ∼    I
                             ≡      OF                translation function (·) that I =(U, r , (·) ) is a model
                         Septic Bone                                  
                  MOF                                 for T ,andthatCI = ∅, which is a contradiction. The other
                                    OF
                     MOF Septic                       direction is similar.
                                                        As with usual DLs, one can reduce other reasoning ser-
                         Septic ≡Strict               vices, such as subsumption, to satisﬁability (and ﬁnally to
                                                      ABox consistency) in the presence of negation. Rough DL
    There are more examples of the intrinsic semantics of are no different. As the translation is linear, the complexity
    Rough DLs, which do not show in the previous ﬁgure. of reasoning in Rough DL is the same as of reasoning in its
                                                      carrier DL with quantiﬁers, symmetry and transitivity.
  • There are no deﬁnitely non-typical sepsis patients. Sup-
    pose that we deﬁne non-typical sepsis patients (NTS)as 4 Modeling Clinical trials with Rough DL
    those septic patients which are not deﬁnitely septic, i.e.,
    patients for which a similar patient exists which is not Clinical trials use entry criteria to select patients for the study.
    diagnosed as septic. Formally, we add an axiom NTS   The choice of these criteria is an important step in clinical
    Septic ¬Sepsis to T to get a new TBox T . Rough DL trial design: to be able to compare the results of the trial with
    semantics implies that there can be no deﬁnitely non- those of other trials and to assess the generalizability of the
    typical septic patients, i.e. that T  |= NTS = ⊥. results to daily clinical practice, the entry criteria have to be
  •                                                   compatible with deﬁnitions used in comparable trials and the
    Deﬁnitively septic or deﬁnitively not septic. Suppose agreed standard deﬁnitions of disease. This is obviously com-
    that for a new trial only patients are selected which are plicated when no crisp disease deﬁnition exists.
    deﬁnitively only diagnosed as either deﬁnitively septic,
                             ∀    (      ¬      )      In the case of severe sepsis, nine recent randomized clini-
    or deﬁnitively not septic, i.e., diag. Septic Septic . cal trials all used different entry criteria to select patients with
    Then, every patient who is diagnosed as possibly sep- severe sepsis [Peelen et al., 2005]. Seven out of the nine in-
    tic, ∃diag.Septic, must possibly have been diagnosed as vestigated trials used a structure similar to the original con-
    deﬁnitively septic (or ∃ diag.Septic).            sensus deﬁnition for severe sepsis: conﬁrmed infection plus
                                                      SIRS criteria plus organ failure. However, the number of re-
  • Finally, it is a simple consequence of the semantics that
                                                      quired SIRS criteria varied between the trials and some trials
    approximations of approximations are equivalent to the
                                                      used a slight modiﬁcation of the original SIRS criteria. Fur-
    approximations themselves, e.g., that Septic ≡ Septic.
                                                      thermore, the speciﬁcation of organ failure and the required
                                                      number of failing organ systems differed.
Reasoning with Rough DLs   One of the main advantages   One way to investigate the differences in entry criteria is to
of our newly introduced modeling mechanism is that reason- compare the deﬁnitions used in the trials with the approxima-
ing almost comes for free. As opposed to most other mech- tions of the medical condition. In our study, we use the con-
anisms to deal with vague knowledge in DL, reasoning with cepts Strict and Bone as approximations of sepsis and com-
approximations can be reduced to standard DL reasoning, by pare them to the entry criteria used in the nine trials. There
translating rough concepts into pure DL concepts with a spe- are four interesting situations. Are there patients that are
cial reﬂexive, transitive and symmetric role.           1. in one of the trials but not in Bone?

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   560 2. in all trials but not in Strict?                  per approximation and queries like Strict ¬trial-X for vi-
 3. in Bone but not in one of the trials?             olations of the lower approximation. In this way, we found
                                                      141 patients in PROWESS-sepsis and 6 patients in Lexipafant-
 4. in Strict but not in all trials?                  sepsis that do not fulﬁll the Bone criteria.
The existence of such patients would signal a discrepancy Finally, we can use purely terminological reasoning to
between the trial deﬁnitions and the interpretation of sepsis, analyse the trial criteria. For example, classifying all deﬁ-
pointing to potential ﬂaws in the set-up of the trials. With nitions brought to light that none of the concepts describing
RDL  a validation of these ﬂaws comes for free as it allows the trials is subsumed by Bone. This is an interesting result
the user to model their assumptions about the inherent vague- when compared to the data-based validation. Although for 7
ness of the deﬁnitions in a precise way. We will now describe of the trial deﬁnitions we did not ﬁnd any patient that violated
how we used RDL to perform such an investigation.     the upper approximation, such patients can exist in principle.
  In order to use RDL for patient selection we ﬁrst trans- Similarly, with respect to the lower approximation, we found
lated the deﬁnition for each trial into a DL formula. We did that only 4 of the trial deﬁnitions subsumed Strict.
thesamefortheBone  deﬁnition and the Strict deﬁnition of
sepsis, thus building a TBox with 11 deﬁnitions for septic pa- Advantage over standard DL Trial validation using a
tients. In addition we have translated a dataset from the Dutch standard DL infrastructure without the rough extension is al-
National Intensive Care Evaluation (NICE) registry contain- ready a signiﬁcant improvement over the current situation,
ing information on 71,929 patients into an ABox, using the in which patient selection is procedurally performed as a se-
terminology from the TBox. With the selection criteria for the quence of database queries. Using standard DL we can check
different trials and the translated data, we used a DL-reasoner violations, as discussed above, with A-box reasoning over the
(Racer [Haarslev and M¨oller, 2001]) to select the patients that data set and the terminology, or purely terminologically, as
would be eligible for the different trials (thereby mimicking suggested in the previous two paragraphs (which are not nec-
the patient selection process). The following table shows the essarily restricted to RDL).
numbers of patients of 4 of the 9 trials:               Modeling the deﬁnitions in RDL gives an additional im-
   Deﬁnition      # patients Deﬁnition   # patients   provement: the validation against the criteria is done auto-
   BONE-sepsis      5633    Lexipafant-sepsis 1607    matically. There is a way of achieving the same validation
   Strict            982    OPTIMIST-sepsis 5088      with pure DL, which we is much less elegant, though. Here,
   UnionOfTrials    6203    PROWESS-sepsis  6201
   IntersectionOfTrials 534 2SPLA2I-sepsis  4002      one would sequentially check the validation criteria 1 to 4
                                                      introduced above, i.e. by checking satisﬁability of the con-
  To answer the aforementioned questions, we deﬁne    cept ¬Bone  trial-X for all trials. However, this amounts to
      ≡                ≡             RDL
Sepsis  Bone and Sepsis   Strict in our    terminol-  a procedural veriﬁcation of the assumptions about the vague
ogy, as those are the most widely accepted upper and lower deﬁnitions about Sepsis, which is error-prone, and tedious.
approximations of Sepsis. Additionally, we can model the re- Moreover, our RDL model excludes the invalid deﬁnitions
lation of the trials to the concept Sepsis explicitly. Although automatically. For example, the set of patients in Lexipafant-
the 9 different trials widely cover different ways of describ- sepsis ¬Bone is empty per deﬁnition. To achieve the same
ing possibly septic patients, it might be conceivable that there result in a pure DL TBox one has to model the relation be-
are patients outside the scope of all of these trials. However, tween trials and Bone explicitly, e.g. by asserting UnionOf-
one could assume that the 9 trials cover the most typical of Trials ≡ Bone. But this is an incorrect oversimpliﬁcation of
                                RDL
all possible sepsis patients. Because provides formal the relation between the trials and the approximation of Sepsis
representations for the intuitions ‘most typical’ and ‘all possi- as opposed to the much more accurate RDL formalisation.
ble’, we can model this assumption in a formal way. Namely,
the union of all trials is equivalent to the lower approximation
(i.e. the typical cases) of the upper approximation (i.e. all pos- 5 Related and future work
sible cases) of Sepsis. Similarly, we can model the assump- The work described in this paper covers a wide variety of
tion that the intersection of all trials covers the most typical topics that have been studied extensively in the literature.
patients that are deﬁnitively septic. This is done by deﬁning This means that there are a plethora of similar approaches,
the intersection of all trial concepts to be a lower approxima- to which we will brieﬂy refer.
tion (i.e. the most typical cases) of the lower approximation
                                                        • Rough DL versus Modal DL. From a technical perspec-
(i.e. the deﬁnitively septic patients) of the concept Sepsis.
                                                          tive, Rough DL is a fusion of DL with modal S5.1 Most
  Given our experimental setup it is easy to show that there
                                                          attempts to introduce modal operators into DL focus on
are serious ﬂaws in the trial selection. It is a consequence of
                                                          unions or produces, which usually requires more com-
the semantics of RDL that an approximation itself can not be
                                                          plex, mostly Kripke-based, semantics (e.g., [Baader and
approximated. This implies that Bone ≡ UnionOfTrials and
                                                          Laux, 1995]) and new decision procedures. Our modali-
Strict ≡ IntersectionOfTrials. This resulted in inconsistency
                                                          ties range over the domain itself rather than over varying
of the deﬁnitions with respect to the trial data.
  Using our infrastructure one can now perform a more de- 1Fusion means, that the different operators of the two languages
tailed data-based validation to detect the source of the logi- apply on different sets of roles, and don’t interfere [Baader et al.,
cal contradiction. For example, we queried for patients with 2002]. This makes fusions behave better than their more complex
queries like ¬Bone  trial-X to look for violations of the up- relatives unions or products [Gabbay et al., 2003].

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   561