             Privacy and Artificial Agents, or, Is Google Reading My Email?

                 Samir Chopra                                        Laurence White
Department of Computer and Information Science                       Rue Franklin 157
                Brooklyn College                                     Brussels B-1000
              Brooklyn, NY 11210                                         Belgium
         schopra@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu                         laurencefwhite@gmail.com

                     Abstract                         landscape however: the collection and use of information by
                                                      programs such as Google’s AdSense scanning technology,
We investigate legal and philosophical notions of privacy in
                                                      which when applied to Google’s Gmail system leads to the
the context of artificial agents. Our analysis utilizes a nor-
                                                      generation of advertisements (ads) that are relevant to iden-
mative account of privacy that defends its value and the tified keywords in message bodies1. Google conducts auc-
extent to which it should be protected: privacy is treated as
                                                      tions of each keyword, so that the highest bidders have the
an interest with moral value, to supplement the legal claim
                                                      right to have their ads linked to that keyword.
that privacy is a legal right worthy of protection by society
                                                        Google has sought to assuage concerns over this putative
and the law. We argue that the fact that the only entity to
                                                      violation of privacy by pointing to the non-involvement of
access my personal data (such as email) is an artificial agent
                                                      humans in the process. In the coming decades, we may ex-
is irrelevant to whether a breach of privacy has occurred. pect increasing use of this technology and artificial agents,
What is relevant are the capacities of the agent: what the
                                                      such as data-miners and bots, which scan online databases
agent is both able and empowered to do with that informa-
                                                      for profiling purposes. And we may see an increasing usage
tion. We show how concepts of legal agency and attribution
                                                      of the so-called Google defense: if humans do not read your
of knowledge gained by agents to their principals are crucial
                                                      private communications, your privacy has not been violated.
to understanding whether a violation of privacy has oc-
                                                      This raises a question for concerned citizens and designers
curred when artificial agents access users’ personal data. As of autonomous artificial agents: to what extent should these
natural language processing and semantic extraction used in
                                                      agents have access to personal information? Does it matter
artificial agents become increasingly sophisticated, so the
                                                      that a human is not reading my email? Should it concern us
corporations that deploy those agents will be more likely to
                                                      that information we would not entrust to a human willingly,
be attributed with knowledge of their users’ personal infor-
                                                      citing privacy concerns, is collected, stored and analyzed by
mation, thus triggering significant potential legal liabilities.
                                                      ‘a mere program’? We will argue that it should; it is the
                                                      technical capacities of this program that are relevant.
                                                        The outline of this paper is as follows: in Section 2, we
1   Introduction                                      argue for privacy as a moral value; in Section 3 we intro-
Privacy’s philosophical history dates back to Aristotle’s duce the general theory of artificial agents and attribution of
famous distinction between the public sphere of political knowledge to their principals; in Section 4 we address
activity and the private sphere of domestic life. Philosophi- whether Google is ‘reading my mail’, and in Section 5 we
cal debates since then have distinguished between descrip- inquire into the legal implications for Google if that is the
tive (what is worthy of being kept private) and prescriptive case. Our conclusions are set out in Section 6.
(what is of normative value in privacy) accounts of privacy.
Of particular interest in this rich discussion [Paul et. al 2 The Value of Privacy
2000; Schoeman, 1984; Agre & Rotenberg, 1997] is the
                                                      In their seminal 1890 paper “The Right to Privacy”, Samuel
normative concept of informational privacy. This notion is
                                                      Warren and Louis Brandeis argued that “political, social,
increasingly threatened by the colossal amounts of personal
                                                      and economic changes” and “the right to be let alone” en-
information collected as individuals participate in online tailed that the law offer privacy protection to individuals.
activities that identify them, and stored in commercial on-
                                                      Responding to technological changes in the media, such as
line databases whose access policies may not be sufficiently
                                                      the advent of photography, Warren and Brandeis noted the
respectful of individual privacy, or in insecure databases
                                                      invasion of privacy brought about by release of details per-
maintained by federal, state, and local governments
                                                      taining to a person’s private life. They argued that a general
[Garfinkel, 2004].
  Concerns over the violation of privacy by technological
advances are not new; the first expression of concern in this 1 AdSense technology is described in US Patent Applications
regard dates back to 1890. There is a new wrinkle in the 20040059712, 20040093327 and 20040167928.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1245right to privacy would protect the extent to which one’s in- Theorizing since then has reflected this concern with in-
nermost mental life could be shared with others, afford formational privacy5 and continues to link the notion of per-
“peace of mind”, and be grounded in a general right of im- sonal autonomy to it. [Westin, 1967] describes privacy as
munity of the person, “the right to one’s personality” (inter- the ability to determine for ourselves when, how, and to
pretable as protection of an individual’s autonomy). While what extent information about us is communicated to others;
existent US law  offered protection—via the Fourth    while [Parent, 1983] describes privacy as, “the condition of
Amendment—for homes and their interiors against searches, not having undocumented personal information known or
they argued that new, potentially intrusive, technology made possessed by others”. Common to these analyses is the no-
it necessary to formalize this protection under the rubric of tion of the loss of autonomy when the agents’ privacy is
privacy.                                              breached; each problematic appropriation of an agent’s per-
  This formulation of the right to privacy is known as sonal information takes place without his or her consent.
“control over information about oneself”; it says nothing Westin’s analysis raises the issue of autonomous determi-
about the identity of the agent gaining control over informa- nation of the release of information, while Parent notes that
tion. Thus, photographs taken by an automated camera  information may only be released when the individual has
mounted outside someone’s home entail a loss of privacy itself documented it publicly. These analyses suggest a
even if the photographs had not yet been viewed by humans: moral wrong occurs with the uncontrolled, non-autonomous
the person inside would have had no control over the release release of information pertaining to an individual.
of this information. The ‘information leakage’ would be More recently, [Lessig, 2000] argues that the right to pri-
enough violation of privacy; the violation would take place vacy provides a measure of dignity, and tests our intuitions
at the moment the photograph was taken, not when they with a hypothetical situation. The US National Security
were viewed. For Warren and Brandeis, the right to privacy Agency (NSA) releases a worm over the Internet in an effort
is a moral value worthy of protection under law, with no to try and find a file missing from their servers. This pro-
concessions made to contingent violations.            gram enters every US resident’s computer and scans its
  To echo Warren and Brandeis’ concerns, three landmark hard disk; if it finds the file, it sends a report to the NSA; if
cases established that privacy needed protection from tech- not, it moves on. The program is smart enough to only use
nological invasions. In the first electronic surveillance case, idle CPU cycles on each machine. No intrusion then, that
Olmstead v. United States (1928)2, the US Supreme Court bothered me, took place; nothing was disturbed; the contents
ruled that warrants were not necessary in order for federal of my hard disk were not reported to the government (even
agents to carry out phone-taps. The Court ruled that the my illegal collection of copyrighted music). An artificial,
Fourth Amendment only protected against “physical inva- not human, agent went through my files (only their names,
sions” by law enforcement officers. Dissenting from the not their contents); no human eyes have seen my data; yet
majority, Justice Brandeis argued for a reconfigured notion our intuitions pertaining to our sense of dignity and personal
of privacy to accommodate new technology. In 1967, the autonomy are offended, for we were not asked for permis-
Supreme Court overruled this decision in deciding Katz v. sion, our belongings were searched, and we were held po-
United States3, judging that tapping phone conversations in tentially suspect until searched. Privacy law finds its foun-
a public phone booth was a violation of the Fourth Amend- dations in the intuition that we experience moral injury in
ment. The court ruled that there is a “reasonable expectation situations like those in Lessig’s example.
of privacy” in public spaces: “[T]he Fourth Amendment   Claims for full-blown rights to privacy then, regardless of
protects people, not places. [What a person] seeks to pre- the nature of the agent engaged in the violation, can be un-
serve as private, even in an area accessible to the public, derstood as carrying normative weight: dignity is a moral
may be constitutionally protected.” Finally, in 1995, a US good, as is individual autonomy. Understanding informa-
Military Court, citing the Katz decision, ruled that an indi- tional privacy as an expression of autonomy [Michelfelder,
vidual has a reasonable expectation of privacy in his private 2001; Scanlan, 2001; Corlett, 2002], and dignity, in addition
e-mail, even if stored and sent using an online service4. The to viewing it as a constitutional limitation on governmental
right to informational privacy then, has been understood as or corporate power, enables an understanding of it as a
protecting not just against surveillance, monitoring and war- moral good, worthy of protection from the assaults of the
rantless searches, but also against appropriation and misuses legal and penal systems, and from changes in technological
of one’s communications. Again, these rulings did not make capacities that increase the potential for the invasive
their judgments contingent upon the nature of the agent that searches of, and the increasing access to, our personal in-
violates a citizen’s right to privacy.                formation that artificial agents will come to have. As we
                                                      will see, when an artificial agent and its principal can be
                                                      said to ‘know’ something is crucial in determining whether
                                                      a breach of privacy has occurred on its accessing our data.
   2 277 U.S. 438; 48 S. Ct. 564; 72 L. Ed. 944
   3 389 U.S. 347; 88 S. Ct. 507; 19 L. Ed. 2d 576
   4 U.S. v. Maxwell, 42 M.J. 568 (USAF Crim.App. 1995), rev'd
in part, 45 M.J. 406 (1996). However the mainstream academic
assumption is that the Fourth Amendment does not protect email 5 See discussions concerning medical data e.g., [Tavani, 2004;
stored by third parties see, e.g., [Schwartz et al, 2005] at p. 602. Lankshear & Mason 2001].


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  12463   Attribution of Knowledge held by Agents           an agent to a corporate principal even when the agent is
                                                      under an obligation not to convey the knowledge to other
[Chopra & White 2004, 2005] argued for a development of agents of the corporate principal.6
legal doctrine, whereby artificial agents are assimilated to
human agents for the purposes of entering into contracts and 4 Is Google Reading My Email?
for the purposes of accumulating knowledge that could le-
gally be attributed (or ‘imputed’) to their principals (the The launch of Gmail was attended by considerable disquiet
legal persons, human or corporate, on whose behalf they among commentators to the effect that Google’s screening
act). Artificial agents, on this analysis, would be akin to methodology amounted to a breach of the user’s privacy.
slaves under Roman law, not legal persons in their own One response was that users are free to give up their own
right, but with power to enter into binding arrangements, privacy, and are asked to do so on a regular basis, in ex-
and receive information, on behalf of their owners, in cir- change for receiving certain services. However, Google’s
cumstances where their owners would be bound by those response was instructive: there was no issue of a breach of
arrangements or that knowledge.                       privacy because humans were not reading the users’ mail:7
  [Chopra & White, 2005] showed that the law of imputed
knowledge, whereby the knowledge of a (human or corpo-  1. Is Google reading my email?
rate) agent gained within the scope of the agent’s employ- No. Google scans the text of Gmail messages in order to filter spam
ment is imputed to its principal, does not rest on a presump- and detect viruses, just as all major webmail services do. Google…uses
tion that the agent has carried out its duty to inform its prin- this scanning technology to deliver targeted text ads and other related
cipal. Rather, they postulate that it is the ability of the agent information. This is completely automated and involves no humans.
to convey the requisite information to the principal—that
knowledge is ready to hand—that is crucial. They further However, thirty-one worldwide privacy bodies were quick
argue that artificial agents, just like human ones, should be to point out:8
considered to be repositories of legally relevant knowledge
on behalf of their principals, a compelling approach when … a computer system, with its greater storage, memory, and associative
most information held by corporations is in the form of ability than a human’s, could be just as invasive as a human listening to
electronic records. They suggest a distinction between elec- the communications, if not more so.
tronic records, which are ready-to-hand and should be con-
sidered to be part of the knowledge of the corporation We agree with the privacy bodies that the mere fact that
whether or not any human agent knows their contents, and humans are not involved is not relevant to either the legal or
paper records which the corporation controlling them cannot moral dimensions of Google’s behavior. However, the lim-
be presumed to know the contents of, in the absence of a ited functionality of the software agents used to process the
human or artificial agent that does. Attribution then, does mail, and the limits on what is done with the information
not depend on a notional passing of knowledge up the man- extracted, gives the user sufficient comfort that intimate
agement hierarchy; rather, attribution of knowledge held by details are not available for others to peruse. For many us-
an agent to the principal depends on the functions granted ers, including these authors, the trade-offs are worthwhile.
to the agent, i.e., the existence and scope of the agency re- Significantly, Google does not itself place complete faith
lationship.                                           in the automated nature of the scanning process:9
  What of ‘horizontal’ information barriers, which prevent
management from gaining access to the knowledge held by All major email services…automatically scan email content for the
agents lower down the corporate hierarchy? These issues are benefit of users. When email messages are fully protected from un-
important in medical situations, where patient confidential- wanted disclosure, the automatic scanning of email does not amount to
ity means that management and others not directly con-  a violation of privacy. [emphasis added]… [D]elivering information
cerned with the patient’s clinical care may have no right to gathered through email scanning to a third party would be a violation of
particular patients’ records. Yet the law will attribute doc- privacy. Google does not do this. Neither email content nor any personal
tors’ knowledge to an employing hospital or practice, for information is ever shared with other parties...
instance in the context of a medical negligence case. The
fact that knowledge is not ready-to-hand to the management Google then, implicitly acknowledges that, however auto-
does not mean that it is not counted as the corporation’s mated the process, if details were forwarded on to third par-
knowledge for legal purposes.                         ties, a violation of privacy would occur. Thus, Google rec-
  Furthermore, the corporation itself legally is attributed ognizes that the automated nature of the process, while of
with that knowledge. If, for example, the employer made a comfort to users who are grateful their personal messages
misleading public statement about the number of patients it are not being read by human strangers, is not a defense to
had treated who had had a certain medical condition, it
could not plead in its defense its lack of knowledge of its 6
                                                           In this respect, corporate principals may be different than
patients’ medical conditions. The proper response would be other kinds of principal. See [Langevoort, 2003]
for the employer to establish a system whereby patient sta- 7 http://mail.google.com/mail/help/about_privacy.html
tistics—properly anonymized—would be collected and re-   8 http://www.privacyrights.org/ar/GmailLetter.htm
ported accurately. Hence, knowledge can be attributed from 9 http://mail.google.com/mail/help/more.html


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1247the charge of a violation of privacy. Their defense is that no deployed. Its system might categorize mail according to
onward disclosure takes place. However, the fact that the what the mail was about, and which emotion concerning the
software agents cannot do anything more with the informa- subject matter of the email was being expressed. Advertisers
tion extracted than generate advertisements to place along- might find this useful. More invasively, Google might want
side those mails is not, by itself, sufficient to dispel the legal to build a profile of users’ tastes, habits and characteristics
and ethical dilemmas at play.                         (such as sex, race, religion, income); advertisers would find
  Right now, Google’s system is able to identify users who that kind of information interesting too. When that technol-
have an interest—innocent or otherwise—in terrorism, Na- ogy eventuates, it would be natural to say that Google is
zism or child pornography. Many people interested in these ‘reading’ my mail, just as we speak of computers ‘knowing’
topics would have innocent motives, whether they are aca- that summer time has started. Intentional attributions in the
demics, law enforcement officials or curious citizens. But a former case are even more plausible than the latter.
small but relatively high percentage (compared with the
total user group) would have a less innocent interest. Infor- 5 Legal Implications for Google
mation of this type is a valuable commodity in a world
gripped by fears of terrorism and Internet pedophilia. Goo- Even if Google could then be said to be ‘reading’ its users’
gle was recently ordered by the US District Court to hand mail in a loose sense, it would not attain the level of seman-
over anonymized information about URLs returned by user tic understanding of the mail that a human would. Never-
searches,10 and it and other online companies have been theless, the fact that Google has some (if not complete)
asked by the US Justice Department to retain records of knowledge of the contents of its users’ emails has potential
users’ search queries for as long as two years.11     legal implications, which need to be kept in mind by de-
  If Google were to find itself the subject of a valid sub- signers of artificial agents.
poena relating to email content, and the court were to find Firstly, ‘reading’ its users’ mail could have legal implica-
                                                      tions for Google under a US and a Californian statute relat-
the request not over-broad, it would be of no comfort to                                  13
users that no human had read their mail. Google notes that it ing to wiretapping. The US Wiretap Act criminalizes a
is subject to authorized requests for information:12  person who “intentionally intercepts” any “electronic com-
                                                      munication”, subject to certain exceptions14, and who sub-
  Many of the concerns around Gmail have centered on the use of auto- sequently uses or discloses the contents of the electronic
                                                      communication, having reason to know that the information
  matic scanning technology to deliver relevant ads and related informa-                 15
  tion….These concerns are misdirected. Automatic scanning technology was obtained in violation of the provision . It also provides
  alone does not make it any easier for a government to obtain or access for civil damages for a person whose electronic communi-
                                                      cation is intercepted, disclosed, or intentionally used in vio-
  your…private information. …Google does…comply with…search war-       16
  rants, court orders, or subpoenas seeking account information. These lation of the chapter.
  same processes apply to all law-abiding companies….[T]he primary It has been suggested [Miller, 2005] that Google’s de-
  protections you have against intrusions by the government are the laws ployment of the AdSense technology in its Gmail service
  that apply to where you live. [Emphasis added]      could violate the Wiretap Act as the scanning of each email
                                                      on its first opening would constitute an ‘interception’ for the
                                                                       17
Google’s assertion emphasized above is questionable. While purposes of the Act. It could also be argued that its use of
the huge Gmail databases could be queried under a sub- the contents of an email by the AdSense program would be
poena using custom-built filters to track down ‘bad guys’, a use by a person having reason to know that the informa-
Gmail’s development work is self-evidently eliminating the tion was obtained in violation of the provision, contrary to
need to custom-build equivalent filters, and accelerating the the statute.
development of more sophisticated filters that can build on However, there is a specific exception in the Wiretap Act
                                                      where “one of the parties to the communication has given
their functionality.                                                                 18
  So, Is Google reading my mail? At present, we conclude prior consent to such interception”. Google could argue
not: AdSense software does not currently appear to possess that it is protected by the consent that its users give to its
the semantic analysis capacity that we could call ‘reading’. terms of use. But, as [Miller, 2005] points out, Google’s
We would argue it knows what we are talking about and in terms of use are made known after the user has signed up to
some circumstances that may be compromising enough. But the Google account, and its privacy policies, which can be
it does not, crucially, appear to know what we are saying accessed before registration, are not specific on the issue.
and what emotions we are expressing about what we are So, arguably, Google is intercepting its users’ emails with-
talking about.                                        out their consent. Nevertheless, it seems that its users are
  Google could however, continue to refine its software’s
sophistication, so that the semantic content of the mails be- 13 18 USC Chapter 119—Wire And Electronic Communica-
ing scanned becomes increasingly known to the software tions Interception And Interception Of Oral Communications
                                                         14 18 USC § 2511(1)(a)
                                                         15 18 USC § 2511(1)(c) and (d)
   10 United States v Google, Inc., 234 F.R.D. 674.      16 18 USC § 2520(a)
   11 http://tinyurl.com/f5u5q                           17 United States v Councilman (2005) 418 F.3d 67.
   12 Google Inc., ‘More on Gmail and privacy’, note 9, op. cit. 18 18 USC § 2520(2)(d)


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1248content to trade-off the loss of privacy suffered for the con- arguing that Google was in breach of §631(a).22 We agree
venience of a capacious, free online email storage system. with the EPIC that Google should be treated as ‘learning the
Implicit consent or consent by conduct might well be found contents’ of the mails in the Gmail system and therefore in
by a court that had to decide the issue. Were the issue to prima facie violation of the statute. Further, it appears to be
become a critical one Google could review its registration using information so obtained, again in prima facie viola-
process to ensure adequate consent was obtained.      tion of the statute. If the AdSense technology is developed
  One privacy interest that is not protected by this conclu- further, Google may violate the prohibition against ‘reading’
sion, however, is that of the sender of email to a Gmail ac- its users’ mail. The provision raises a host of legal issues
count. Unless it is assumed that all senders are aware of the that would need to be demonstrated in practice in order to
details of Google’s AdSense software, it seems there would prove a violation on the part of Google. For example,
be no protection for the sender of an email to a Gmail ac- whether the email was in ‘transit’ for the purposes of the
count from having her mail ‘read’ by Google.          provision, and whether senders had consented to the appli-
  Once opened, email retained on the Gmail server may19 cation of AdSense technology. In the event, the Californian
be subject to a separate body of law relating to unauthorized Attorney-General failed to give any definitive response to
access to stored electronic communications in the facilities the allegations therein.23
of an electronic communications service provider.20 [Miller, Leaving aside questions of liability under these particular
2005] argues that Google would be in danger of violating statutes, there is the issue of potential liability for knowledge
this rule. However, even if this body of law is applicable, that Google might gain from users' mail. Let us suppose that
there are defenses that would be potentially applicable to Google’s AdSense semantic extraction technology contin-
Google where the conduct complained of is authorized by: ued to be developed. Suppose the system becomes aware,
  • ‘the person or entity providing a[n] … electronic com- not only of what my email is about, what emotion or attitude
     munications service’; or                         is being expressed, but starts to model in detail what is be-
                                                      ing said. Such a system could become a kind of ‘personal
  •
    ‘a user of that service with respect to a communication assistant’, managing my diary and automatically answering
                           21
     of or intended for that user’ .                  some emails. In such a situation we would find it com-
  While [Miller, 2005] argues that the first of these excep- pletely natural to say the system was ‘reading’ my mail. But
tions is too broad, it would seem to be squarely applicable the knowledge gained by such a system might lead Google
on the law as it stands. Furthermore, Google could argue to gain ‘unwanted’ knowledge.
that it has the authorization of its users to engage in scan- Suppose, for example, that terrorists detonate a weapon of
ning. On this point, the argument about consent set out mass destruction in a major city causing great loss of life,
above would be equally applicable.                    that the terrorists used Gmail to plot the attack, and the ‘per-
  California Penal Code § 631 establishes expansive pro- sonal assistant’ functionality was switched on. Let us also
tections for “communications”, which includes e-mail mes- suppose (contrary to current fact) that Google was subject to
sages. This provision establishes a criminal offence where a law which required all persons (including companies) to
any person:                                           report knowledge of intended terrorism to the authorities.
                                                      (In some jurisdictions, a person who merely knows of an
  …willfully and without the consent of all parties to the communication, intended act of treason is required to inform the authorities
  or in any unauthorized manner, reads, or attempts to read, or to learn and commits a crime if she fails to do so; in the US, an ad-
                                                                                              24
  the contents or meaning of any message, report, or communication ditional act of concealment is currently required. )
  while the same is in transit or passing over any wire, line, or cable, or is In this scenario, on the legal analysis above, Google
  being sent from, or received at any place within this state; or who uses, could be attributed with knowledge gained by its agent that
  or attempts to use, in any manner, or for any purpose, or to communi- a terrorist plot had been planned: a failure to warn the
  cate in any way, any information so obtained, … [emphasis added] authorities of such a plot could, we maintain, be cause for
                                                      prosecution of Google itself. Furthermore, if Google failed
Central to any argument that Google is in violation of the to issue a warning about a planned terrorist attack, the firm
provision is the proposition that Google is ‘reading or might even be sued in a civil action by the families of the
learning the contents or meaning of any message’ within dead, by injured survivors and by owners of damaged prop-
Gmail.                                                erty, for breach of its statutory duty to warn the authorities.
  On 3rd May 2004, the Electronic Privacy Information   Thus, if firms such as Google wish to ‘read’ users’ mail,
Centre (EPIC) wrote—on behalf of two other privacy orga- they would (absent shield laws such as are put in place for
nizations and itself—to California Attorney General Lokyer ‘common carriers’) need to establish systems whereby sus-
                                                      picious mails are routinely alerted to the police and other
                                                      authorities. As in the example of medically confidential
   19 There is a body of case law that holds that only an Internet
service provider is capable of the provision of an ‘electronic com-
munication service’ [Goldberg, 2005]. If true, webmail services 22 See http://www.epic.org/privacy/gmail/agltr5.3.04.html.
would not qualify, and the prohibition would not apply.  23 See http://www.epic.org/privacy/gmail/caagack.pdf
   20 18 USC § 2701 et seq.                              24 Criminal Code (Australia) s. 9A(2)(b); this is a crime at
   21 18 USC § 2701(c)(1) and (2)                     common law in the UK. Compare 18 USC § 2382.


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1249