                     Truthful Risk-Managed Combinatorial Auctions

                                 Alan Holland   and  Barry O’Sullivan
                                  Cork Constraint Computation Centre
                                    University College Cork, Ireland
                            {a.holland|b.osullivan}@4c.ucc.ie


                    Abstract                          be risk-managed. It is possible to incentivize truthful bid-
                                                      ding in auctions by carefully designing the allocation and
    Given a winning-bid withdrawal in a combinato-    payment mechanism so that they satisfy certain properties.
    rial auction, ﬁnding an alternative repair solution The Revelation Principle implies that in a wide variety of
    of adequate revenue without causing undue distur- settings, only “truthful revelation mechanisms” in which
    bance to the remaining winning bids in the orig-  agents truthfully announce their valuations need to be con-
    inal solution may be difﬁcult or even impossi-    sidered when the maximization of a social objective is re-
    ble. This “bid-takers exposure problem” may be    quired. In other words, there are no manipulable mecha-
    preemptively addressed by ﬁnding a solution that  nisms in which agents strategically report their types that
    is robust to winning-bid withdrawal. We intro-    achieve superior outcomes than any non-manipulable mech-
    duce the concept of monotonicity-in-expectation.  anism. This principle allows us to focus our attention on
    We provide impossibility results concerning truth- truthful mechanisms only. There has been considerable re-
    ful mechanisms for robust solutions with bounded  search effort in this ﬁeld by the computer science community
    social-welfare losses in which the bid-taker cannot in recent years because of the computational challenges posed
    rescind items from winning bidders to repair a solu- by incentive compatibility [Nisan and Ronen, 2001; 2000;
    tion. We also show that this result extends to com- Lehmann et al., 2002].
    binatorial auctions that include a form of leveled- The contributions of this paper are twofold. Firstly, we
    commitment contract. However, we present a pos-   present impossibility results related to the non-existence of
    itive result regarding truthfulness for combinato- mechanisms to incentivize truthful bidding when robust al-
    rial auctions in a restricted setting that comprises a locations are required in a combinatorial auction. These re-
    computationally efﬁcient allocation algorithm that sults hold for both irrevocable commitments and a form of
    seeks to maximize expected social welfare.        leveled commitment contract between the bid-taker and bid-
                                                      ders. Secondly, we propose an alternative approach to man-
                                                      aging risk in combinatorial auctions in which we maximize
1  Introduction                                       expected social welfare. We present a positive result regard-
A combinatorial auction (CA) provides an efﬁcient means ing truthfulness for CAs in a restricted setting that features a
of allocating multiple distinguishable items amongst bidders computationally efﬁcient allocation algorithm.
whose perceived valuations for combinations of items differ.
Such auctions are gaining in popularity and there is a prolif- 2 Preliminaries
eration in their usage across a variety of industries. Revenue
is the most obvious optimization criterion for such auctions, Combinatorial auctions involve a single bid-taker allocating
but another desirable attribute is solution robustness [Holland multiple distinguishable items amongst a set of bidders. The
                                                                        m             M    { ,...,m}
and O’Sullivan, 2005a]. A robust solution to a CA is one bid-taker has a set of items for sale, = 1  ,and
                                                                               B   {B  ,...,B }
that can withstand winning-bid withdrawal (a break)bymak- bidders submit a set of bids, = 1  n .Abidisa
                                                           B    b ,S       S  ⊆  M
ing changes easily to form a repair solution of adequate rev- tuple j = j j where j  is a subset of the items
                                                                 b  ≥
enue. A brittle solution is one in which an unacceptable loss for sale and j 0 is a bid amount. The winner determi-
in revenue is unavoidable if a winning bid is withdrawn. Ro- nation problem (WDP) for a CA is to label all bids as either
bustness is a preventative measure that protects against future winning or losing so as to maximize the revenue from win-
uncertainty by trading-off revenue for solution stability. ning bids without allocating any item to more than one bid,
  The weighted super solutions (WSS) framework has been and is formulated as follows:
proposed as a means of ﬁnding such solutions [Holland and
O’Sullivan, 2005a]. A natural question that arises from    n          
that work is whether it is possible to design truthful mech- max bjxj s.t. xj ≤ 1, ∀i ∈{1 ...m},xj ∈{0, 1}.

anisms for combinatorial auctions whose social welfare can j=1        j|i∈Sj

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1315  This problem is NP-complete [Rothkopf et al., 1998] repair revenue of 60, which is below our threshold, should
and inapproximable [Sandholm et al., 2005], and is other- either of the winning bids be withdrawn.
wise known as the Weighted Set Packing Problem. The for- Most prior literature on the subject of combinatorial auc-
mulation above assumes the notion of free disposal.This tions assumes that the probability of a winning bid withdraw-
means that the optimal solution need not necessarily sell all ing from the auction is zero. Therefore, we contend that
of the items. If the auction rules stipulate that all items relaxing this assumption so that the conditional probability
must be sold, the problem becomes a Set Partition Prob- of withdrawal in a repair solution is negligible, given that a
lem. The WDP has been extensively studied in recent years. withdrawal has already occurred in the initial allocation, is
The fastest search algorithms that ﬁnd optimal solutions (e.g. a reasonable assumption. We can choose α to establish an
CABOB   [Sandholm et al., 2005]) can, in practice, solve upper bound on the number of likely withdrawals that re-
very large problems involving thousands of bids very quickly. quire repairs. A constraint programming approach, called
Given the possibility of a winning bid being withdrawn by the weighted super solutions framework, for ﬁnding such ro-
the associated bidder before the transaction has been com- bust solutions has been developed [Holland and O’Sullivan,
pleted, large losses in revenue are possible [Holland, 2005; 2005a; 2005b]. This framework enables us to ﬁnd such so-
Holland and O’Sullivan, 2005a]. Therefore, it is often impor- lutions in a computationally feasible manner by facilitating
tant to preempt bid withdrawal by ﬁnding a robust solution. satisﬁability tests for repair solutions.
                                                        The design of truthful mechanisms for a computation-
DEFINITION  1 (Robust Solution for a CA) A robust solu- ally hard problem such as winner determination in a CA is
tion for a combinatorial auction is one in which any subset made difﬁcult by the fact that efﬁciently computable heuris-
of successful bids whose probability of withdrawal is at least tics cannot be employed whilst still maintaining their non-
α
  can be repaired by reallocating items at a cost of at most manipulability characteristics. For example, the class of
β
  amongst other bidders, in order to form a repair solution Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanisms guarantee that
                              γ
whose revenue is at least a fraction, , of optimal revenue. each bidder’s dominant strategy is to tell the truth, but it re-
                                                      quires solving q +1optimization problems, where the over-
DEFINITION  2 (1-robust Solution for a CA) A 1-robust                           q
solution for a combinatorial auction is one in which any sin- all optimal solutions involves winning bidders. However,
                                                                                               [
gle bid whose probability of withdrawal is at least α can be non-optimal solutions compromise truthfulness Nisan and
                                                                 ]
repaired by reallocating items at a cost of at most β amongst Ronen, 2001 . In this classic setting a necessary condition
other bidders, in order to form a repair solution whose for any truthful mechanism is that its allocation scheme be
revenue is at least a fraction, γ, of optimal revenue [Holland, monotone.
2005]. (The deﬁnition of a k-robust solution follows in an DEFINITION 3 (Monotone allocation algorithm) An allo-
obvious manner.)                                      cation algorithm is monotone iff whenever a bid vj wins, an
                                                                         
                                                      increase in the bid to vj still wins, assuming all other bids are
  A solution is considered robust if and only if the revenue of ﬁxed.
a repair solution is is guaranteed to be at least γ times the op-
timum for every likely set of winning-bid withdrawals, whose 3 Non-monotonicity Results
probability of failure is greater than or equal to α. The max-
imum cost of repair (β), in the case of CAs, reﬂects the size In the case of truthful auctions, however, the payments do
of any fund for compensatory payments paid to/from the bid- not generally equal the declared valuations. For this reason,
taker following the reassignment of items in order to ﬁnd a risk management for such auctions involves managing po-
repair solution with satisfactory revenue. If item revocation tential losses in social welfare rather than revenue. Hence-
from bidders by the bid-taker is forbidden, then β =0and forth, when we refer to solution robustness involving truth-
compensatory payments to bidders are effectively ∞. Later, ful bidding we are referring to robustness in terms of social
we shall consider mutual bid bonds in which a reneging bid- welfare. Given exogenous probabilities of failure, we adopt
der forfeits a bond that is used by the bid-taker to fund com- a concept of monotonicity-in-expectation to analyze alloca-
pensation to other non-reneging winning bidders when revok- tions that support contingency planning. Clearly, in our set-
ing items to form an alternative repair solution [Holland and ting a necessary condition for any truthful mechanism is that
O’Sullivan, 2005a].                                   its allocation scheme be monotone-in-expectation.
  As an  example, consider three bids for two items   DEFINITION  4 (Monotone-in-expectation allocation algorithm)
100, {A, B}, 60, {A} and 60, {B}. The independent An allocation algorithm is monotone-in-expectation if when-
probabilities of each bid being withdrawn if successful are ever a bid vj wins with exogenous probability p, an increase
            α     .   β         γ     .                           
0.1. If we set =005,    =0and     =075,sothatall      in the bid to vj means that it wins with at least probability p,
bids are brittle, no non-reneging winning bidder can have an assuming all other bids are ﬁxed.
item revoked, and we wish to ensure that a repair solution ex-
ists with a minimum revenue of 0.75 × 120.Then1, 0, 0 3.1 Robust-Allocation Algorithms
is the optimal 1-robust solution1 because it can be repaired We show that an increase in a bid amount may provide a re-
to form 0, 1, 1, should the winning bid be withdrawn. Note pair solution for a previously irreparable bid. This enlarges
that 0, 1, 1 is not a robust solution because it results in a the set of bids that may be considered when determining an
                                                      optimal robust solution. We shall later see how this can occur
  1The notation 1, 0, 0 means that only the ﬁrst bids wins. in practice in Example 1. Lemma 1 provides an impossibility

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1316result regarding the monotonicity-in-expectation of robust- THEOREM 1 A normalized2 truthful mechanism is impossi-
allocation algorithms when ﬁnding an optimal 1-robust so- ble for 1-robust solutions where item assignments are irrevo-
lution. The non-existence of a monotone-in-expectation al- cable.
location algorithm implies that for some bidder a,ifva is a
                                                      Proof:  A normalized mechanism is truthful if and only if
winning declaration with some probability, p, then for some
               v >v                                  its allocation algorithm is monotone and its payment scheme
higher declaration a a it is more likely to become a los- is based on the critical value [Mu’alem and Nisan, 2002].
ing declaration. The proof utilizes the fact that if va becomes
                                                      When considering exogenous probabilities of contingency
a losing bid with a higher probability, then it must form part
                                                      allocations the algorithm must be monotone-in-expectation.
of a repair allocation for another previously irreparable bid Lemma 1 shows that a monotone-in-expectationallocation al-
that partakes in the subsequent winning allocation.
                                                      gorithm is impossible to achieve for 1-robust solutions where
LEMMA   1 Any allocation algorithm for ﬁnding a social- item assignments are irrevocable.              
welfare maximising 1-robust solution to a CA with irrevoca- Theorem 1 shows that it is impossible to incentivize truth-
ble assignments of items is non-monotone-in-expectation. ful bidding to achieve 1-robust solutions. Monotonicity-in-
Proof: Example 1 sufﬁces to prove this result.       expectation is hindered by the fact that irreparable bids are
EXAMPLE   1 Consider bids v113,A, v212,B, v38,C, discounted from consideration when determining the win-
v433,AB and v524,BC (Table 1). Let α =0.1 and all ners.
bids are robust, i.e. not likely to be withdrawn, except for COROLLARY 1 A normalized truthful mechanism is impos-
v4 whose probability of withdrawal, 0.15, exceeds the thresh- sible for k-robust solutions where item assignments are irre-
old value of α. In this example we consider irrevocable as- vocable.
signments so we have no budget to revoke items from non-
reneging winning bidders and compensate them for such ac- In prior work, the lower bound on tolerable revenue was in-
                        34                            troduced to permit satisﬁability testing for repairs in order to
tions, so β =0.Weletγ = 41 , so the minimum acceptable
social welfare is 34. The optimal robust solution is, therefore, improve computational feasibility [Holland and O’Sullivan,
                                                           ]
{v1,v5} with social welfare of 37, because {v3,v4},theso- 2005a . However, this constraint inhibits truthful mecha-
lution with the highest aggregate declared value to bidders, nisms because an increase in a bid amount for a bid partici-
cannot be repaired to form a solution of at least 34 should pating in an optimal robust solution can simultaneously cause
v4 be withdrawn. The optimal repair solution, {v1,v2,v3}, a brittle allocation of higher revenue to become robust. We
attains only 33.                                      need to circumvent this problem in order to ﬁnd a truthful
                                                      mechanism for risk-managed solutions as opposed to robust
                                                      solutions that provide guarantees on the social welfare of re-
      Table 1: Combinatorial auction for Example 1.   pair allocations.
                                                        The WEIGHTED-SUPER-SOLVE     algorithm [Holland and
              Item Combinations                       O’Sullivan, 2005b] is an example of an allocation algorithm
     Bids  A   B   C   AB   BC   Withdrawal prob      that ﬁnds such robust solutions. Although the allocation prob-
                                                      lem is NP-complete when a ﬁxed bound is placed on the size
      v1   13   0   0   0    0     0.02(<α)
                                                      of any break, its application within a VCG-based mechanism
      v2   0120         0    0     0.03(<α)
      v3   0080              0     0.04(<α)           would remain of the same asymptotic complexity. An obvi-
      v4   000330                  0.15(≥ α)          ous, yet interesting, question remained as to whether it could
      v5   000024                  0.05(<α)           induce truthful bidding. Theorem 1 informs us that such an
                                                      algorithm is non-monotone-in-expectation so the answer to
                                                     this question is negative.
  Let us suppose that v1 becomes v116,A, so that the dec-
laration has increased by 3. A monotone-in-expectation al- 3.2 Mutual Bid Bonds
location algorithm requires that v1 remains a winning bid in
                                                      Some auction solutions are inherently brittle and it may be
the initial allocation because if it were to become part of a
                                                      impossible to ﬁnd a robust solution. We can alter the rules
repair allocation the bidder would have a lower probability of
                                                      of an auction so that the bid-taker can revoke items from
receiving the item. However, allocation {v3,v4} can now be
                                                      winning bidders, to be reallocated so that the reparability
repaired to form a solution with a social welfare of 36 should
                                                      of solutions to such auctions can be improved [Holland and
v4 be withdrawn. Therefore, the new optimal 1-robust solu-
                                                     O’Sullivan, 2005a]. In this section we investigate whether it
tion becomes {v3,v4}. Thisimpliesthatv is less likely to
                                    1                 is possible to allocate items in a robust solution using an auc-
be awarded item A following the increase from v1, violating
                                                      tion model that permits bid and item withdrawal by the bid-
the monotonicity-in-expectation requirement.     

                                                      ders and bid-taker, respectively, whilst incentivizing truthful
  Lemma 1 demonstrates that increasing a winning bid has bidding.
the possible side-effect of creating new robust solutions by We adopt a model that incorporates mutual bid bonds to
forming a repair solution for a previously irreparable alloca- enable solution reparability. Mutual bid bonds are a form of
tion of higher social welfare. Example 1 shows how such insurance against the winner’s curse for the bidder whilst also
allocation algorithms can cause the probability of a decla- compensating bidders in the case of item withdrawal from
ration’s success to decrease following an increase in its bid
amount.                                                  2A normalized mechanism ensures that non-winners pay zero.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1317winning bids. Such “Winner’s Curse & Bid-taker’s Expo- β = κ × 33 if v4 is withdrawn, but this is insufﬁcient to al-
sure” insurance comprises a ﬁxed, non-zero fraction, κ,of low revocation of items from v3 who requires a compensatory
the bid amount for all bids. Mutual bid bonds are manda- payment of κ × 38. A monotone-in-expectation allocation
                                                                           
tory for each bid in our model. The conditions attached to the algorithm requires that v1 has least the same probability of
bid bonds are that the bid-taker be allowed to annul winning receiving item A as it did previously (Deﬁnition 3). How-
bids (item withdrawal) when repairing breaks elsewhere in ever, v4 can now be repaired to form a solution, v1,v2,v3,
the solution. In the interests of fairness, compensation is paid of welfare 66 should the bid be withdrawn, therefore, the
to bidders from whom items are withdrawn and is equivalent new optimal 1-robust solution following the increase in v1
                                                                               
to the penalty that would have been imposed on the bidder is {v3,v4}.Thisimpliesthatv1 becomes a losing declaration
should he have withdrawn the bid.                     with a greater probability following the increase from v1, thus
  If the decommitment penalties are the same for both parties violating the monotonicity-in-expectation requirement. 

in all bids, κ does not inﬂuence reparability. It merely inﬂu-
ences the levels of penalties and compensation transacted by THEOREM 2 A normalized truthful mechanism is impossi-
the agents. Low values of κ incur low bid withdrawal penal- ble for 1-robust solutions and mutual bid bonds.
ties and simulate a dictatorial bid-taker who does not ade- Proof: Lemma 2 shows that a monotone-in-expectation al-
quately compensate bidders for item withdrawal. Increased location algorithm is impossible to achieve for 1-robust solu-
levels of winning-bid withdrawal are likely when the penal- tions with mutual bid bonds.               
ties are low in a common or afﬁliated-values model. High
values of κ tend towards full-commitment. The penalties paid COROLLARY 2 A normalized truthful mechanism is impos-
                                                             k
are used to fund a reassignment of items to form a repair solu- sible for -robust solutions where items can be revoked based
tion of sufﬁcient value by compensating previously success- on mutual bid bonds.
ful bidders for withdrawal of items from them.
LEMMA   2 Robust-allocation algorithms for ﬁnding an op- 4 Truthful Risk-Managed Allocations
timal 1-robust solution to a CA with mutual bid bonds are In this section we investigate ways in which we can com-
non-monotone-in-expectation.                          promise our allocation algorithm and restrict the CA set-
Proof: Example 2 sufﬁces to prove this result.       ting so that we can achieve a truthful mechanism. Various
  We present an example to demonstrate how an increase in polynomial-time approximation algorithms can provide good
a declaration can result in its likelihood of success being de- or near optimal solutions very quickly. However, Nisan and
creased because it forms part of a repair solution for a previ- Ronen [2000] showed that a non-optimal solution can in fact
ously irreparable solution. Note that Example 2 has different be degenerate so that results can be arbitrarily far from the
bid amounts for v3 and v5 than those in Example 1. These optimum, in terms of social efﬁciency. A seminal positive re-
were altered so that the withdrawal of v4 would provide in- sult, due to Lehmann et al. [2002], showed that by restricting
sufﬁcient funds to repair v3,v4 by revoking items from v3. the set of agents’ preferences to be what they termed, single-
Mutual bid bonds only permit revocation of items from a set minded, i.e. agents are only interested in a single bundle of
of winning bids whose summation of declarations is less than items, it is possible to develop greedy mechanisms that are
that of the withdrawn bid.                            both truthful and computationally efﬁcient.
                       v   ,A v   ,B  v   ,C
EXAMPLE   2 Consider bids 1 13  , 2 12   , 3 38   ,   DEFINITION  5 (Single-minded bidder) Bidder j is single-
v   ,AB     v   ,BC                       α                                                     ∗
 4 33     and  5 54      (Table 2). Again, we let =   minded if there is a set of goods Sj ⊆ M and a value v > 0
 .                                v                                                                j
0 10 so that all bids are robust except for 4 whose probabil-           v∗   S ⊇ S
                  .          γ   64                           v  S       j        j
ity of withdrawal is 0 12.Welet = 71 , so the minimum such that j( )=        otherwise.
acceptable social welfare for a solution is 64. The bid-taker            0
would like to be able to award the items to {v3,v4} but v4 is a Lehmann et al. showed, axiomatically, that a mechanism
brittle bid that cannot be repaired satisfactorily. The optimal is truthful, given single-minded bidders, if it fulﬁls the fol-
robust solution is, therefore, {v1,v5} with welfare of 67. lowing requirements: the mechanism’s allocation algorithm
                                                      is monotone (Deﬁnition 3); the bidder is either awarded his
                                                      set of desired items and no more or nothing at all (exactness);
      Table 2: Combinatorial auction for Example 2.
                                                      a winning bidder pays the lowest value he could have declared
              Item Combinations                       to win the items (critical value); a bidder never pays less for
                                                      a superset of items in his bid (payment monotonicity); losing
    Bids   A   B   C   AB    BC   Withdrawal prob     bidders pay zero (participation constraints).
      v1  13   0    0   0    0      0.01(<α)            We adopt a similar model to Mu’alem and Nisan [2002]
      v2   0120         0    0      0.02(<α)          to investigate possible mechanisms that incentivize truthful
      v3   00380             0      0.03(<α)          bidding over a set U of m items. Each bidder j,ofn bid-
      v                             0.12(≥ α)
       4   000330                                     ders in total, has a non-negative valuation function vj for a
      v5   000          054         0.04(<α)
                                                      subset Sj ⊆ U of items. We assume that bidders’ valuation
                                                      functions are private, as is commonplace within mechanism
                        
  Suppose that v1 becomes v116,A, so the declaration has design [Archer and Eva´ Tardos, 2001] and probabilities of
increased by 3. The mutual bid bond provides a fund of withdrawal are exogenous.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1318                                                             ∗
              Informally, single-minded bidders are willing to pay vj , whilst still maintaining the integrality constraints on winning
            a privately known valuation, on condition that they mini- bids [Holland and O’Sullivan, 2005a].Byremovingthese
            mally receive a set of items, Sj. This condition is neces- lower bounds on repair revenues and optimizing expected
            sary to satisfy the individual rationality constraints. Mu’alem utility using the LP relaxation, we need to then determine
            and Nisan [2002] introduced known single-minded bidders, the allocation from the results of this non-integer solution.
            whereby the subsets Sj are known to the mechanism. In fact, It is natural to assume that yj, representing the status of bid
            only the cardinality of these subsets needs to be known to vj in the optimal allocation of the linear relaxation, would
            the mechanism. This mechanism is composed of an alloca- provide a good heuristic for guiding the choice of an approx-
            tion algorithm, A(v), whose inputs are the bid declarations imate solution because it reﬂects a fraction of how much that
            v = {v1,...,vn}, the respective desired items {S1,...,Sn} bid should win in an optimal solution. In general, however,
            and a payment rule p(v). The output of A(v) is a subset of such heuristics are not necessarily truthful.
            pair-wise disjoint winning bids.
              We present a positive result: a truthful approximation
                                                                   Algorithm 1:LP-RISK-MANAGE
            scheme whose allocation scheme accounts for the risk of po-
            tential single winning-bid withdrawals. We develop an ap- input :BidsV
            proximation algorithm similar to the LP-based allocation al- output: Allocation X, R
            gorithm of Mu’alem and Nisan [2002] and show that it is begin
                                                                       Y  ← LP  V
            monotone-in-expectation. The IP formulation for maximiz-           (  ) // Optimal LP solution
            ing expected social welfare, given the possibility of single foreach j ∈{1 ...n} do
                                                                            y    − p      n   r p  > 1
            bid-withdrawal, is the following:                              if j(1   j)+   k=1 kj k   2 then
                      ⎛                               ⎞                       X[j] ← 1
                        n               n n
                      ⎝                               ⎠
                  max      (1 − pj)vj xj +     pkvjrkj      (1)        foreach j, k ∈{1 ...n} do
                        j=1              k=1 j=1                           R[k][j] ← 0
                                                                    end
            where rkj(k=j) ∈{0, 1},xj ∈{0, 1},rkk ∈{0} and is sub-
            ject to the following constraints:
                         
                                                                                   ISK   ANAGE
                             xj ≤ 1  ∀i ∈{1, .., m}                 Informally, LP-R  -M       (Algorithm 1) assigns any
                                                                  bid whose value in the corresponding LP solution is expected
                        j|i∈Sj                                                   1
                                                                 to be greater than 2 , when considering the exogenous proba-
                       xj + rkj ≤ 1 ∀i ∈{1, .., m},k∈{1, .., n}   bilities of withdrawals, to be a winning bid. In order to prove

              j|i∈Sj ,j=k                                        the monotonicity-in-expectation of Algorithm 1 it is neces-
                          1                                       sary to show that for any v−j,wherev−j = v \{vj}, yj is a
                   ≤ pj <                      j
            where 0       2 is the probability of bid being withdrawn non-decreasing function of vj .
            so that we do not expect the repair allocation to have higher                n
            revenue than the initial allocation. xj is the decision variable LEMMA 3 yj(1 − pj)+ k=1 rkj pk is a non-decreasing
            for bid j, vj the amount of bid j and rkj is 1 iff bidder j re- function of vj for any ﬁxed v−j.
            ceives her bundle if bidder k withdraws but does not receive it                       n
                                                                  First let us deﬁne U(x, r, v)=       (1 − pj)vjxj +
            if bidder k does not withdraw. We assume conditional prob-                            j=1
                                                                    n     n  p v r
            abilities of failure so that the likelihood of multiple winning- k=1 j=1 k j kj for the purposes of notational brevity.
                                                                                                                  
            bid withdrawals is zero. Notwithstanding this assumption, the Proof: Consider optimal feasible solutions Y and Y to
                                                                                                  
            formulation still remains computationally infeasible because the linear program, LP (v) and LP (v ), respectively, where
                                                 2                                         
            of the size of the input, which requires O(n ) variables. A vj ≤ vj and Δ=vj − vj. Y is a feasible, though non-
            branch and bound search to ﬁnd an optimal solution quickly optimal, solution to LP (v) and so U(y,r,v) ≤ U(y,r,v).
                                                                                                
            becomes prohibitively expensive as n increases. The LP re- Yis also a feasible solution to LP (v ) and so(1 − pj)Δyj +
                                                                    n                                   n       
            laxation for Equation 1 relaxes the integrality constraints on k=1 pkΔrkj +U(y,r,v) ≤ (1−pj)Δyj + k=1 pkΔrkj +
            xj and rkj so that bids, in effect, can partially win. Although U y,r,v ∴ ≤ U y,r,v − U y,r,v ≤ y − y −
                                                                    (    )   0     (    )    (      )   ( j   j)(1
                              O n2                                         n     
            this problem also has ( ) input variables, it can be solved pj)Δ + (r  − rkj )pkΔ. The expression on the very
                                                        LP  v              k=1   kj
            in polynomial time. The LP formulation, denoted ( ),  right hand side is ≥ 0 and we can rearrange it so that the
            is the same as the integer formulation except that we denote y ,r y ,r
                                                                  ( j  kj ) and ( j kj ) components are on opposite sides,
            the decision variables as yj (instead of xj )andyj, rkj and        n                       n
                                                                  y (1 − pj)+      r  pk ≥ yj(1 − pj)+      rkj pk. 
            rkk are ∈ [0, 1]. Note that prior work on robust optimiza- j        k=1 kj                   k=1
            tion concerns uncertainty about the precision in coefﬁcients LEMMA 4 Algorithm 1 (LP-RISK-MANAGE) is monotone-
            in an ILP [Bertsimas and Sim, 2004], and is therefore not ap- in-expectation.
            propriate for our problem that concerns uncertainty about the
                                                                         v                                 1 <y    −
            validity of assignments to variables.                 Proof: j is a winning declaration if and only if 2 j(1
                                                                  p      n   r p                           1 <y    −
              There are no constraints on minimum social welfare in j)+ k=1 kj k. From Lemma 3 we know that 2 j(1
                                                                         n                     n             
            this model. These constraints were originally introduced pj)+ k=1 rkj pk ≤ yj(1−pj)+ k=1 rkj pk so any vj >vj
            as a compromise on the original problem of utility maxi- is also a winning declaration.                
            mization so that we could improve computational feasibility

                                                            IJCAI-07
                                                              1319