     Communicating Effectively in Resource-Constrained Multi-Agent Systems

          Partha S. Dutta                Claudia V. Goldman                Nicholas R. Jennings
           School of ECS           Samsung Telecom Research Israel             School of ECS
     University of Southampton              Herzliya, Israel.            University of Southampton
    Southampton SO171BJ, UK.         c.goldman@samsung.com              Southampton SO171BJ, UK.
    psd@ecs.soton.ac.uk                                                 nrj@ecs.soton.ac.uk

                    Abstract                          improve coordination) with the need to reduce overhead (to
                                                      save valuable bandwidth).
    Agents with partial observability need to share in- In more detail, the issue of planning when to communi-
    formation to achieve decentralised coordination.  cate is a non-trivial problem. In particular, Goldman and Zil-
    However, in resource-constrained systems, indis-  berstein [2004] show that solving this problem optimally is
    criminate communication can create performance    intractable. Given this, a number of non-optimal solutions
    bottlenecks by consuming valuable bandwidth.      to the problem have been proposed. For example, in [Gmy-
    Therefore, there is a tradeoff between the utility at- trasiewicz and Durfee, 2001], agents communicate to im-
    tained by communication and its cost. Here we ad- prove their own utilities, but this may be at the expense of
    dress this tradeoff by developing a novel strategy to the overall system performance. Zhang et al. [2004] require
    make communication selective based on informa-    all possible communication acts of agents to compute team
    tion redundancy; ensuring communication only oc-  utility gained due to communication: an impractical proposi-
    curs when necessary, while maintaining acceptable tion in real applications. The algorithms to solve the DEC-
    coordination. We apply this strategy to a state-of- MDP formulation in [Shen et al., 2003] need expensive of-
    the-art communication protocol to evaluate its re- ﬂine planning and so cannot readily be applied to dynamic
    source saving beneﬁt in a distributed network rout- environments. Finally, centralised solutions are equally in-
    ing problem. Furthermore, we design a mecha-      applicable [Haas et al., 2000] as they are not scalable and
    nism to adapt its selectivity level to the prevail- present a single point of failure.
    ing resource constraints to ensure further improve-
    ments. Empirical studies show our selective strat-  Against this background, this paper presents a compro-
    egy achieves relative savings in bandwidth usage  mising but scalable approach: agents exchange information
    of 50-90%, with only a 5-10% relative reduction in selectively such that it improves coordination, but without
    coordination effectiveness and the adaptive strategy incurring the high costs associated with computing exactly
    further improves relative bandwidth usage by up to when it is best to communicate. Here, the main challenge
    10% and also relative coordination effectiveness by is to ﬁnd the right level of selectiveness that will restrict
                                                      resource usage, thereby allowing its use for realistic task
    up to 12% over the non-adaptive approach.
                                                      processing, while limiting performance degradation to non-
                                                      signiﬁcant levels compared to strategies that permit uncon-
1  Introduction                                       strained communication.
In many distributed systems, such as sensor networks, P2P To design our information-sharing algorithm for efﬁcient
systems, and grid applications, decision-making is performed task processing and resource usage, we use information re-
by individual agents in a decentralised fashion under incom- dundancy as the parameter for agents to decide when to
plete global knowledge. Now, to effectively coordinate their communicate. Speciﬁcally, we build upon the information-
actions under these circumstances, the agents need to share sharing algorithm of [Dutta et al., 2005] which represents
information [Xuan et al., 2001; Goldman and Zilberstein, the state-of-the-art in this area (having been shown to out-
2003]. Speciﬁcally, the fact that such exchanges can signif- perform Littman’s Q-routing, Stone’s TPOT-RL, and broad-
icantly improve distributed task processing has been shown cast protocols). This benchmark algorithm distributes local
in [Dutta et al., 2005] where a state-of-the-art information- knowledge among cooperative agents after they jointly com-
sharing protocol is developed. However, their solution does plete a task. We call this approach non-selective information
not consider communication cost, which is the extra band- exchange (NSIE) as information is shared every time a task
width required for communication and is limited in all prac- is completed without considering resource constraints (Sec-
tical applications. Given this, this paper develops a novel de- tion 2). Here, we extend this approach by including a level
centralised strategy that agents can employ to decide when of decision-making among agents before distributing local
to exchange information. This strategy is practical for real- knowledge. Thus, after jointly completing tasks, the agents
istic applications and balances the need to communicate (to now choose to communicate or not depending on whether

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1269the information transmitted would be useful or redundant to destination. After this happens, the destination sends “up-
the recipient (Section 3). Such redundancy is captured using stream” along the call route an ack message indicating a
a selectivity threshold, Δs, which is by how much the cur- successful call connection. Each node i also appends its
rent information (the value of an agent’s local state) differs state value to the ack. In this application, a node’s state is
from what was previously transmitted. Now, various selec- the bandwidth available expressed as a fraction of the max-
tivity values affect a system’s performance differently: the imum availability. Thus, a node k receiving the ack from
higher the threshold, the more restricted the communication, the immediate “downstream” node l gets the set of state val-
which lessens coordination quality but takes up less resource. ues that were appended by all “downstream” nodes on this
To improve resource usage still further, we then develop an call route. Node k then updates its RT as: RTk(d, l) ←
algorithm for adaptively setting the selectivity threshold so (1 − α)RTk(d, l)+αΓ(sl, ..., sd),whereΓ() is an aggrega-
that its level can be chosen according to the prevailing con- tion function on a set of node state values, and α is a discount
text. This allows more informed communication decisions, factor (0 <α<1). Here, we choose Γ as the minimum of the
thereby reducing bandwidth usage and also increasing coor- set of states since it is the minimum available bandwidth that
dination effectiveness compared to using a ﬁxed threshold. determines the maximum number of calls on a given path.
We then empirically assess the effectiveness of our selective The above description of information exchange after every
information exchange (SIE)andadaptive selective informa- call connection is called non-selective information exchange
tion exchange (ASIE) protocols by comparing their perfor- (NSIE) which is the approach of [Dutta et al., 2005] and,
mances against NSIE (Section 4). In particular, for a dis- therefore, treated as the baseline algorithm in this paper. In
tributed task processing problem, we measure the amount of NSIE, information exchanged via the ack messages is signif-
degradation (if any) in the quality of solutions and the amount icant in updating RTs and, hence, performing decentralised
of savings (if any) in resource usage achieved by our strate- routing efﬁciently. On the other hand, these messages con-
gies compared to NSIE. The evaluations are carried out on an sume valuable bandwidth and, hence, act as overhead. The
exemplar problem: distributed network routing. This is the larger the ack’s size is, the more the bandwidth it con-
same domain used in [Dutta et al., 2005] which allows valid sumes. To counter this, we make information exchange selec-
comparisons. That our SIE approach extends the state-of-the- tive to restrict the ack size. Thus, we are essentially solving
art signiﬁcantly is conﬁrmed by these empirical studies: SIE the problem of controlling resource usage by communication,
achieves a 50-90% saving in bandwidth usage while reducing while retaining system performance.
throughput by only 5-10% compared to NSIE across various 3 The Information Exchange Strategies
network environments. ASIE further improves relative band-
width usage by about 10% and also the relative throughput by The state value that a node transmits to another at a given time
about 12% compared to SIE.                            can be identical to what it sent to that node on the previous
                                                      occasion. This happens if, since the last transmission, exactly
2  Routing in Resource-Constrained Networks           as many new calls have been connected through this node as
This section outlines the call routing application on which our existing calls on this node have terminated and, hence, the re-
selective information exchange protocol is evaluated. Note, sultant bandwidth availability on this node is unchanged. In
however, our protocol is generic and can be used to conserve general, an agent’s local state can be identical or similar in
bandwidth in any system with resource constraints and using terms of information content to what it perceived when it last
information-sharing at some level to operate efﬁciently. Also communicated its state. In such cases, sending state informa-
note, in systems where communication is different from ex- tion is redundant and can be discarded. The goal, therefore,
changing state values (as happens in our application), we need is to communicate only when there is a signiﬁcant enough
a suitable way of formalising the redundancy metric.1 In our change in an agent’s state. Making information exchange se-
application, each node communicates directly with those that lective (SIE) in this way, the ack size can be reduced. To
are within its communication range. The system’s task is to this end, we discuss the requirements and the design of SIE,
connect a call between the node where the call originates and how SIE affects system performance, and the notion of com-
the one where it is destined. The originating node forwards a munication selectivity. Finally, the adaptive (ASIE)protocol
call setup request to one of its neighbours. As each agent only is introduced.
has local information, it chooses that neighbour for which it Selective Information Exchange: To implement SIE,a
estimates that the call would be placed via the most efﬁcient node should have the following:
overall route.                                        Transmitter memory (T ): To store the state values sent to
                                                                                                  T  n
  Speciﬁcally, each node i maintains a routing table RTi, each neighbour on the most recent transmission. So, i( ) is
                                                                                          i            n
where each element RTi(d, n) (d: the destination node, n: the most recent state-value transmitted by to neighbour .
a neighbour of i)representsi’s estimate of the best end-to- These are compared against the current state value to deter-
end bandwidth availability in going from n to d. Node i mine a redundancy. Thus, a node i needs a memory of size
                  j                                   | Ki |,whereKi is its set of neighbours, for its decision of
chooses a neighbour using a Boltzmann distribution over
                 −RTi(d,j)         −RTi(d,n)          when to transmit.
its RTi values: exp( τ   )/  n exp(    τ   ),where
τ is the importance given to higher RT values. Each node Receiver memory (R): To store the state values received
chooses the next hop until the call setup request reaches the from any other node on the most recent transmission from the
                                                      latter. So, Ri(j) is the most recent state-value received by i
  1E.g., a measure of the “distance” between information elements. from j. Thus, i uses this stored value to update its RT when

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1270it receives an ack that does not include the current state of j. be relaxed from zero difference (condition (1)) by incorporat-
This happens if j detects a redundancy and does not transmit. ing a “threshold difference” between present and past state
On the other hand, when it receives the state value of j (when values. Such relaxation would further restrict information
j has not identiﬁed a redundancy), it replaces Ri(j) with this exchange resulting in further bandwidth savings, although it
value and updates its RT with this new information. Thus, a may deteriorate the quality of RTs.
node i needs a memory of size |A|−1,whereA is the set of In more detail, a threshold difference (TD) is the amount
all nodes, for its RT-update decision.                of change in state-value that a node needs to observe before
  Given T and R, a formal description of the selective infor- transmitting its value. Thus, a TD of Δsi for node i implies
mation exchange decision and RT-update action follows: that i transmits to its neighbour j iff: | si−Ti(j) |≥ Δsi. (3)
                                                                            s
Transmitting State Value Selectively. In SIE, a node i The higher the value of Δ , the more selective the communi-
(1 <i≤  d) transmits its state to its “upstream” node {i − 1} cation, the lower the number of transmissions, and the smaller
                                                                            s
if: si = Ti(i − 1) (1). If condition (1) holds and i transmits the message size (a large Δ implies nodes communicate only
its state si to {i−1},theni updates Ti(i−1) to: Ti(i−1) = si. when there is at least an equally large state-change). How-
However, if condition (1) is not true, then i does not append ever, when Δs is small, nodes communicate for both large
si to the ack before sending it to {i − 1}.           and small state changes.
Updating RT.  A node i (1 ≤ i<d) uses the following   Adaptive Selective Information Exchange: In SIE,all
set of state values of the “downstream” nodes to update its agents use a common, pre-set, threshold to communicate.
                            
RT: {si+m|m =1, ..., (d − i) ∧ si+mis the latest of Ri(i + However, agents can choose different levels of communica-
m) and si+m} (2). In the values in (2), i determines the tion selectivity and each such combination can affect the sys-
“recency” of state information by checking if the value of tem performance differently. Thus, SIE searches only a lim-
node {i+m} is present in the message. If it is, then {i+m} has ited region of the solution space. We now alleviate this by
transmitted this value by determining that this transmission is letting each agent choose adaptively its own TD over time
not redundant (using condition (1)). Then, i uses this value to (thus, exploring a larger number of combinations of commu-
update its RT (as stated in Section 2) and also updates Ri(i+ nication behaviours). By so doing, we could have a more
m) to be si+m.However,ifi does not ﬁnd the state value of effective system by improving upon the efﬁciencies of both
{i+m}  in the message, then it uses the last value received task processing and resource usage than achieved by SIE.To
from {i+m}, Ri(i+m), to update its RT.                use such adaptive selective information exchange (ASIE), we
  Using the above-mentioned, we now analyse the effects of need to determine how an agent should choose a particular
SIE on decentralised routing along different dimensions: TD at a given time. To do this, we use stored performance
                                                      proﬁles [Zilberstein and Russell, 1996] of a network.
Memory size.  Each node i needs a memory of size | Ki |+|
                                                        In more detail, to generate performance proﬁles, we let a
A |-1 to store R and T . Thus, memory size is linear with
                                                      single agent use SIE (with different TD values) and all others
the number of nodes, but remains constant at run-time. Now,
                                                      use NSIE. Then, for each TD value, we measure the differ-
hardware memory is cheap and can be easily incorporated
                                                      ence of this system’s performance from that where all agents
into the nodes.
                                                      use NSIE. This determines how a single agent’s communica-
Message size. This has a positive correlation with band- tion selectivity affects global performance over time and, in
width use. It increases only if a node appends a state value. turn, deﬁnes our performance proﬁles. Subsequently, ASIE
Using SIE, therefore, the message size cannot be any more is implemented when each agent selects, at a given time, the
than NSIE. In fact, node states remain unchanged over time TD which generated the best performance proﬁle. Thus, the
intervals when new calls do not originate and when existing stored proﬁles are re-used at run time by each agent to dy-
calls are ongoing. In these scenarios, SIE would restrict the namically select its own TD.
size of ack, thus reducing overhead and freeing up valuable However, in selecting TD dynamically as described above,
bandwidth.                                            the following points should be noted. (1) Our ASIE approach
Quality of routing table. Information exchange allows is myopic since each agent considers only how its own com-
RTs to remain up-to-date with the actual end-to-end band- munication action inﬂuences global performance. Using es-
width availabilities. Now, since SIE restricts communication, timates of the actions of other agents could generate better
the concern is whether it adversely affects the quality of RTs performances, but is likely to cause practical difﬁculties in
(hence, the overall routing quality). However, SIE prevents terms of the computational complexity associated with such
information exchange only if it is identical to what has been estimation [Goldman and Zilberstein, 2004]. (2) The time-
communicated previously. Thus, by storing in memory the indexed performance proﬁles are re-used in the ASIE system,
latest transmissions (T ), any new information is guaranteed where, in fact, the system could be at a different global state
to be transmitted. Hence, SIE keeps the RTs up-to-date in ex- than it was at the same time when the proﬁle was gener-
actly the same way as NSIE; so routing performance should ated. Thus, the TD that generated the best proﬁle at a given
be as good as NSIE.                                   time (and, thus, is selected in ASIE) can be different from
  The deﬁnition of SIE implies that information exchange the one required in the ASIE system at the current time. To
is restricted only when there is an exact equality between alleviate this potential limitation, an agent needs to estimate
the current state-value and the one transmitted most recently. the global state: again, a practical problem. (3) We gener-
This is a very restrictive condition for deﬁning redundancy ate performance proﬁles by letting one agent use SIE.Now,
and, hence, for information exchange being selective. It can in a distributed system, the communication actions of differ-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1271ent agents can impact global performance differently. In this
case, the performance proﬁles of different agents will be dif- Table 1: NSIE performance: uniform load
ferent. Nevertheless, we assume that by choosing a “repre-
sentative” agent, we can generate a performance proﬁle that
will be fairly close to those of any agent. Moreover, perfor- Topology 1      Topology 2       Topology 3
                                                       COP  CSR      MS     CSR      MS      CSR     MS
mance proﬁles of multiple agents can be stored in case of Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev
systems with heterogeneous agents.                     0.1 0.487 0.003 3.86 0.022 0.493 0.003 3.52 0.015 0.287 0.003 4.026 0.042
                                                       0.2 0.328 0.001 3.16 0.014 0.363 0.002 2.95 0.009 0.217 0.002 3.31 0.023
                                                       0.4 0.213 0.0001 2.58 0.01 0.247 0.001 2.32 0.012 0.158 0.001 2.676 0.016
4  Experimental Evaluation                             0.6 0.164 0.0004 2.26 0.009 0.191 0.0005 1.996 0.009 0.128 0.0006 2.365 0.016
For our experiments, we use the network simulator of [Dutta 0.8 0.134 0.0004 2.06 0.006 0.158 0.0004 1.80 0.007 0.108 0.0007 2.159 0.008
et al., 2005]. We create different network environments by
changing the following simulation parameters so that the re-
                                                      bandwidth savings and only slightly deteriorates call routing;
sults on performance tradeoffs can be generalised.
                                                      or (ii) high TD generates signiﬁcant bandwidth savings but
• Topology: Different network structures can affect system
                                                      signiﬁcantly deteriorates call routing. In our experiments,
performance differently, although we would want to establish
                                                      ﬁrst, the CSR and MS of the SIE and ASIE are compared
some general conclusions about performance trends. To this
                                                      against those of NSIE using uniform load, followed by us-
end, we use a 36-node irregular grid topology (ﬁg 1(a)) used
                                                      ing non-uniform load. The following parameter values are
previously in [Boyan and Littman, 1993] to make valid com-
                                                      used (as per [Dutta et al., 2005]): α =0.03, τ =0.1,and
parisons. Also, two random topologies of 50 nodes (ﬁg 1(b))
                                                      maximum number of simultaneous calls per node is 10.
and 100 nodes (ﬁg 1(c)) are used.
• Trafﬁc patterns: Both uniform and non-uniform network 4.1 Uniform Load
trafﬁc is used. In the former, a common call origination Each experiment uses a constant COP chosen from the set
                                                      { . , . , . , . , . }
probability (COP) exists for all nodes and remains constant 0 1 0 2 0 4 0 6 0 8 . Note, the higher the COP value, the
throughout an experiment. Thus, the network faces a steady more calls originate and, hence, the higher the network load.
trafﬁc inﬂow. In the latter, the COP is selected randomly per Performance of NSIE: Our baseline results (NSIE)are
node and then used to generate a call.                summarized in Table 1, showing the steady state average CSR
• Information exchange algorithms: We compare   SIE   and average MS values for different topologies. For all topolo-
against NSIE (with various TD values) by comparing their gies, the average CSR decreases as the COP increases (calls
routing quality and message overheads across different originating increase). With limited bandwidth (10 units per
topologies and load patterns. ASIE and NSIE are compared node), as the COP increases, larger percentages of originating
similarly.                                            calls fail to be connected. Hence, the CSR decreases. Also,
                                                      the average MS decreases with increasing COP. At higher
                                                      COPs, when all nodes generate large number of calls, only
                                                      the short-distance calls connect. Having limited bandwidth,
                                                      a node gets saturated with the calls that it originates. Then,
                                                      the extent to which a node routes calls originating elsewhere
                                                      decreases with increasing COP.Sinceack size is determined
                                                      by the route length, MS decreases with less long-distance calls
                                                      connecting at high COP.
    (a) 36nodes       (b) 50nodes     (c) 100nodes
                                                      Performance of SIE: Table 2 shows the steady state aver-
             Figure 1: Random topologies              age CSR and MS in the different topologies using SIE when
                                                      Δs  =0.1. This is the minimum value that Δs can take
We  choose  the following performance measures  (as   to have any communication selectivity, generating a baseline
per [Dutta et al., 2005]):                            SIE. For all other Δs, we get the same trends (excluded due
• Call success rate (CSR): This is the fraction of the number to limited space).
of calls originating that actually get connected to their des- In Table 2, the trends in both CSR and MS are identical to
tinations. Given a network load and maximum node band- those in Table 1. However, both of these in Table 2 are lower
width, the more accurate the routing tables, the more likely than the corresponding values in Table 1. Hence, SIE uses less
it is that calls will be connected. Thus, CSR is a measure of bandwidth than NSIE, but it has a slightly reduced call suc-
routing quality (the coordination effectiveness).     cess rate. We then compare these across all COP and Δs val-
• Message size (MS): Thesizeofanack   message is the  ues by generating the relative differences of the average CSRs
number of state-values appended to it. The smaller the mes- and MSsas:CSRdiff =(CSR(NSIE)−CSR(SIE))/CSR(NSIE),
sage size, the higher the bandwidth saved (the more efﬁcient and MSdiff =(MS(NSIE) − MS(SIE))/MS(NSIE). Thus, the
the information-sharing algorithm).                   higher the value of CSRdiff , the poorer is the solution quality
  We study the impact of communication selectivity (TD)on of SIE compared to NSIE. However, the higher the MSdiff ,
network performance. Such empirical results allow a system the more efﬁcient the communication of SIE.
designer or user to examine performance tradeoffs across dif- Studying the CSRdiff values (ﬁgure 2(a)) of topology 1,
ferent network environments. In this context, we can form we learn: (1) At any COP, for small Δs,theCSR of SIE is
subjective hypotheses such as: (i) small TD generates good very close to that of NSIE. Thus, when Δs<0.4, CSRdiff

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1272                                                      Performance of ASIE: We study ASIE on a regular 6×6
    Table 2: SIE performance (Δs = 0.1): uniform load
                                                      grid where the centroid is the representative node (nR) (sec-
                                                      tion 3). Here, performance proﬁles (pp) represent time-
                                                      variations of the percentage deviations of global CSR and MS
        Topology 1       Topology 2      Topology 3   between NSIE and the one where only nR uses SIE and all
COP   CSR      MS      CSR     MS      CSR      MS
    Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev Avg Stdev others use NSIE.InASIE, node i selects that Δsi which gen-
0.1 0.484 0.002 1.938 0.015 0.492 0.004 2.455 0.016 0.274 0.003 1.89 0.02 erates the least degradation in CSR for the COP value, at that
0.2 0.325 0.001 1.50 0.011 0.363 0.002 2.067 0.011 0.212 0.001 1.60 0.011
0.4 0.207 0.0006 1.098 0.004 0.246 0.0009 1.612 0.006 0.156 0.0008 1.298 0.006 time, in the proﬁle. It then uses this Δsi for its communica-
0.6 0.157 0.0005 0.891 0.006 0.190 0.0007 1.352 0.004 0.127 0.0006 1.124 0.005 tion decision (equation (3)) until it chooses a new Δs.We
0.8 0.128 0.0005 0.755 0.004 0.156 0.0005 1.18 0.003 0.107 0.0004 0.985 0.005
                                                      select a period of 1000 time steps for storing performance
                                                      proﬁles and, thus, for choosing a new Δs.
                                                        For each COP, we studied the frequency with which the
is less than 4.0% for any COP.WhenΔs is low, communi-
                                                      CSR of ASIE deviated from that of NSIE (ﬁgure 3). In each
cation occurs for both small and large state-changes. Now,
                                                      graph, using a different COP, the x-axis shows the different
small state-changes occur at any COP value because the orig-
                                                      (percentage) CSR deviations between ASIE and NSIE.The
ination and termination of few calls are more common than
                                                      y-axis shows the (percentage) duration of a simulation run
a larger number. Larger state-changes, however, occur more
                                                      for which the corresponding CSR deviation (the x-value) was
at higher COPs. Thus, for any COP,alowΔs value allows
                                                      observed. Thus, in ﬁgure 3(a), a 6% CSR deviation was ob-
frequent communication. This keeps the RTs updated fairly
                                                      served (ASIE worse than NSIE by 6%) for 10.2% time of the
well, thus, generating good call success rates (close to NSIE).
                                                      simulation. We conclude: (1) At smaller COP values, ASIE
(2) At larger Δs,theSIE CSR is signiﬁcantly lower than NSIE
                                                      performs better than SIE by generating CSRs that are closer
when COP is small, but remains close to NSIE at higher COPs.
                                                      to the baseline NSIE. Thus, the majority of the CSR differ-
Thus, Δs =0.9 causes a 32.0% CSRdiff when COP is 0.1,
                                                      ences between ASIE and NSIE is 4-6% for COP less than 0.6.
but it is only about 3.0% when COP is 0.8. High Δs al-
                                                      For the same COP values, the mean CSR differences between
lows communication only for large state-changes. Now, large
                                                      SIE and NSIE is 8-16% (measured on the same topology but
state-changes are rare at small COPs when nodes are sparsely
                                                      omitted here due to lack of space). So, the CSR of ASIE is
occupied, and so is communication. Thus, the RTs are not
                                                      up to 12% closer to the benchmark than SIE, implying a fur-
up-to-date, causing poor routing and reducing the CSR of SIE.
                                                      ther improvement in the quality of task processing. (2) At
But, at higher COPs, large state-changes (and communication)
                                                      higher COP values, SIE performs slightly better than ASIE by
are more frequent; hence CSR of SIE is close to NSIE.
                                                      achieveing CSRsclosertoNSIE. Thus, for COPs 0.6 and 0.8,
  Studying the MSdiff values (ﬁgure 2(b)) of topology 1,
                                                      the CSR difference in ASIE is mostly 6-9%, while for SIE it is
we learn: (1) At any COP, the larger the Δs,thelarger
                                                      4.5-5.6%. The slight decrease in ASIE performance compared
is the MSdiff value. Since communication reduces with
                                                      to SIE is due to the limitation of a myopic algorithm (ASIE)
Δs, so does the MS of SIE (but not inﬂuencing the MS of
                                                      in a dynamic environment (large COP).
NSIE). These results conﬁrm that larger bandwidth savings
                                                        Now studying the MS of ASIE and SIE, we observe: For all
are achieved by making communication ever more selective.
                                                      COP, ASIE ensures higher bandwidth savings than SIE: ASIE
(2) At any Δs, a change in COP does not signiﬁcantly change
                                                      saves up to 85-100% compared to NSIE, which is greater (by
the MSdiff value. Thus, SIE maintains a uniform advantage
                                                      up to 10%) than the bandwidth savings of SIE compared to
over NSIE in terms of saving bandwidth for all COP values.
                                                      NSIE (plots omitted due to limited space).
  In summary, the signiﬁcant result is that the bandwidth us-
age improvement of SIE (up to 99%) clearly offsets its de-
grading in routing (as low as 35%). More typically, we obtain
30-80% improvement in bandwidth efﬁciency at the expense
of less than 5% degradation in routing quality. The results
from the other topologies show similar trends.


                                                               (a) COP = 0.1             (b) COP = 0.4


      (a) CSR difference         (b) MS difference
  Figure 2: CSR and MS differences between SIE and NSIE        (c) COP = 0.6             (d) COP = 0.8
                                                           Figure 3: CSR difference between ASIE and NSIE

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1273