  Automated Heart Wall Motion Abnormality Detection From Ultrasound Images
                                     using Bayesian Networks
Maleeha Qaziϕ, Glenn Fungϕ, Sriram Krishnanϕ, Romer Rosalesϕ, Harald Steckϕ,R.BharatRaoϕ,
             Dr. Don Poldermans¯h    and  Dhanalakshmi Chandrasekaran, RDCS, FIAE±
               Siemens Medical Solutions, 51 Valley Stream Parkway, Malvern, PA, USAϕ.
                    Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands¯h.
                                            Bangalore, India±.
                        maleeha.qazi@siemens.comϕ, glenn.fung@siemens.comϕ
                     Abstract                          need for an automated “second-reader” system that can pro-
                                                       vide objective diagnostic assistance, particularly to the less-
     Coronary Heart Disease can be diagnosed by mea-   experienced cardiologist.
     suring and scoring regional motion of the heart wall In this paper, we address the task of building a computer-
     in ultrasound images of the left ventricle (LV) of aided diagnosis system that can automatically detect wall-
     the heart. We describe a completely automated     motion abnormalities from echocardiograms. Our goal is
     and robust technique that detects diseased hearts to develop a real-time system to assist physicians to inter-
     based on detection and automatic tracking of the  pret wall motion scores, and thereby reduce variability and
     endocardium and epicardium of the LV. The local   improve diagnostic accuracy of wall motion analysis. Sec-
     wall regions and the entire heart are then classi- tion 2 provides some medical background on cardiac ultra-
     ﬁed as normal or abnormal based on the regional   sound and the standard methodology used by cardiologists
     and global LV wall motion. In order to leverage   to score wall-motion abnormalities. In Section 3 we de-
     structural information about the heart we applied scribe our real-life dataset, which consists of echocardio-
     Bayesian Networks to this problem, and learned    grams from leading healthcare institutions to diagnose wall-
     the relations among the wall regions off of the data motion abnormalities. Sections 4 and 5 provide an overview
     using a structure learning algorithm. We checked  of our proposed system which we built on top of an algo-
     the validity of the obtained structure using anatom- rithm that detects and tracks the inner and outer cardiac walls
     ical knowledge of the heart and medical rules as  [Georgescu et al., 2005; Zhou et al., 2005; Comaniciu, 2003;
     described by doctors. The resultant Bayesian Net- Comaniciu et al., 2004]. It consists of a classiﬁer that classi-
     work classiﬁer depends only on a small subset     ﬁes the local region of the heart wall (and the entire heart) as
     of numerical features extracted from dual-contours normal or abnormal based on the wall motion. We describe
     tracked through time and selected using a ﬁlter-  our methodology for feature selection and classiﬁcation, fol-
     based approach. Our numerical results conﬁrm that lowed in Section 6 by our experimental results. We refer-
     our system is robust and accurate on echocardio-  ence some related work in Section 7, and conclude with some
     grams collected in routine clinical practice at one thoughts about our plans for future research in Section 8.
     hospital; our system is built to be used in real-time.
                                                       2   Medical Background Knowledge
 1  Introduction                                       2.1  What is Coronary Artery Disease?
 Early detection (along with prevention) is an excellent way Coronary artery disease (CAD) results from the development
 of controlling Coronary Heart Disease (CHD). CHD (along of plaque within one or several of the arteries that feed the
 with Congestive Heart Failure) can be detected by measuring muscle surrounding the left ventricle of the heart. Early signs
 and scoring the regional and global motion of the left ventri- of CAD include perfusion abnormalities which would indi-
 cle (LV) of the heart; CHD typically results in wall-motion cate the lack of oxygenated blood going to tissue. As CAD
 abnormalities, i.e., local segments of the LV wall move ab- progresses, it will manifest itself as wall motion abnormal-
 normally (move weakly - known as hypokinesia, not at all - ities, which can be detected by echocardiography. Finally,
 known as akinesia, or out of sync with the rest of the heart - CAD will lead to angina, or chest pain. This changing man-
 known as dyskinesia), and sometimes motion in multiple re- ifestation of CAD is described by Picano et al. [Picano et
 gions, or the entire heart, is compromised. The LV can be im- al., 2001; Picano, 1997] as the “ischemic cascade”. Accurate
 aged in a number of ways. The most common method is the regional wall motion analysis of the LV is an essential com-
 echocardiogram – an ultrasound video of different 2-D cross- ponent of interpreting echos to detect this effect, particularly
 sections of the LV. Echocardiograms are unfortunately noto- for early disease.
 riously difﬁcult to interpret, and even the best of physicians Heart disease has no gender, geographic or socio-economic
 can misdiagnose heart disease. Hence there is a tremendous boundaries. Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) is a global epi-

                                                 IJCAI-07
                                                    519demic that is the leading cause of death worldwide (17 mil.
deaths per year) [World Health Organization, 2004].Since
1900, CVD has been the No. 1 killer in the USA every year
except 1918. It claims more lives each year than the next 4
leading causes of death combined, which are cancer, chronic
lower respiratory diseases, accidents, and diabetes mellitus
[American Heart Association, 2006]. Coronary Heart Dis-
ease (CHD) accounts for more than half the CVD deaths
(roughly 7.2 mil. deaths worldwide every year, and 1 of
every 5 deaths in the US), and is the single largest killer in
the world. Accurate early diagnosis of CHD - primarily with
cardiac ultrasound - has been identiﬁed as a critical factor in
improving patient outcomes for CHD.
2.2  Divisions of the Heart
There are many imaging modalities that have been used to
measure myocardial perfusion, left ventricular function, and
coronary anatomy for clinical management and research; for
this project we chose to use echocardiography. The Cardiac Figure 1: Echocardiographic views for wall motion evalua-
Imaging Committee of the Council on Clinical Cardiology of tion. In the short-axis view, at the base and midventribular
the American Heart Association has created a standardized levels, the left ventricle is divided into anterior septum (2,8)
recommendation for the orientation of the heart, angle selec- and anterior free wall (1,7), lateral (6,12), posterior (5,11),
tion and names for cardiac planes and number of myocardial inferior free wall (4,10), and posterior septal (3,9) segments.
        [                  ]
segments Cerqueira et al., 2002 . This is the standardization These same wall segments are seen in apical views as indi-
used in this project.                                 cated, plus the anterior(13), septal (14), inferior (15), and lat-
  Echo images are collected from four standard views: apical eral (16) apical segments are seen. Modiﬁed from reference
4 chamber (A4C, Figure 1(b)), apical 2 chamber (A2C, Fig- “Textbook of Clinical Echocardiography” (segment numbers
ure 1(c)), parasternal long axis (PLAX) or apical 3 chamber have been corrected to reﬂect standard naming convention be-
(A3C, Figure 1(d)), and parasternal short axis (PSAX, Figure ing used).
1(a.1,a.2)). These views result from cutting the heart along
different 2-D planes.
  The left ventricle (LV) is divided into 17 myocardial seg- ﬁcation, to determine whether a heart is normal or abnormal
ments, 16 of which are measurable. The short-axis view given the resting ultrasound.
which results in a circular view of the LV can be taken at The data consists of 345 cases for which we have asso-
3 locations, near the apex (apical), at the middle (mid-cavity, ciated images as well as ground truth and 2216 cases for
Figure 1(a.2)), or near the base (basal, Figure 1(a.1)). The which we only have ground truth (no images); all of which
most desirable being the mid-cavity cut. If one lays these 3 were generated using pharmacological stress, which allows
resultant rings against one another, all segments of the heart the physician to control the amount of stress a patient expe-
are visible in relationship to one another, as shown in Figure riences (in this case induced by dobutamine). All the cases
2 (modiﬁed from reference [Cerqueira et al., 2002]). The left have been labeled at the segment level by a group of trained
anterior descending(LAD) feeds segments 1, 2, 7, 8, 13, 14 cardiologists; this is what we refer to as “ground truth”. Each
and 17, the right coronary artery (RCA) feeds segments 3, 4, of the 16 segments were labeled 1 - 5 (1 = normal, 2 = hypo-
9, 10 and 15, and the left circumﬂex coronary artery (LCX) kinetic, 3 = akinetic, 4 = dyskinetic, 5 = aneurysm), for sim-
feeds segments 5, 6, 11, 12 and 16.                   pliﬁcation purposes we converted this 5-class problem to a
                                                      binary class problem (1 = normal, 2 - 5 = abnormal).
3  Understanding the Data
The data is based on standard adult transthoracic B-mode ul- 4 Preparation of the Data
trasound images collected from the four standard views de- Our application consists of two main parts: image process-
scribed previously. The echos are in 256 gray scale color, ing, and classiﬁcation. In this paper we will focus only on the
with a resolution in the order of magnitude of about 2 mm. classiﬁcation portion, details of the image processing part can
Currently we utilize the three apical views - A2C, A3C, and be found in the referenced papers. The echos are run through
A4C - which show all 16 segments of interest These provide an algorithm which detects and automatically tracks both the
all the information needed to achieve our goal of classifying interior (endocardial) and exterior (epicardial) borders of the
hearts.                                               LV [Comaniciu, 2003; Comaniciu et al., 2004]. Motion inter-
  Even though we have images at different levels of stress ferences (e.g. probe motion, patient movement, respiration,
(resting, low-dose stress, peak-dose stress, recovery) this etc.) are compensated for by using global motion estimation
work is based on images taken when the patient was resting. based on robust statistics outside the LV, this is done so that
The goal is to automatically provide an initial score, or classi- only the heart’s motion is analyzed. Then numerical feature

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   520Figure 2: Display, on a circumferential polar plot, of the 17 Figure 3: One frame from an A4C image clip with the outer
myocardial segments and the recommended nomenclature for and inner contour control points shown. The (red) vertical
tomographic imaging of the heart. Modiﬁed from reference line shows use of global motion compensation, and the two
“Standardized Myocardial Segmentation and Nomenclature squares denote the centers of the individual contours.
for Tomographic Imaging of the Heart”.
                                                      ejection fraction (EF) ratio, and segmental volume. Some of
vectors, which are extracted from the dual-contours tracked these features, including velocity, circumferential strain, and
through time, form the basis for the regional wall motion clas- local EF ratio, are based on the inner (endocardial) contour.
siﬁcation.                                              Due to the patient examination protocol, only the systole
                                                      (i.e. contraction phase of the heart) is recorded for some
4.1  Image processing                                 patients. In order for the features to be consistent, the sys-
The ﬁrst step toward classiﬁcation of the heart involves con- tole is extracted from each patient based on the cavity area
tour generation of the LV [Georgescu et al., 2005]. Ultra- change. For each frame, the LV cavity area can be estimated
sound is known to be noisier than other common medical accurately based on the inner (endocardial) contour of that
imaging modalities such as MRI or CT, and echocardiograms frame. The frame corresponding to the maximal cavity area
are even worse due to the fast motion of the heart muscle and that is achieved at the end of diastolic phase (expansion phase
respiratory interferences. The framework used by our algo- of the heart) is the frame considered to be the beginning of
rithm is ideal for tracking echo sequences since it exploits het- systole. The frame corresponding to the minimal cavity area
eroscedastic (i.e. location-dependent and anisotropic) mea- (achieved at the end of systolic phase) is the frame assumed to
surement uncertainties.                               be the end of systole. For the time being, all features are com-
  The algorithm takes a hand-initialized border and tracks it puted based only on the systolic phase. However, the methods
from one frame to the next through the entire video clip. The used to calculate the features are generally applicable for the
inner and outer contours are treated as a single shape for cou- diastolic phase as well. The following is a basic description
pled double-contour tracking. “Intuitively, a double-contour of some of the features:
approach can propagate information from the endocardium • Velocity features: determines how fast any pair of con-
to guide the localization of the epicardium (or vice versa), trol points change in the x and y coordinate system per
thus achieving more robust tracking of the two borders than frame.
                                  [              ]
tracking them independently” (details in Zhou et al., 2005 ). • Circumferential strain features: also called Fractional
The global motion estimation can be seen in Figure 3 as a Shortening, measures how much the contour between
vertical line near the center of the image. After tracking, nu- any two control points shrinks in the systolic phase. This
merical features are computed from the dual-contours tracked is measured along the parameter of the contour.
through time. The features extracted are both global (involv-
ing the whole LV) and local (involving individual segments • Radial strain features: also called Thickening, measures
visible in the image), and are based on velocity, thickening, how much the contour shrinks for each control point be-
timing, volume changes, etc.                              tween any two time frames. This is measured along the
                                                          radius from a calculated “center” of the LV.
4.2  Extracted Features                                 • Local and Global Simpson Volume features: determine
A number of features have been developed to characterize  the volume as computed by the Simpson rule (with 50
cardiac motion in order to detect cardiac wall motion ab- disks) for each frame, and for the systolic phase of the
normalities, among them: velocity, radial and circumferen- heart as a whole (this gives the global EF, which captures
tial strain, local and global Simpson volume, global and local the whole heart’s contraction abnormalities).

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   521  • Segmental Volume features: determine the volume per
    segment per frame, and the segmental EF values (i.e lo-
    cal EFs, which aim to capture the local cardiac contrac-
    tion abnormalities).
In general, the global version of certain features (e.g. radial
strain, circumferential strain, etc) can be calculated by taking
the mean, or standard deviation, of the 6 segment’s respective
feature values from any one view. All in all we had 120 local
and global features for each of the 3 views (360 total), all of
which were continuous. The limitations of present wall mo-
tion analysis programs, e.g. color kinesis and blood pool, is
that they only evaluate wall motion and not heart wall thick-
ening, which is the hallmark of ischemia. Our program takes
both into account.

5   Segment Classiﬁcation
Our data mining process which starts with the raw data (ultra-
sound videos) and ends with a robust classiﬁer that predicts/ Figure 4: Diagram of process, from raw data to ﬁnal classiﬁer.
assesses heart wall motion for the 16 segments of the heart,
can be summarized as follows:                         [Biesiada J., 2005; Chakravarti and Roy, 1967] to measure
 1. The image sequences are pre-processed to extract the the maximum difference between the empirical cumulative
    area of interest (i.e. the LV). Intensity Normalization distributions of the two classes according to a given feature,
    and an appropriate resizing are applied.          in other words, the KS-test measures the difference between
                                                      the two histograms of the two classes with respect to all the
 2. Given the initial contour, the border tracking is per-
                                                      available features. This test is a nonparametric method and
    formed as described in section 4.1, item 2.
                                                      it makes no assumptions about the underlying distributions
 3. A set of features is extracted from the tracked contours of the two classes being tested .All the available features are
    as described in section 4.2.                      ranked by the score given by the KS-test and only the fea-
 4. Using the provided Ground Truth (assessments from the tures at the top of the list are selected for classiﬁcation. Note
    doctors), a network structure is learned that represents that a high rank according to the KS-test implies that the
    the correlations among segments, this process is ex- corresponding empirical cumulative distributions of the two
    plained in detail in section 5.2.                 classes according to these features are considerably different,
                                                      making these features desirable for discrimination between
 5. For each segment, a subset of relevant features for classi-
                                                      the two classes.
    ﬁcation is selected (section 5.1), as a result the classiﬁers
    we obtain only depend on a small number of numer- 5.2  Bayesian Networks
    ical features extracted from the dual-contours tracked
    through time. Having classiﬁers depending on a small Bayesian Networks or Belief Networks (BNs) are directed
                                                                               [                  ]
    number of features not only improves performance time graphical models (e.g., see Cowell et al., 1999 for an
    but also results in better generalization.        overview): the BN structure is a directed acyclic graph
                                                      (DAG), and the BN parameters are conditional probabilities,
 6. This subset of numerical features is provided as evidence represented by a contingency table in case of discrete vari-
    for the networks’ variables of interest (the 16 heart seg- ables. The directed edges in the graph can often be interpreted
    ments) to provide classiﬁcation for each segment and the in an intuitive way, namely as causal relationships (requiring
    whole heart. The entire process is diagrammed in ﬁgure additional assumptions) [P. Spirtes and Scheines, 2000].
    4.                                                  We applied BNs to automatically detecting heart abnor-
                                                      malities to utilize the structural knowledge of the heart seg-
5.1  Feature Selection                                ments in hopes of improving the classiﬁcation accuracy for
One of the difﬁculties in constructing a classiﬁer for this task the whole heart. In this paper, the following representation
is the problem of feature selection. It is a well-known fact that will be used
a reduction on classiﬁer feature dependence can improve the • numbers between 1 and 16 will be used to name the re-
classiﬁer’s generalization capability. However, the problem spective heart segment being referred to.
of selecting an “optimal” minimum subset of features from •                  ←    →
a large pool (in the order of hundreds) of potential original arrows (for example: , ) are used to denote the
                                                          direction of causality. An arrow is drawn from the cause
features is known to be NP-hard. In this paper we use a very                                           ←
simple but efﬁcient ﬁlter-based approach. In general, Filter- (parent) node to the effect (child) node. Example: 5
based methods aim to select features based on simple auxil- 6 should be read as 6 causes/inﬂuences 5, here 5 is the
iary criteria, such as feature correlation, to remove redundant child node and 6 is the parent node.
features. We used the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (KS-test) • Two segments are called “neighbors” if they share a

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   522Figure 5: Structure learned by BNT using multi-class labels.

    common boundary. For example: the neighbors of 1 are
    6, 7, and 2 (as shown in Figure 2). 8 and 12 are not Figure 6: Structural relationships learned by BNT using
    neighbors since they lie diagonal to 1 and share only a multi-class labels overlayed on physical heart diagram
    point of contact with 1. They could only be inﬂuenced
    by 1 via one of the neighbors.
                                                      to do structure learning; note that the 2216 cases without im-
Prior Domain Knowledge expressed as Rules             ages were only used during training since they incorporated
We derived prior knowledge from prior clinical research – the relationship between segments in their GT). The test set
Moir & Marwick [Moir and Marwick, 2004] are well-known was 125 cases, with images, held out speciﬁcally for this
cardiologists who have provided some basic rules about read- purpose. The testing process involved entering all available
ing echos in standard views. According to our cardiologist evidence into the compiled network, running inference, and
collaborators, two rules of thumb that most doctors use while querying all variables of interest simultaneously. In our case,
reading a patient’s echos have to do with neighboring seg- the evidence given to the network were the 6 best segment
ments and shared coronary artery territory. Neighboring seg- speciﬁc features found by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (all
ments inﬂuence each others behavior. And if two segments continuous attributes), and the variables of interest that were
are fed by the same coronary artery, one is abnormal and the queried were the nodes that represented each heart segment
other unknown, then it is better to err on the side of caution (S1, S2, ... , S16; all discrete attributes). After the struc-
and classify the unknown segment as abnormal.         ture between the segments was learned off of data via the
                                                      BNT method described above, we manually added the evi-
Learning Bayesian Network structure from data         dence variables using a naive Bayesian methodology (each
To ﬁnd a network structure that represents the relations node representing a segment speciﬁc feature was inﬂuenced
among the heart segments from the data, we used Kevin Mur- only by the corresponding segment’s node in the network, e.g.
phy’s BNT algorithm [Murphy, 2001]. We applied a structure S2 → s2 A3C segvol ef).
discovery method because creating a structure by hand using As an alternative to this naive Bayes method, we also tried
only physical knowledge of the heart would have resulted in to learn a general Bayes net (i.e., without any constraints on
a cyclic graph. For learning the structure we used the GT the network structure), allowing a feature node to be possibly
from both the training cases and the 2216 non-image cases. connected to several segment nodes. However, when learn-
It is important to note that the structures that we found using ing the structure between the imaging-feature nodes and the
the data, actually mirrored the physical relationships within segment nodes, the number of available training cases with
the heart but without creating cycles, furthermore, the result- images, namely 220, was very small compared to the number
ing structure coincides with our cardiac knowledge extracted of 96 feature nodes in the Bayes net. This let to large uncer-
from literature. The obtained structure can be seen in Figure tainty concerning the learned structure, and possibly to over-
5. Overlaying the structural relationships learned on the cir- ﬁtting. Not surprisingly, we found that, on the test set, the
cular diagram of the heart segments (see Figure 6) shows the general Bayes net learned from this small amount of train-
logical sense of them with respect to the physical heart. ing data actually gave results inferior to the ones of the naive
                                                      Bayes method
6  Testing Learned BN Models                            All continuous valued features were discretized using
                                                      Recursive Minimal Entropy Partitioning [Dougherty et al.,
To test the BNs we learned, we transferred the ﬁnal net- 1995], a method based on minimal entropy heuristic, pre-
works to a well-known Bayesian networks commercial soft- sented in [Catlett, 1991; Fayyad and Irani, 1993].Thisisa
ware, Netica [Norsys: Software corp., 2000] and did parame- supervised algorithm that uses class information entropy of
ter training using 220 training cases with images, and 2216 candidate partitions to select bin boundaries for discretiza-
cases without images (i.e. a subset of the same cases used tion. We tested the network using a subset of selected features

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   523