What You Seek is What You Get: Extraction of Class Attributes from Query Logs

                       Marius Pas¸ca                           Benjamin Van Durme∗
                        Google Inc.                            University of Rochester
             Mountain View, California 94043                 Rochester, New York 14627
                    mars@google.com                          vandurme@cs.rochester.edu


                    Abstract                            From a pure Artiﬁcial Intelligence perspective, class at-
                                                      tributes recommend themselves as building blocks towards
    Within the larger area of automatic acquisition of the appealing, and yet elusive goal of constructing large-scale
    knowledge from the Web, we introduce a method     knowledge bases automatically. Yet our work is originally
    for extracting relevant attributes, or quantiﬁable motivated by an activity that permeates modern societies and
    properties, for various classes of objects. The   is undertaken by millions of people every day, namely Web
    method extracts attributes such as capital city and search. Named entities constitute a large fraction of the
    President for the class Country,orcost, manufac-  queries submitted to the largest Web search engines. In re-
    turer and side effects for the class Drug, without re- sponse to a query that refers to a named entity, Web search
    lying on any expensive language resources or com- engines could augment their results with a compilation of spe-
    plex processing tools. In a departure from previous ciﬁc facts, based on the set of attributes extracted in advance
    approaches to large-scale information extraction, for the class to which the named entity belongs.
    we explore the role of Web query logs, rather than
                                                        Another, more immediate application of class attributes in
    Web documents, as an alternative source of class
                                                      Web search is to process a query stream to identify and ﬂag
    attributes. The quality of the extracted attributes
                                                      queries that request factual information. This is particularly
    recommends query logs as a valuable, albeit little
                                                      useful in the more frequent, but difﬁcult case when likely-
    explored, resource for information extraction.
                                                      factual queries are keyword-based rather than expressed in
                                                      natural language. For example, if the search engine has spe-
1  Introduction                                       cialized functionality for answering simple natural-language
                                                      questions such as “What is the altitude of Guadalajara?”,
Despite differences in the types of targeted information, the knowledge that altitude is a prominent attribute of the
as well as underlying algorithms and tools, a common  class City enables the search engine to handle keyword-based
theme shared across recent approaches to information ex- queries such as “altitude guadalajara” and “guadalajara al-
traction is an aggressive push towards large-scale extrac- titude” similarly to their cleaner, natural-language counter-
tion. Documents spanning various genres, news corpora, part.
or the Web are readily available, providing signiﬁcant
amounts of textual content towards the acquisition of rela- In this spirit, and in a signiﬁcant departure from previous
tions such as InstanceOf [Pantel and Ravichandran, 2004], approaches to large-scale information extraction, the target
Country-CapitalOf-City [Cafarella et al., 2005], Company- information (in this case, class attributes) is not mined from
HeadquartersIn-Location [Agichtein and Gravano, 2000], document collections. Instead, we explore the role of Web
Person-AuthorOf-Invention [Lita and Carbonell, 2004] or query logs, rather than documents, as an alternative source
Person-BornIn-Year [Pas¸ca et al., 2006]. As a next step be- of class attributes. To our knowledge this corresponds to
yond extracting instances of a target relation that is speciﬁed the ﬁrst endeavor in large-scale knowledge acquisition from
in advance, this paper aims at acquiring sets of relations that query logs. Sections 2 and 3 explain why we believe that
constitute prominent attributes, or quantiﬁable properties, of query logs represent a valuable, albeit unexplored, resource
a given class of instances. As an illustration, desirable class for information extraction. Section 4 introduces a robust and
attributes targeted here include, among others:       scalable method for extracting quantiﬁable attributes of arbi-
  • manufacturer, cost, side effects, pharmacokinetics and trary classes. The method initially relies on a small set of lin-
dosage (for Drug);                                    guistically motivated extraction patterns applied to each en-
  • capital city, population, gross domestic product and try from the query logs, then employs a series of Web-based
prime minister (for Country);                         precision-enhancement ﬁlters to reﬁne and rank the candi-
  • paintings, artistic style, inﬂuences and birth place (for date attributes. Section 5 presents evaluation results when
Painter).                                             applying the method to a sample of approximately 50 mil-
                                                      lion queries selected from a larger set of queries collectively
  ∗Contributions made during an internship at Google. submitted by Web users to the Google search engine.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  28322  Strategies for Extraction                          documents that contain information about I are also likely to
                                                                       A               I
2.1  Class-Driven Extraction                          contain mentions of in the context of .
If the target class is speciﬁed by mentioning only the class 3.2 Extraction from Query Logs
name (e.g., country or drug/medicine), a possible extraction
strategy is to identify authoritative documents that explicitly At ﬁrst sight, choosing queries over documents as the source
                                                      data may seem counterintuitive due to disadvantages in sev-
enumerate the attributes of the class. For the class Car,an
ideal enumeration could be “The most important properties eral key aspects: ability to convey rather than inquire about
of a car are its class, quality of handling, engine displace- information; sheer size of available data; and availability
                                                      of contextual clues. Indeed, common wisdom suggests that
ment, top speed, fuel economy [..]”. Unfortunately, the likeli-
hood of such enumerations occurring in natural language for textual documents tend to assert information (statements or
arbitrary classes is quite low, even within Web-scale collec- facts) about the world in the form of expository text. Com-
                                                      paratively, search queries can be thought of as being noth-
tions. Moreover, the scale and noisy character of the Web rule
out the use of any expensive tools that would be required for ing more than noisy, keyword-based approximations of often-
the necessary levels of text understanding. For these reasons, underspeciﬁed user information needs (interrogations). In
                                                      fact, even with a large document collection there is no guar-
class-driven extraction is both unlikely to produce useful at-
tributes, and impractical to apply to large amounts of text. antee that any relevant documents exist that provide an an-
                                                      swer, conﬁrm, or refute the interrogation to which a random
2.2  Instance-Driven Extraction                       query corresponds. From a strictly quantitative standpoint,
Since a class (concept) is traditionally a placeholder for a the amount of text within query logs is at a clear disadvan-
set of instances (objects) that share similar attributes (prop- tage against the much larger textual content available within
erties) [Dowty et al., 1980], the attributes of a given class the Web documents. Finally, additional contextual informa-
can be derived by extracting and inspecting the attributes of tion is usually available in Web documents both internally,
individual instances from that class. With this strategy, the at- i.e., the context in which an instance occurs in text, and ex-
tributes of the class Car are extracted by inspecting attributes ternally, e.g., through anchor text associated with incoming
extracted for Chevrolet Corvette, Toyota Prius, Volkswagen links. In contrast, little, if any additional context is available
Passat, etc. This is particularly appealing with large sources in Web queries since their median length is only two words.
of open-domain text (e.g., the Web) for two reasons. First, it Despite these disadvantages, our choice of exploring query
is straightforward to obtain high-quality sets of instances that logs is motivated by the following general hypothesis about
belong to a common, arbitrary class by either: a) acquiring a availability and use of knowledge.
reasonably large set of instances through bootstrapping from Assume an abstract search scenario, in which a pool of
a small set of manually speciﬁed instances [Agichtein and users has access to a large body of common-sense knowl-
Gravano, 2000]; or b) selecting instances from available lexi- edge - so large that no user can possibly memorize each in-
cons, gazetteers and Web-derived lists of names; or c) acquir- dividual assertion from the knowledge base. In order to ﬁnd
ing the instances automatically from a large text collection new knowledge that they need, users can search the existing
(including the Web), based on the class name alone [Shin- knowledge base. Each query that they submit is an inquiry
zato and Torisawa, 2004]; or d) selecting prominent clusters for new information. However, users formulate their queries
of instances from distributionally similar phrases acquired based on the common-sense knowledge that they already pos-
from a large text collection [Lin and Pantel, 2002].Inother sess at the time of the search. Therefore, search queries play
words, specifying the target class as a set of instances rather two roles simultaneously: in addition to requesting new infor-
than the class name is simply a matter of formatting (or mation, they also indirectly convey knowledge in the process:
converting) the input class, rather than a limiting assump- Hypothesis 2: If knowledge is generally prominent or rele-
tion. Second, named entities are well represented on the Web vant, people will (eventually) ask about it.
(whether documents or queries), whereas it is relatively much The hypothesis becomes increasingly useful as the num-
harder to ﬁnd common-sense knowledge such as the fact that ber of users and the quantity and breadth of the available
“all countries have a capital city”, especially in an explicit knowledge increase. Indeed, to switch from an abstract to
natural-language form that lends itself to robust extraction. a more concrete scenario, if it is common-sense knowledge
                                                      that something (e.g., top speed) is a prominent attribute of a
3  Sources of Data                                    given class (e.g., Car), then a fraction of the set of Web search
                                                      queries submitted by people from around the globe are likely
3.1  Extraction from Document Collections             to capture that knowledge:
Previous studies in textual information extraction consistently Hypothesis 3:LetC beaclass,andI∈Cbe instances of
use some form of a document collection as their preferred that class. If A is a prominent attribute of C, then a fraction
data source. In particular, many recent studies take advantage of the queries about I are likely to ask about A in the context
of the increasing amount of textual content available in Web of various instances I.
documents. Similarly, for the task of extracting attributes for Among the possible choices in data sources (Web docu-
arbitrary classes, Web documents represent an obvious choice ments vs. query logs) and format of the information about
based on a simple observation:                        the target class (class-driven vs. instance-driven), we opt for
  Hypothesis 1:LetC beaclass,andI∈Cbe instances of    an instance-driven extraction method from query logs, which
that class. If A is a prominent attribute of C, then some of the is presented in the next section.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2833    Query logs                       Raw candidate attributes          Unfiltered class attributes
    fuel economy of honda civic  the maker of solaris(honda civic, fuel economy)  (solaris, maker) (C2, fuel economy)  (C4, maker)  (C5, capital)
    france’s capital  what is the population of iquitos (france, capital)  (iquitos, population) (C1, population)  (C3, average weight)  (C6, founder)
    department of commerce  schnauzer average weight (1)(commerce, department) (schnauzer, average weight) (2) (C6, ceo)  (C3, pictures)  (C1, mayor)  (C1, battle)
    founder of ebay  resection of 11th rib  chrysler’s ceo (ebay, founder)  (11th rib, resection)  (chrysler, ceo) (C1, toyota)  (C3, meaning)  (C1, archdiocese)
    pictures of schnauzer  who is the mayor of helsinki (schnauzer, pictures)  (helsinki, mayor) (C5, map)  (C6, logo)  (C4, meaning)  (C1, story)
    battle of algiers  toyota of reno  meaning of poodle (algiers, battle)  (reno, toyota)  (poodle, meaning) (C5, detailed map)  (C6, logos)  (C6, meaning)

                                                                                                 (3)
    Extraction patterns Target classes    Capitalization within Web documents Filtered class attributes (after filter 1)
    what is the A of I C1 = {Helsinki, Iquitos, Rome, Reno, ...} ... an initiative in the Archdiocese of Chicago ... (C2, fuel economy)  (C4, maker)  (C5, capital)
    who was A of I C2 = {Chevrolet Corvette, Honda Civic, ...} ... hosted by the Archdiocese of Denver and ... (C1, population)  (C3, average weight)  (C6, founder)
    the A of I  C3 = {Schnauzer, Fox Terrier, Poodle, ...} ... as the founder of Ford, he contributed ...
                                                                       (C6, ceo)  (C3, pictures)  (C1, mayor)  (C3, meaning)
    who is I’s A C4 = {Linux, Unix, Mac OS, Solaris, ...} ... but the founder of eBay, the world’s ...
    what are the A of I C5 = {Tuvalu, Peru, France, Thailand, ...} ... behind the Toyota of Glendale dealership ... (C5, map)  (C6, logo)  (C4, meaning)  (C1, story)
    I’s A       C6 = {New York Times, Ford, eBay, ...} ... took place at the Toyota of Hollywood ... (C5, detailed map)  (C6, logos)  (C6, meaning)

    Resources and target classes                                                                 (4)
    Ranked class attributes           Filtered class attributes (after filter 3) Filtered class attributes (after filter 2)
    A1 = {population, mayor, latitude, flag, suburbs, ...} (C2, fuel economy)  (C4, maker)  (C5, capital) (C2, fuel economy)  (C4, maker)  (C5, capital)
    A2 = {top speed, fuel economy, reliability, price, ...} (6) (C1, population)  (C3, average weight)  (C6, founder) (5) (C1, population)  (C3, average weight)  (C6, founder)
    A3 = {average weight, shape, life span, fur color, ...} (C6, ceo)  (C1, mayor)  (C5, map) (C6, ceo)  (C1, mayor)  (C5, map)  (C6, logo)
    A4 = {maker, system requirements, kernel size, ...} (C6, logo)     (C5, detailed map)  (C6, logos)

    Extraction steps

                          Figure 1: Overview of data ﬂow during class attribute extraction

4  Extraction Method                                  4.2  Filtering of Candidate Attributes
4.1  Selection of Candidate Attributes                Due to the simplicity of the extraction patterns applied dur-
                                                      ing pre-processing, and the relative low quality of the average
Our extraction method consists of three stages: selection of Web query, the candidate attributes selected after Step (2) are
candidate attributes for the given set of target classes (Steps quite noisy. A series of ﬁlters successively improve the qual-
1 and 2 from Figure 1); ﬁltering of the attributes for higher ity of the sets of class attributes.
quality (Steps 3 through 5); and ranking of the attributes that The ﬁrst ﬁlter - Step (3) from Figure 1 - identiﬁes and dis-
pass all ﬁlters (Step 6).                             cards attributes that are proper names or are part of longer
  For robustness and scalability, a small set of linguistically- proper names. Since many users of search engines make no
motivated patterns extract potential pairs of a class label (or upper vs. lower-case distinction when they type their queries,
instance) and an attribute from query logs. This corresponds it is not feasible to detect the true case of the candidate at-
to Step (1) from Figure 1. For each pair, a weighted frequency tributes based on query logs alone. However, it is relatively
is computed as a weighted sum of the frequencies of the input straightforward (although computationally expensive) to re-
queries within the query logs. The weights are set such that cover case information heuristically, by scanning Web docu-
full-ﬂedged natural-language queries (e.g., “what is the pop- ments for mentions of the candidate attributes. More specif-
ulation of iquitos”) have a higher contribution towards the ically, let A be an attribute to be checked (e.g., toyota)and
weighted frequencies. In a useful extension that better cap- I be instances (e.g., Helsinki, Glendale, Hollywood)ofthe
tures frequency data available within query logs, the logs are class. If the pattern “the upper-case-A of I”(e.g.,“the Toy-
scanned again for any keyword-based queries that contain the ota of Glendale”) occurs more frequently in Web documents
elements from the collected pairs (in any order) and noth- than the pattern “the lower-caseA of I”(e.g.,“the founder
ing else (e.g., “population iquitos” or “iquitos population”). of Ford”) does, then the attribute is discarded as upper-case
The motivation of this step is that keyword-based queries are (unless it is a known person title such as Queen); otherwise
used much more often by Web users as compared to natural- it is retained. Although simple, this technique proves quite
language queries. The frequencies of those matching queries effective in discarding spurious attributes such as the above-
are added to the counts computed initially for the pairs. mentioned toyota,aswellasarchdiocese, battle,etc.
  Figure 1 illustrates how Step (2) converts the collected The second ﬁlter corresponds to Step (4) from Figure 1.
pairs into a smaller set of yet-unﬁltered attributes that apply It discards candidate attributes that are deemed to be generic
only to instances of the target classes. For example, Honda (e.g., meaning, story, picture, pictures and summary), in that
Civic is an instance of the target class C2. It also appears in they are simultaneously associated with many target classes.
the ﬁrst pair shown as collected after Step (1). Therefore the The third ﬁlter (Step (5) from Figure 1) aims at reducing
attribute “fuel economy” is extracted for C2. The weighted the number of attributes that are semantically close to one
frequency of each pair output by Step (2) (e.g., (C5, capital)) another within a class, thus increasing the diversity and use-
aggregates the weighted frequencies of the source pairs (e.g., fulness of the overall set. For the sake of simplicity, we prefer
(france, capital), (peru, capital), (thailand, capital), etc.). a fast heuristic that ﬂags attributes as potentially redundant if

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2834        Class  Size          Examples of Instances
        Drug   346     Ibuprofen, Tobradex, Prilosec
     Company   738    Ford, Xerox, Longs Drug Stores
      Painter 1011   Georgia O’Keeffe, Ossip Zadkine
         City  591   Hyderabad, Albuquerque, Tokyo
      Country  265    Yemen, India, Paraguay, Egypt
                                                       Precision                 Precision

 Table 1: Size and example of instances in each target class  city−reranked             drug−reranked
                                                              city−reranked−filtered    drug−reranked−filtered
                                                              city−frequency            drug−frequency
                                                              city−frequency−filtered   drug−frequency−filtered
                                                         0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0   0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
they have a low edit distance to, or share the same head word 0 1020304050           0   1020304050
with, another attribute already encountered in the list.           Rank                       Rank

4.3  Ranking of Candidate Attributes                  Figure 2: Precision as a function of rank. Dotted lines rep-
In summary, the weighted frequencies of the pairs of a class resent lists that have been through heuristic ﬁltering (Sec-
and an attribute that pass all ﬁlters are derived successively tion 4.2), black denotes lists reranked based on the PMI-
from the original frequencies in query logs. The computation inspired formula, and gray represents frequency-ranked lists.
takes the frequencies from query logs, weights them based on
which pattern they match, and then adds frequencies together Label Value             Examples of attributes
as different entries are collapsed into identical pairs during
                                                           vital   1.0      (Country, president), (Drug, cost)
pre-processing and then selection of attributes.
                 W   C, A                                  okay    0.5 (City, restaurant), (Company, strengths)
  Using the notation f ( ) for the weighted frequency of wrong     0.0         (Painter, diary), (Drug, users)
the attribute A within the class C, the ﬁrst formula (frequency)
for scoring the attributes is:                           Table 2: Correctness labels for the manual assessment
              Score(C, A)=Wf   (C, A)
  In other words, the ﬁrst formula exploits the weighted fre-
                                                      Section 2.2, our apparent reliance on pre-specifying the target
quencies directly to determine the relative order of the re-
                                                      class through a set of instances is not a limiting factor.
turned attributes within each class. To better capture at-
tributes that are speciﬁc to a particular class, a second formula
(reranked) computes PMI-inspired [Turney, 2001] scores: 5.2 Results
                                     W   C, A × N
Score C, A   W   C, A ×S  C, A ×       f (  )
     (    )=   f (   )   f (  )  log W  C × W   A     Precision: Four distinct lists of attributes are evaluated for
                                      f ( )   f ( )   each class, corresponding to the combination of the use of
where N is the total frequency over all pairs, and Sf (C, A) one of the two ranking methods (frequency or PMI-reranked)
is a smoothing factor to avoid an over-emphasis of rare at- with either applying all ﬁlters (e.g., City-frequency-ﬁltered)
tributes. With either formula, the top attributes in each class or none of them (e.g., City-frequency). Each of the ﬁrst 100
are returned in Step (6) from Figure 1.               elements of the extracted lists of attributes is assigned a cor-
                                                      rectness label. Similarly to the methodology previously pro-
5  Evaluation                                         posed to evaluate answers to Deﬁnition questions [Voorhees,
5.1  Experimental Setting                             2003], an attribute is vital if it must be present in an ideal
                                                      list of attributes of the target class; okay if it provides useful
Query Logs: The data source for attribute extraction experi- but non-essential information; and wrong if it is incorrect. To
ments is a random sample of around 50 million unique, fully- compute the overall precision score, the correctness labels are
anonymized queries from larger query logs collected by the converted to numeric values as shown in Table 2. Precision
Google search engine in the ﬁrst few months of 2006. All at rank n in a given list is thus measured as the sum of the
queries are in English, and are accompanied by their total fre- assigned values of the ﬁrst n attribute candidates, divided by
quency of submission within the logs.                 n. With frequency ranking and with all ﬁlters enabled, Ta-
Target Classes: Due to the time intensive nature of manual ble 3 illustrates the top attributes returned for the ﬁve target
accuracy judgments often required in the evaluation of in- classes. A few of these attributes that are deemed to be wrong
formation extraction systems [Agichtein and Gravano, 2000; include long term use for Drug,andbest for City.Table4
Cafarella et al., 2005], we restricted ourselves to a conser- summarizes the resulting precision values at various ranks.
vative number of classes for testing. The test set comprises
                                                        Figure 2 gives a detailed illustration of the effects of ﬁl-
ﬁve target classes, namely Drug, Company, Painter, City,
                                                      tering (described earlier in Section 4.2) and reranking when
and Country, which respectively correspond to artifacts, or-
                                                      applied to the classes City and Drug. The accuracy varies
ganizations, roles, and two geographic entities. Each of these
                                                      among different classes. Somewhat surprisingly, using the
classes is speciﬁed as a set of representative instances, de-
                                                      reranked scoring formula does not bring signiﬁcant beneﬁts
tails on which are given in Table 1. 1 As explained earlier in
                                                      over the simpler frequency ranking, as seen in the lack of sep-
  1The set of instances for Country contains a number of popularly aration between gray versus black lines. On the other hand,
used abbreviations, as well as geopolitically distinct areas such as the heuristic ﬁltering increases accuracy signiﬁcantly, as il-
Taiwan and the West Bank.                             lustrated by the difference between dotted and bold lines, es-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2835 Country: capital, population, president, map, capital city,   Attribute Rank           Attribute Rank
   currency, climate, ﬂag, culture, leader                      capital    1            emperor     -
 Drug: side effects, cost, structure, beneﬁts, mechanism of action, population 2 date of independence 50
   overdose, long term use, price, synthesis, pharmacology Prime Minister 19            currency    6
 Company: ceo, future, president, competitors, mission statement, leader  10               area    23
   owner, website, organizational structure, logo, market share capital city 5            Queen    76
 City: population, map, mayor, climate, location, geography,  President    3               GDP     32
   best, culture, capital, latitude                               size    20
 Painter: paintings, works, portrait, death, style, artwork,
   bibliography, bio, autobiography, childhood        Table 5: Gold-standard attributes for Country from TREC
                                                      questions, with their rank in the ﬁltered, frequency-ranked list
   Table 3: Top ten attributes acquired from query logs
                                                                    Attribute R.           Attribute R.
         Class             Precision
                @10   @20   @30   @40   @50                (Painter, nationality) 30 (Painter, inﬂuences) 11
                                                           (Drug, is it addictive) - (Painter, awards) -
       Country  0.95   0.93  0.90  0.89  0.82                (Drug, side effects) 1 (Country, income) 88
         Drug   0.90   0.93  0.83  0.79  0.79           (Company,is it nonproﬁt) - (Country, neighbors) -
      Company   0.90   0.75  0.63  0.56  0.50            (Company, competitors) 4       (City, mayor) 3
          City  0.85   0.73  0.72  0.66  0.65             (City, quality of living) -    (City, taxes) 30
        Painter 0.95   0.93  0.85  0.84  0.75
                                       n              Table 6: Sample of attributes given by survey participants and
          Table 4: Precision at various ranks         their ranks in the ﬁltered, frequency-ranked list (R. = Rank)

pecially within the crucial 2 top ten entries.
                                                      ples of attributes mentioned by textual descriptions found in
Recall: In general, the measurement of recall requires knowl-
                                                      the CIA Factbook. 4 The table also shows where the attributes
edge of the complete set of items (in our case, attributes) to
                                                      occur in our own extracted list. Unsurprisingly, “common”
be extracted. Unfortunately, this number is often unavail-
                                                      attributes such as ﬂag and map are more attainable via query
able in information extraction tasks [Hasegawa et al., 2004;
                                                      logs versus speciﬁc, yet equally correct, gold-standard at-
Cafarella et al., 2005]. Following a scenario that matches
                                                      tributes such as household income consumption by percent-
well the intended use of our extracted attributes, an unbi-
                                                      age share or manpower reaching military service age annu-
ased gold standard collects attributes of the class Country
                                                      ally. In fact, we feel that the automatic extraction of such de-
from the ﬁrst 1,893 main-task questions used in past editions
                                                      tailed, “summarizing” attributes from natural-language text is
of the Question Answering track of the Text REtrieval Con-
                                                      beyond current state of the art in information extraction.
ference [Voorhees and Tice, 2000]. Table 5 gives these at-
tributes sorted by frequency of appearance among the ques-
tions, along with their respective ranks as exact strings within 6 Comparison to Previous Work
our own extracted attribute list. For example, the gold- Although our work naturally ﬁts into the larger goal of build-
standard attribute capital city, collected from questions such ing knowledge bases automatically from text [Craven et al.,
as “What is the capital city of Algeria?”, is present among 2000; Schubert, 2002], to our knowledge we are the ﬁrst to
the extracted attributes at rank 5.                   explore the use of query logs for the purpose of attribute ex-
Alternate Sources of Evaluation Data: In a more holistic traction. Similar goals motivated a few other recent studies,
evaluation of recall, starting from a few provided sample at- although the scale, underlying methods and data sources dif-
tributes for the classes Dog and Planet, survey participants fer signiﬁcantly. In [Chklovski, 2003], the acquisition of at-
were asked to provide a set of what they considered to be im- tributes relies on Web users who explicitly specify class at-
portant attributes for each of our ﬁve target classes. Each of tributes given a class name. In contrast, we may think of our
our extracted lists of attributes are searched by hand in order approach as Web users implicitly giving us the same type of
to ﬁnd candidates that are deemed semantically equivalent to information. The method proposed in [Tokunaga et al., 2005]
what participants provided. 3 A sample of these results are applies lexico-syntactic patterns to text within a small collec-
provided in Table 6. Note that (City, quality of living) is not tion of Web documents. The resulting attributes are evalu-
an attribute that we would consider to be vital, as compared ated through a notion of question answerability, wherein an
to some equivalent version of (Drug, is it addictive)or(Com- attribute is judged to be valid if a question can be formulated
pany, is it nonproﬁt). From the survey results it was primarily about it. More precisely, evaluation consists in users manu-
these sort of binary valued attributes that we failed to extract, ally assessing how natural the resulting candidate attributes
leading us to consider if in the future alternate patterns may are, when placed in a wh- question. Comparatively, our eval-
potentially improve our performance.                  uation is stricter. Indeed, many attributes, such as long term
  Speciﬁcally for the class Country, Table 7 contains exam- uses and users for the class Drugs, are marked as wrong in
                                                      our evaluation, although they would easily pass the ques-
  2Web search engines also tend to display ten results by default. tion answerability test (e.g., “What are the long term uses
  3For example, the survey response (Country, income)was
deemed equivalent to the extracted (Country, per capita income). 4http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2836