                      Higher-Order Potentialities and their Reducers: 
           A Philosophical Foundation Unifying Dynamic Modelling Methods 

                                      Tibor Bosse and Jan Treur 
                  Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Department of Artificial Intelligence 
                      De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
                                        {tbosse, treur}@cs.vu.nl 

                     Abstract                         anticipatory state property: a state property anticipating the 
   In the development of disciplines addressing       different state property (in the changed state).  
   dynamics, a major role was played by the assumption  In the current paper the notion of potentiality is used as a 
   that processes can be modelled by introducing state basis for a philosophical framework to analyse modelling 
   properties, called potentialities, anticipating in which methods that address dynamics. This framework is 
   respect a next state will be different. A second   applicable to obtain philosophical foundations for both 
   assumption often made is that these state properties quantitative approaches (such as DST and neural networks) 
   can be related to other state properties, called   and qualitative or symbolic approaches (such as BDI-
   reducers. The current paper proposes a philosophical modelling and production systems) to modelling of 
   framework in terms of potentialities and their     dynamics. Given that the framework is applicable to DST, 
   reducers to obtain a common philosophical          which since long has proved its value for quantifiable areas 
   foundation for methods in AI and Cognitive Science within a wide variety of disciplines, also the scope of 
   to model dynamics. This framework provides a       applicability of the proposed philosophical framework 
   unified philosophical foundation for numerical,    covers disciplines such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and 
   symbolic, and hybrid approaches.                   Economics. For the cognitive and knowledge engineering 
                                                      area, it is shown how the framework can be applied to 
                                                      provide a foundation for symbolic modelling methods such 
1.  Introduction                                      as production systems and BDI-models. The framework 
Dynamics of the world shows itself by the occurrence of easily describes both mental aspects and physical aspects of 
different world states, i.e., states at different points in time embodied cognitive agents and their relationship. 
that differ in some of their state properties. In recent years, Below, first the notion of potentiality is briefly introduced 
within Cognitive Science, dynamics has been recognised (Section 2). Next, in Section 3 the notion of higher-order 
and emphasised as a central issue in describing cognitive potentiality is discussed and illustrated by examples from 
processes [Port and Gelder, 1995]. Van Gelder and Port Mathematics (higher-order derivatives and Taylor series). In 
[1995] propose the Dynamical Systems Theory (DST) as a Section 4 it is shown how higher-order potentialities play a 
new paradigm that is better suited to the dynamic aspects of role as a philosophical foundation of basic concepts in 
cognition than symbolic modelling approaches. However, as Physics (momentum, kinetic energy, force). Section 5 
DST (which subsumes neural networks and many other    discusses the assumption that  potentialities of some higher 
quantitative approaches to adaptive and control systems), order can be reduced to lower level state properties. Sections 
commits to the use of quantitative methods (differential and 6 and 7 show how the framework can be applied to 
difference equations), it is often considered less suitable to symbolic modelling methods: BDI-models and production 
model higher cognitive processes such as reasoning and systems. Section 8 shows how it can be applied to modelling 
language processing. DST is based on the state-determined of adaptive agents. In Section 9 the philosophical 
system assumption: properties of a given state fully  framework is related to the Dynamical Systems Theory, 
determine the properties of future states; cf. [Ashby, 1960], including neural networks and many other (quantitative) 
p. 25; [Gelder and Port, 1995], p. 6. This means that for approaches to dynamic systems. Section 10 is a discussion. 
state properties that are different in a future state, state 
properties in the given state can be found that somehow 2.  Potentialities  
indicate or anticipate these differing (changed) properties. Given a particular state that just changed with respect to 
This idea closely relates to the concept of potentiality that some of its state properties, it is natural to ask for an 
goes back to Zeno and Aristotle [350 BC’]: if a potentiality explanation of why these new state properties occurred. In a 
p for a state property a occurs in a given state, then in a next state-based approach, as a source for such an explanation, 
state, property a will occur. A potentiality is a kind of state properties found in the previous state form a primary 


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   262candidate. A main question becomes how to determine for a indicates what it is a potentiality for. A more complicated 
certain state that it is going to change to a different state, question is how to specify when (under which past and 
and, more specifically, how to determine (on the basis of present circumstances) a potentiality itself will occur. For 
some of the state properties in the given state) those state the case of empty space, where an object is assumed to have 
properties for which the new state will differ from the given no interaction with other objects, a potentiality to change 
one. This poses the challenge to identify state properties position is present because it was present at an earlier point 
occurring in a given state that anticipate the next state: in time and persisted until t (inertia of motion). However, if 
anticipatory state properties. If such state properties the potentiality in a new state is different from the earlier 
(historically sometimes called potentialities) are given, one, a question becomes why this is so. This leads to the 
anticipation to change is somehow encoded in a state. The question addressed in this section of how a changed 
assumption on the existence of such properties is the crucial potentiality can be explained. 
factor for the validity of the assumptions underlying   The use of higher-order potentialities is an answer to this 
dynamic modelling methods such as the Dynamical Systems question. The idea behind higher-order potentialities is 
Theory.1  Aristotle did introduce such a type of concept; he simple. To obtain an explanation of changed state properties 
called it potentiality (to move), or movable.2 For example, over time, potentialities were introduced. Potentialities are 
following Zeno, the difference between an arrow at rest and also state properties that change over time. Therefore it 
the snapshot of a moving arrow at time t at position P is that would be reasonable to treat them just like any other state 
the former has no potentiality to be at P', whereas the latter property that changes over time. This means that for a 
has. This explains why at a next instant t' the former arrow potentiality p(1) a socalled second-order potentiality p(2) is 
is still where it was, at P, while the latter arrow is (assuming introduced to explain why p(1) may become changed over 
no obstruction) at a different position P': Aristotle did not time. And of course this process can be repeated for p(2), and 
only consider changes of positions (due to locomotion), but so on. This leads to an infinite sequence of higher-order 
also, for example, a young man becoming an old man, and a potentialities, p(1), p(2), p(3), p(4), …, where for each natural 
cold object becoming hot. For each of these types of  number n the potentiality p(n) is called an n-th-order 
changes a specific type of potentiality is considered; e.g., potentiality. Using such higher-order potentialities, the idea 
the potentiality to be at position P', the potentiality (of a is the following: 
cold object) to be hot. In general, if the potentiality p • for a certain point in time t0 the occurrence of a state property 
(occurring in a state S) to have state property a has led to a a is determined by the state at a previous time point t1 < t0, in 
state S' where indeed a holds, then this state property a of particular, by the occurrence of the first-order potentiality p(1) for a 
state S' is called the fulfilment or actualisation of the at that time point t1,  
                                                                                               (1)
potentiality p for a, occurring in state S. Notice that • the occurrence of the first-order potentiality p  at t1 is 
Aristotle considered both absolute potentialities, indicating determined by the state at a time t2 < t1, in particular by the 
                                                      occurrence of its own potentiality which is the second-order 
a state property for the future state independent of this state (2)
property in the present state, and relative potentialities, potentiality p  for a at t2, et cetera. 
indicating a difference (increase or decrease) in a future This process can be visualised as depicted in Figure 1. 
state property compared to the present state.          
                                                         state 
                                                         properties 
                                                                   (4)
                                                             (4)  p  
3.  Higher-Order Potentialities                             p  
                                                                         (3)
                                                             (3)        p  
The effect of a potentiality on a future state can be described  p  
                                                                               (2)
by relating its occurrence in the present state to the      p(2)               p  
occurrence of a certain state property in the future state,                          (1)
                                                            p(1)                     p  
usually under an additional opportunity condition (e.g.,  
                                                                                            a 
assuming no obstruction by influences otherwise). This      a 

                                                                                            time points 
1 ‘As a working guide, the scientist has for some centuries followed the  
hypothesis that, given a set of variables, he can always find a larger set that Figure 1.  Dynamics based on higher-order potentialities 
(1) includes the given variables, and (2) is state-determined. Much research 
work consists of trying to identify such a larger set (…). The assumption This shows how the concept of potentiality to explain 
that such a larger set exists is implicit in almost all science, but, being change of a certain basic state property a can take the form 
fundamental, it is seldom mentioned explicitly.’ [Aristotle, 350 BC’], p. 28. of a large number of (higher-order) entities. Strange as the 
2 ‘We have now before us the distinctions in the various classes of being idea of an infinite number of higher-order potentialities may 
between what is full real and what is potential. (…) The fulfilment of what seem at first sight, in mathematical context (in particular in 
exists potentially, in so far as it exists potentially, is motion - namely, of calculus) this has been worked out well (using infinite 
what is alterable qua alterable, alteration: of what can be increased and its 
opposite what can be decreased (there is no common name), increase and summations). Higher-order potentialities have been 
decrease: of what can come to be and can pass away, coming to be and formalised in the form of higher-order) derivatives of a 
passing away: of what can be carried along, locomotion.’ function. The (first-order) derivative of a function at a time 
(from [Aristotle, 350 BC], Book III, Part 1)          point t gives an estimated measure of how the function will 
                                                      change its value in a next time point. The well-known 

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   263Taylor series [Taylor, 1715] for sufficiently smooth  ‘motion generated in a given time’. This ‘motion generated 
functions (at least infinitely often differentiable to guantee in a given time’ can be philosophical founded as a second-
the existence of the derivatives) shows how changes of the order potentiality for the first-order potentiality ‘motion’. 
function value from t to t'    (within some given     So, within classical mechanics, after the concepts 
neighbourhood of t) depend on all (higher-order)      ‘momentum’ and ‘kinetic energy’ which were added to the 
derivatives:                                          state ontology as specific types of concepts based on a (first-
                     (k)      k 
       f(t') = f(t) + Σk  f (t)(t' – t) / k!.         order) potentiality, the concept ‘force’ can be considered a 
This shows how the (relative) potentiality at t, defined by third anticipatory state property added to the state ontology, 
the combination of all higher-order potentialities,   this time based on a second-order potentiality. Newton and 
determines the changed state at the future time points t'.  also Leibniz developed mathematical techniques of calculus, 
                                                      such as differentiation and integration. Using these 
4.  Potentialities Underlying Physics                 techniques, Newton’s second law is formulated as F = dp/dt 
                                                      or F = d(mv)/dt. For a mass which is constant over time this 
In later times, successors of Aristotle, such as René is equivalent with F = ma with a the acceleration dv/dt; in 
Descartes (1596-1650), Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695), this - most known form - the law was formulated by Euler 
Isaac Newton (1643-1727) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz 65 years after the Principia appeared. In 20th century text 
(1646-1716), among others, have addressed the question books such as [Mach, 1942] the concept ‘moving force’ is 
how to further develop the phenomenon of dynamics (or defined in terms of acceleration, which is based on a second-
change), in particular within Physics. They developed order potentiality for change of position.6 
classical mechanics based on concepts that can be       As illustrated by the examples in Sections 3 and 4, the 
philosophically founded as certain types of potentialities.  idea of use potentialities to analyse the change of states has 
   Descartes [1633] took the product of mass and velocity successfully contributed to the development of well-
of an object for its potentiality to be in a changed position, respected disciplines such as Mathematics and Physics.  
or ‘quantity of motion’. Notice that this anticipatory state 
property ‘quantity of motion’ is a relative potentiality: the 
actualisation of a given quantity of motion entails being at 5.  Reducers Limiting a Potentiality Chain 
another position as specified by this quantity relative to the Apparently, the use of potentialities may lead to an infinite-
current position. Descartes also expresses a law of   dimensional vector of higher-order potentialities. As this 
conservation for this quantity of motion.             can be difficult to handle, it makes sense to look for ways to 
  In modern physics this ‘quantity of motion’ concept is break off this chain of higher-order potentialities. One 
called linear momentum, or just momentum, and the     possible option is to consider only changes that involve a 
conservation, for example, during elastic collisions, is called finite number of higher-order potentialities. For example, 
the ‘law of momentum conservation’. Newton incorporated for a falling object within a constant gravitation field, the 
this notion in his approach to motion. This is one way in second-order potentiality (the second-order derivative of the 
which a concept ‘potentiality’ (for change of position) was function measuring the distance) is constant (9.8 m/sec2), 
used as a philosophical basis to introduce formalised and hence no third- or higher-order potentiality is needed. 
concepts in physics, thus providing one of the cornerstones However, further away in the universe, if an object is 
of classical mechanics. Also the concept of ‘quantity of approaching the earth, gravitation will increase over time, so 
motion’, describing change of position, can change itself; this assumption of constancy will not always be fulfilled. 
this leads to a second-order potentiality. In his second law However, as is also shown by the Taylor series, often an 
Newton [1729] uses the term ‘impressed motive force’ to adequate approximation can be obtained by taking into 
express the change of motion.3 This law expresses that the account only the terms up to some n-th order, as the terms 
concept of force used by Newton directly relates to change substantially decrease in absolute size; for example, 
of motion. For (quantity of) motion he gives the same assuming all derivatives bounded by some constant M, the 
definition as Descartes, i.e., momentum. For an impressed effect of the n-th term is less then M/n!, so, as an 
force a definition is given that refers to ‘exerted action’, and approximation its contribution can be counted as zero. 
to the corresponding change of the object’s state of motion.4   In the same perspective, a more general way to get rid of 
He shows how this notion applies in the particular case of the infinite vector of higher-order potentialities is when for 
centripetal (i.e., directed to one point) force.5 This shows some n the n-th-order potentiality is equivalent to a 
that the concept ‘force’ used by Newton as an addition to combination of lower level potentialities and/or basic state 
state ontology can be given a definitional relationship to properties (this is called a reducer of the higher-order 
                                                      potentiality) and by means of this relation can be reduced to 
                                                           them. This is what happens in classical mechanics, and, in a 
3 ‘The change of motion is proportional to the motive force impressed; 
and is made in the direction of the right line in which that force is more general context, in other cases where a differential 
impressed.’ [Newton, 1729] 
4                                                                                                                
 ‘An impressed force is an action exerted upon a body, in order to 6
change its state ...’ [Newton, 1729]                    ‘Moving force is the product of the mass value of a body with the 
                                                      acceleration induced in that body.’ [Mach, 1942], p. 304 
5 ‘The motive quantity of a centripetal force is (…) proportional to the 
motion which it generates in a given time.’ [Newton, 1729]  

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   264equation can be found that relates a higher-order derivative as a second-order potentiality (for a changed world state). 
to lower order derivatives and/or basic state properties.  To the question where desires come from there seems to be 
  The domain of Physics illustrates this. Analysing the no general answer. In some cases there may be reducers for 
motion of planets around the sun, Newton found out that it in terms of physical states, in other cases, e.g., norms or 
they can only follow their orbit if a second-order potentiality personality aspects may provide a third-order potentiality. 
is assumed, in the direction of the sun. Newton calculated 
(using his calculus under development) in detail that this 7.  Potentialities and Production Systems 
motive force was proportional to 1 divided by the square of 
the distance. For example, for an object in space with mass An often used method in AI and Cognitive Science is to 
m approaching earth (with mass M), Newton’s law of    specify how a state in a system may change is production 
                                                      systems. These are collections of production rules, denoted 
gravitation for the motive force on the object is as follows ϕ → ψ          ϕ              ψ
(here x is the distance between the object and the earth, and as    with antecedent  and consequent  ; here: 
                         2                            •
c is a constant): F = c mM/x . Such a relation between the  ϕ  indicates a (combined) state property for the current state 
second-order potentiality force and basic state properties • ψ  indicates one or more state properties for the next state 
mass and distance shows how a higher-order potentiality The idea is that if the combination of properties specified in 
can be reduced: in this case  c mM/x2 is a reducer for F. the first description holds in a (current) state, then in a next 
  As the example from Physics shows, a differential   state the properties specified by the second description will 
equation is a manner to reduce higher-order potentialities. hold. This is illustrated by a simple model of agent 
This reveals another assumption underlying DST, in    behaviour based on beliefs desires and intentions. Consider 
addition to the state-based system assumption, namely that an agent walking down a street and observing an ice cream 
for some n the n-th order potentiality can be reduced to sign across the street he believes the supermarket sells ice 
lower level potentialities and/or basic state properties. cream. Based on this belief (b1) the agent generates a desire 
Without this assumption no differential equations can be (d) for ice cream. Given this desire, and the belief (b2) that 
found, and without them DST will not work.            the supermarket is reachable (by crossing the street) the 
                                                      agent generates the intention (i) of having ice cream. Given 
6.  Potentialities and BDI-Models                     this intention and the belief (b3) that no traffic is on the 
                                                      street he actually crosses the street and obtains the ice cream 
Although traditionally only used within disciplines such as (e). In this case the state ontology is described by six basic 
Mathematics and Physics, a natural question is whether the state properties: b1, b2, b3, d, i, e. The production system is: 
idea of higher-order potentialities is also suitable to obtain    b1 → d       b2 ∧ d → i         b3 ∧ i → e 
philosophical foundations for domains such as AI,     Based on this a trace of subsequent states is made:  
Cognitive Science and Agent Systems. To describe the  •  Given a current state S, take the production rules for which the 
internal dynamics of agents, the concepts beliefs, desires antecedent holds in the current state. This is the set of 
and intentions have been introduced; e.g., [Aristotle, 350 applicable rules. 
BC’]. From a historical perspective, the reason for   •  Collect the consequents of all applicable rules and obtain the 
introducing these concepts was not unlike the reason for next state S' by modifying S so that all these consequents hold 
introducing the concepts momentum and force within       in S' (and the rest of S is persisting). 
classical mechanics: they were needed as abstract notions to So, for example, the subsequent states for a given initial 
explain the change of states, in this case of living creatures. state for which the three beliefs hold are as follows: 
Aristotle describes how desire plays a role similar to that of    0  [b1, b2, b3] 
the potentiality for an action. Here ‘desire’ is indicated as     1  [b1, b2, b3, d] 
the source of motion of a living being. He shows how the          2  [b1, b2, b3, d, i] 
occurrence of certain internal (mental) state properties          3  [b1, b2, b3, d, i, e] 
(desires, ‘the good’) within the living being entail or cause How can this be interpreted in terms of potentialities? For 
the occurrence of an action in the external world, given an example, consider state 1. As in the next state, state 2, state 
opportunity (‘the possible’) to actualise the potentiality for property i holds, in state 1 the potentiality for i to hold has 
the action indicated by the desire.                   to be present. On the other hand, i occurs in state 2 because 
  In this section it is discussed how to philosophically of the second production rule. Taken together this means 
found concepts such as desire and intention by potentialities. that this production rule can be interpreted for state 1 as 
To start, the notion of intention is addressed. An intention indicating that, due to the occurrence of both b2 and d in 
can be founded by a potentiality for an action in the world this state, also the potentiality p(i) for i occurs in state 1. 
(i.e., for a changed world state). Where do intentions come Similarly the other production rules can be interpreted as 
from? A common view is that, given some beliefs,      indications of which potentialities occur in a given state. In 
intentions come from desires, by some form of selection general, according to this interpretation, a production system 
process. In this interpretation a desire can founded by a specifies for each state which potentialities occur: for each 
potentiality as well, but not a potentiality for some state of production rule ϕ → ψ, if in a state S its antecedent ϕ holds, 
the world, but a potentiality for an intention, which itself is then in this state S also the potentialities p(ψ) for ψ occur. 
also considered a potentiality, for an action (i.e., for a Thus a production rule ϕ → ψ can be interpreted as an 
changed world state). Therefore this view identifies a desire implication ϕ → p(ψ), describing a logical relationship 

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   265between state properties in a given state, e.g., ϕ is a reducer about the physiological states of the synapses between 
for p(ψ). Since the idea of production rules is used in certain neurons, e.g., sensory neuron SN2 and motor neuron 
various other modelling approaches (e.g., knowledge-based MN, during the adaptation process), then all of the 
systems, and cognitive architectures such as ACT-R    potentialities can be reduced; e.g., [Gleitman, 1999], pp. 
[Anderson and Lebiere, 1998] and SOAR [Laird et al.,  155-156, see also Figure 2. Within a potentiality-based 
1987]), in principle it is possible to interpret such analysis this is incorporated as follows. Suppose s1, s2 and 
approaches in terms of potentialities as well.        s3 are reducers of p, p', p" respectively, then the (higher-
                                                      order) potentialities p', p", p"'  become (first-order) 
8.  Potentialities and Adaptive Agents                potentialities for the world state properties s1, s2 and s3 
                                                      respectively. 
Adaptive agents are often modelled in numerical and    
algorithmic manners. In this sense modelling approaches for         SN
                                                           siphon 
adaptive agents are in general closer to the DST modelling touch
                                                       
approach than to symbolic modelling approaches as often                   IN                M
applied for other types of cognitive agents such as BDI  
                                                                                              contraction 
agents. The potentiality-based analysis framework is 
                                                            tail 
applicable to obtain a philosophical foundation for both 
                                                           shock 
types of modelling approaches. As in Section 6 and 7 it was         SN 
shown how symbolic models can be founded by                  Figure 2.  Aplysia from neurological perspective 
potentialities, in this section adaptive agents are addressed, 
illustrated by a case study of Aplysia. Aplysia is a sea hare This shows how potentialities cover the foundation of 
that is often used to do experiments. It is able to learn; for both internal agent states that are used as functional states 
example, it performs classical conditioning in the following without  direct physical grounding, and internal agent states 
manner. This (a bit simplified) description is mainly based that are considered as embodied and embedded in the 
on [Gleitman, 1999], pp. 155-156. Initially the following physical world. Moreover, the relationship between these 
behaviour is shown: a tail shock leads to a response  functionalist and physicalist perspectives can easily be 
(contraction), and a light touch on its siphon is insufficient analysed within the potentiality-based philosophical 
to trigger such a response. Now suppose the following framework. For reasons of presentation, the example of an 
experimental protocol is undertaken. In each trial the subject adaptive agent discussed in this section was kept relatively 
is touched lightly on its siphon and then, shocked on its tail simple. However, the case can be extended easily to include, 
(as a consequence it responds). It turns out that after a for example, numerical aspects, or more precise timing 
number of trials (assumed three in the current example) the aspects such as in trace conditioning.  
behaviour has changed: the animal also responds (contracts) 
on a siphon touch. The cause of this change in behaviour is, 9.  Potentialities and DST 
in short, that the learning trials strengthen the internal Within Dynamical Systems Theory (DST; cf. [Ashby, 1960; 
connection between sensory nand motor neurons. To obtain Port and Gelder, 1995]), techniques used are difference and 
a potentiality-based analysis of this adaptive agent the differential equations. The analysis based on potentialities 
following steps can be made.                          covers the DST approach in the following manner.  
•
   Introduce the basic world state properties: siphon touch, tail • For the basic state properties, take value assignments to the 
   shock, contraction, weak connection between sensory neuron basic variables used to describe a phenomenon in DST.  
   and motor neuron.                                   •
•                                                        For any n, for the nth-order potentiality for a basic state 
   Introduce a potentiality p for the contraction (based on the property, take the value assignment to the nth-order derivative 
   opportunity that a siphon touch occurs).              of the variable.  
•
   Introduce a potentiality p' for p (based on the opportunity that • For the reduction relation of an nth-order potentiality, take the 
   both a tail shock and siphon touch occur).            nth-order differential equation relating the value of the nth-
•  Introduce a potentiality p" for p' (based on the opportunity that order derivative to the values of lower-order derivatives and 
   both a tail shock and siphon touch occur).            basic variables. 
•  Introduce a potentiality p"' for p" (based on the opportunity As an example, the gravitation case is covered as follows: 
   that both a tail shock and siphon touch occur).     • Basic state properties: value assignments to x the position of 
•  Specify a reducer for p"' based on the untrained state of the the object, m mass of the object, M mass of the earth. 
   connection between the relevant sensory and motor neurons. • First-order potentiality for basic state property mx: value 
Notice that in the analysis of the example the intermediate assignment to first-order derivative p of mx (momentum p of 
states during the adaptation process were founded by first-, the object): p = dmx/dt. 
second- and third-order potentialities p, p', p" that were not • Second-order potentiality for state property mx: value 
reduced, similar to the not reduced first-order potentiality assignment to first-order derivative f of p, or, equivalently, 
momentum in classical mechanics as an intermediate state second-order derivative f of mx (force f): f = dp/dt = d2mx/dt2. 
between the second order potentiality force, which is  • Reduction relation of the second-order potentiality f:  
reduced, and position. However, if more detailed                    f = c*mM/x2       (or d2mx/dt2 = c*mM/x2 ). 
information from the neurological area is incorporated (i.e., 

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   266