                             Surprise as Shortcut for Anticipation:
                            Clustering Mental States in Reasoning             ∗

                      Michele Piunti, Cristiano Castelfranchi and Rino Falcone
                        Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies - CNR
                         {michele.piunti, c.castelfranchi, r.falcone}@istc.cnr.it


                    Abstract                          level in goal deliberation, planning, intention reconsideration,
                                                      learning and action control.
    To enhance effectiveness in real world applications, In addition, expectations have a foundational role in emo-
    autonomous agents have to develop cognitive com-  tion life-cycle and expectation enabled agents are lean-
    petencies and anticipatory capabilities. Here we  ing to be ’surprised’ according to a human-like behavioral
    point out their strong liaison with the functional metaphor. Deﬁning surprise as a function of the experienced
    roles of affective mental states as those of human- mismatch between what is expected and the perceived data (at
    like metaphor: not only the root elements for both a given level of representation), expectations become ”prereq-
    surprise and anticipation are expectations, but also uisites” for surprise, thus different kinds of expectations holds
    part of the effects of the former elicit efforts on the to different kinds of surprise. Here we point out that sources
    latter. By analyzing different kinds of expectations, of surprise (generally speaking, the ”unexpected” signals) can
    we provide a general architecture enhancing prac- have either negative or positive consequences on purposive
    tical reasoning with mental states, describing and behaviors when they are considered in terms of penalties,
    empirically evaluating how mental and behavioral  costs rather than beneﬁts, advantages.
    attitudes, emerging from mental states, can be ap-  In sections 2 and 3 we give a reformulation of the prob-
    plied for augmenting agent reactivity, opportunism lem from a cognitive perspective, in terms of Mental States.
    and efﬁcacy in terms of anticipation.             We propose that different properties and outcomes of surprise
                                                      can be modeled in terms of mental states/attitudes cluster-
1  Introduction                                       ing suitable reactions and functional efforts. In particular,
                                                      we analyze surprise outcomes in autonomous agents engaged
While cognitive systems are attending in growing interest for in a foraging task in a risky world, where surprise attitudes
anticipatory behaviors, multidisciplinary studies remark li- are signiﬁcant either to become cautious, prudent, careful in
aisons between anticipatory mechanisms and functional role harmful circumstances, either for reinforcing expectations,
of emotions. Otherwise is generally accepted that to en- for enhancing knowledge, for learning and appraisal pro-
hance human-like effectiveness in real world applications, cesses. Some of the functions that surprise plays for an adap-
autonomous agents have to develop higher level cognitive tive behavior and an adaptive cognition can be seen in antici-
competencies. In this paper we claim and explain how au- patory terms of opportunistic adjustment to circumstances, of
tonomous agents can be anticipatory, able to deal with future immediate ’reactions’, but also in terms of intention recon-
events, and how this is important not only for robotic but also sideration, attention, belief revision, learning. Specialization
for software agents. In particular, we deﬁne cognitive an- of above effects induces balancing of agent resources, intro-
ticipatory agents not simply endowed with some statistical duces pay-offs in performances and may hold to domain de-
learning or prediction, but also with true expectations, related pendent decision strategies. Since a theoretical model, we de-
with their epistemic states (Beliefs) and their motivational sign Cautiousness, Excitement, Boredom and Curiosity,giv-
states (Goals). From a computational viewpoint, we deal with ing them the special ’moods’ that agent uses to adapt to un-
world predictive representations and we refer to expectations expected chances and to anticipate the world. In section 6
that can be framed among internal state and knowledge-base. an experiment discussion is proposed to evaluate how effec-
Although adopting a BDI-like [Rao and Georgeff, 1995] ap- tiveness (in terms of anticipation) is affected both by mental
proach, we do not introduce for expectations a new primitive, states and environment dynamics. Final discussion is given
but we build them on the basis of beliefs and goals. Expec- in section 7.
tations processing in real time requires monitoring, appraisal,
revision and updating, while, along practical reasoning [Brat- 2 Expectations and Practical Reasoning
man et al., 1988], expectations are directly involved at various
                                                      Goal directed architectures focalize in deliberation process
  ∗Work supported by the EU project MindRACES, FP6-511931, among set of goals, but let intention making and execution of
www.mindRaces.org.                                    plans in a functional, even purely reactive form: agents pro-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   507cess information reacting in a procedural way and choosing in some functional role of affective states.4 Many of these ap-
repertoire the plan to execute according to ﬁltering of condi- proaches show drawbacks in their cognitive model and gen-
tions and belief formulae. No native support was deﬁned for erally lack in opportunism against unexpected events: antici-
dealing with the future (e.g. future directed intentions), nei- patory agents should have strong proactive capabilities in us-
ther prevision models. Even if the idea was to align agent per- ing uncertain beliefs within deliberation processes, strategies
formances to real worlds environments, soon the inadequacy for adaptive intention reconsideration [Kinny and Georgeff,
of the model has shown drawbacks. Real world applications 1991] and sensing, disambiguation between motivations and
face with dynamism, low accessibility of environment state goal hierarchy.
and constraints.                                        In the next sections we propose a new approach, based on
  The main problem  to be addressed in real-time, sit- the high-level role of expectations, eliciting emotional states
uated and goal-directed model of agency is narrowness- and attitudes. As we see, this can be reﬂected in design of rea-
boundedness in various aspects like computational power, soning and decision making processes affected by emotional
time available to take decisions, knowledge and memory. signals.
Originally proposed in practical reasoning by Bratman, in-
tention reconsideration is a costly and binding process: once 3 Expectations, Surprise and Anticipation
goal is adopted, agent commits its intention to a given state We refer to anticipation outcomes as agent changes on men-
of affairs, and devote resources for achieving it. Traditionally tal attitudes in decision making due to what is expected.
optimization of intention reconsideration processes relies on While the association between internal state, processed in-
the two levels of goal deliberation and plan selection: ab- put and deliberation process is generally deﬁned in design
stractly, agents should break plan and shift their intention if: time, anticipatory strategies for intentional (goal driven) be-
(i) the related beliefs (context conditions) become false; (ii) haviors requires agent to build some predictive representa-
the committed plan is no longer achievable and there are no tions. In [Ortony and Partridge, 1987] cognitive expecta-
alternatives; (iii) the root-goal (or the meta-level intention) is tions are given in terms of practically deducible propositions,
inhibited by other goals (or by other meta-intentions). [Kinny deﬁned as symbolic beliefs that can be fully represented in
and Georgeff, 1991] analyzed different reconsideration strate- memory, or logically inferred. Our claim is that expecta-
                                 1
gies according to a ’degree of boldness’ . Their experiments tions in deliberative agents can be coupled with Beliefs and
showed that cautious agents outperforms bold agents in cases Goals: since these basic components, we attain expectations
of high world dynamism but, if the environment is static, all as a molecule expressing emerging attitudes , in part epis-
the costs for frequent intention reconsideration are wasted. In temic (to check whether the prediction really ﬁts the world,
a successive work [Kinny et al.,1992] introduced the ’cost to monitor the success of the behavior) in part motivational
of sensing’ and showed that agent effectiveness decrease with (the agent who build expectations is ’concerned’ and some of
the increasing of the sensor effort. On the contrary, the opti- its goal are involved) [Castelfranchi, 2005]. At a cognitive
mal sensing rate increase along with the world dynamism. level, we distinguish here between high and low level expec-
The experiments considered on the one side the time spared tations: Expectationα: more explicit, consists of fully rep-
by early detection of changes, on the other side the costs for resented predictions about decision outcomes and can be as-
too frequent sensing.                                 sociated with alternative courses of actions; Expectationβ:
  Agents reasoning has to rely on uncomplete knowledge: dealing with those expectations with weak level of represen-
their beliefs couple with the real world state at various grades tation, due to lack of beliefs, uncertainty, ignorance. At a
of adherence, resulting inconsistent due to ignorance and un- quantitative level, we refer to two independent dimensions:
certainty . Unlike completely observable environments, in 1. Belief strength, as degree of subjective certainty. The
partially observable environment (POEs) the observation at
                                                 2        agent is more or less sure and committed about their con-
time t may not provide sufﬁcient information to identify st . tent.
  Further, disambiguation between internal ’drives’ or mo-
                                                        2. Goal value, a subjective importance strictly dependent
tivations and goals is still an unsolved issue. For instance
                                                          on context conditions and mental attitudes.
Boltzmann selection techniques are used for controlling the
trade-off between exploration and exploitation; other mod- 4In their computational model of surprise [Macedo and Car-
els consider environmentally mediated model of emotions3 or doso, 2004] proposed a solution for exploration of unknown envi-
                                                      ronments with motivational agents where surprise holds to intentions
                                                      and ”action-goal”, thus eliciting action-selection through evaluation
  1
   They deﬁne bold agents which never stop to reconsider inten- of utility functions. We guess in this model two different levels
tions until the current plan is fully executed, and cautious agents are ’collapsed’, resulting surprise concurrently a ”motivation” (like
which stop to execute and reconsider their intentions after the exe- curiosity and hunger) and a ”intention” (”the event with the max-
cution of every action.                               imum estimated surprise is selected to be investigated”). As they
  2Approaches to POE use beliefs state methods (e.g. POMDP) deﬁne agent ﬁrst goal to enhance knowledge, surprise becomes both
and approximation techniques. In continuous space, intractabilities a mechanisms for ”appraisal of unexpectedness” and a further termi-
arise in updating belief and in calculating value function and sud- nal goal, pursued maximizing expected novelty. In addition, the def-
denly agents may operate with hidden states.          inition and functional role of curiosity remains unclear respect to the
  3 [Parunak et al., 2006] endowed a BDI architecture with agent one given for surprise: they identify both as the novelty-discrepancy
motivational state composed by a vector of seven drives, where the between the perceived data and the previous beliefs stored in mem-
current emotions modulates behavior.                  ory.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   508This kind of expectations already allow agent to experience Specialization of the above effects induces balancing of agent
surprise, elicited by the expectation resulting to be wrong af- resources, introduces pay-offs in performances and may hold
ter the fact (expectation invalidation). Thus, expectations be- to domain dependent decision strategies.
come ’prerequisites’ for surprise: more precisely surprise is
due to (and a signal of) a mismatch, an inconsistency between
agent expectations (given by previous knowledge) and the in- 4 Foraging in Risky World
coming information (actual input), compared at a given level
of representation [Castelfranchi and Lorini, 2003].   To test agent performances so that different strategies can be
  Current computational models lack quantitative descrip- signiﬁcantly compared, we design a test-bed scenario. En-
tion of the functions that surprise play for an anticipatory be- vironment captures features of real world domains, allowing
havior and an adaptive cognition. Psychoevolutionary model ﬂexible control of the world dynamics. Navigation capabil-
of [Meyer et al., 1997] proposed that surprise-eliciting events ities are given with a repertoire of paths (deﬁned as list of
holds to (i) appraisal of a cognised event as exceeding some location to pass through) used to routinize crossing rooms
threshold of unexpectedness; (ii) interruption of ongoing in- and LOI. Agents move in a continuous 2D land map where
formation processing and reallocation of resources to the in- walls, obstacles and doors (that can be open or close) delimit
vestigation of the unexpected event; (iii) analysis/evaluation rooms, corridors and pathways. Environment holds simu-
of that events; (iv) immediate reactions to that event and/or lated time and guarantees consistency for entities, artefacts
updating or revision of the ”old” schemas or beliefs. Recent and world objects. Belief base is built upon a shared ontol-
works in neuroscience and neuroeconomics identify the im- ogy of world objects and artefacts: three Locations of Interest
portant role of emotions in decision making and anticipatory (LOI) present symbolic reference points where three kind of
goal deliberation processes. It has been showed that affective food appear, with ﬁxable frequency. Each class of food has
states help to ”decide advantageously before knowing the ad- modiﬁable ’score’ and a likelihood to appear near the corre-
vantageous strategy” [Bechara et al., 1997]. To improve the sponding LOI. Agent works for the terminal goal of foraging,
speed of learning, regulate the trade-off between exploration composed of the following workﬂow of actions: (1) Look for
and exploitation and learn more efﬁciently, [Ahn and Picard, Food with (supposed) best reward; (2) Go to the identiﬁed
2006] introduced decision making strategies using affective Food location and pick up it; (3) Transport Food (one at a
components given by affective anticipatory rewards. They time) from the original location to the repository and deposit
proposed a cognitive system with affective biases of antici- it. Releasing Foods in the repository, agents obtain a ’reward’
patory reward, modeled by positive and negative valence of augmenting energy, calculated from the basis of the original
                     5
evaluation of expectation .                           food score decreased with a decay factor straight depending
  We propose that effects of the expectation processing can on the transport interval. Decay is introduced to enhance cost
be seen beginning from the strength of its component (Be- in duration of actions. Agents are characterized by the fol-
liefs and Goals) and can rely on the positive or negative con- lowing tuple of dynamic resources:
sequences upon agent purposes. The prediction of possible
world outcomes triggers a given anticipatory behavior (e.g.            Ag = En,r,Sr,s               (1)
aimed at preventing threats). Relatively to goals, we con-
sider the ’goal failure’ in terms of excitement or frustration, En indicating the instant amount of energy, r the range of
when the goal is achieved at more or less level than the one vision where sensors can retrieve data, Sr the sensor sample
expected. Relatively to beliefs, we consider the epistemic ca- rate, and s the instant speed. We assume agent burning energy
pabilities aimed at solving the inconsistency. We also guess according to the combination of previous resource costs (e.g.
that different kinds of expectations hold to different kinds of the more speed and sensor-rate is high, the more agent will
surprise. Expectation α failure elicit updating of those ex- spend energy).
plicit expectations coupled with goals, reinforcement in ex-
pected utility and exploitation of purposive behavior. On the Along the presented workﬂow, agents can run up against
other side, unexpected β signals elicit adaptation, reactive- dangerous entities. Fires behave according to a two state life-
ness, backtracking, intention reconsideration, shift of motiva- cycle periodic function: in their ﬁrst shape they are in a smoke
tions, opportunism, investment in resources. We distinguish ’premonitory’ state, then they become real harmful ﬂame.At
between:                                              the beginning of each period, ﬁres change their location with
                                                      discrete movements. Moreover Fires can rise with higher fre-
 1. Long-term and short-term effects, respectively related to quency in given dangerous areas. Against ﬁres collisions,
    decision making, learning and adaptive behavior, arous- agents have to reconsider their intention (e.g. adopting ﬁre
    ing, invoking and mobilizing resources attention. avoidance behavior), and they are constrained to experience
 2. Mental and behavioral changes, affecting motivations, a short-term reaction: actions and speed are constrained and
    intention reconsideration, self-conﬁdence, action execu- further costs in term of energy have to be paid. Agents expire
    tion and selection.                               when their energy goes to zero6.
  5In particular, the extrinsic rewards (rising from external goal,
or cost) are integrated with intrinsic rewards (rising from emotional 6Notice that in order to appreciate cumulative effects of different
circuits), internal drives and motivations: these affective anticipatory strategies and behaviors on the long term, no fatal event are intro-
rewards are modeled to improve learning and decision making. duced.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   5095  Design
As for the agent’s kernel we adopt Jadex engine7, a multi
threaded framework for BDI agents where the architecture
leads to a loosely coupled Beliefs, Goal, and Plans, including
their mutual relations, through agent descriptor [Braubach et
al., 2005]. Jadex deliberation is driven by the evaluation of
logic formulae (put in form of Belief formulae) and ’arcs of
inhibition’ between goals for dynamically resolving their pri-
ority. As explained below, to model expectations and effects
of surprise at a system level, we pointed out that they take
place at various level of reasoning and we modiﬁed the orig-
inal BDI schema introducing α expectation processing (with
Expectation Driven Deliberation) and β expectation process-
ing (with Mental States designed for clustering attitudes for Figure 1: Transition Function for Mental States uses two
adaptive and anticipatory changes).                   stacks for storing Positive and Negative events.

5.1  Subjective Expected Utility                      5.2  From reactiveness to anticipation
We relate α expectations with agent epistemic states (Beliefs) A reactive agent is one that makes decisions about what ac-
and motivational states (Goals). Subjective Expected Utili- tion to take relying on its current state and on input from sen-
ties (deﬁned in decision-theoretic accounts as a function of sors. In this case, states can be modeled by a (stochastic) ﬁ-
the agent’s beliefs and desires [Bratman et al., 1988]) are in- nite state automaton (FSA) where each state represents an ac-
cluded at meta level reasoning as mechanisms for Goal delib- tion -or a plan- the agent is executing, while transitions get it
eration. Along the foraging tasks, a working memory stores to other states. Otherwise, generalized Markov process eval-
information about food ”quality” (reward on goal achieve- uates the past k states: if an agent has instantaneous k-length
                                                      knowledge of the world, it could dynamically change its inter-
ment and food type) and ”quantity” (frequencies, time-stamps                                           8
and location of any food added in the belief base). These are nal state, allowing reasoning as a whole to adapt to changes .
the re-evocable traces of previously achieved actions: agents In most situations, such global knowledge is impractical or
                                                      costly to collect but for sufﬁciently slow dynamics, agents
associate to each LOI a SEU value given by BelRew (deter-
mined averaging rewards stored in a k-length memory for the can correctly estimate the environment through local obser-
                                                      vations. This kind of agents can be described by a push down
last k delivered Foods) multiplied with PFLOI (indicating the
likelihood to discover foods near the LOI). Through a feed- automaton (PDA) where the stack stores the expectation in-
back, actual results of purposive actions of depositing food validations items. By evaluating the cached items agent can
are compared against expectations: once a food is located, foresee the current environment state (infer βexpectations)
                                                      and consequently adapt its attitudes. Items have both an infor-
agent will reinforce PFLOI (correct expectation), otherwise,
                                                      mative content (e.g. timestamp, Location, event type), and a
when a LOI is visited and no foods are located, PFLOI will be
weakened (wrong prediction). At the meta-level-reasoning, semantic content, because they are coupled with the positive
                                                      (beneﬁts) or negative (disadvantages) effects that the event
agent chooses to look for foodx at the corresponding LOIx
by comparing their SEUs and by adopting the epistemic goal entails. Hence, by using two distinct buffers to store these
toward best expected LOI, according to a -greedy strategy. positive and negative events agents, the agent can observe
SEU processing runs in ”discrete time”, upon goal achieve- the world in terms of positive opportunities and negative cir-
ment or at action completion. Identifying with sensors a set cumstances. Starting from these series of local observations,
of foods, agent adds them to the beliefbase and heads for a background process periodically deﬁne the mental state to
the nearest one, observing topology, constraints and obstacle adopt, through a transition function (see Fig.1).
bounds. Deliberation from searching to pickup action is trig-
gered when a food is located, from pickup to homing when a 5.3 Mental States
valuable is carried. Note that if a nearest food fj is located, After a series of positive surprises, unexpected opportunities
a new intention inhibits the current plan. Further transition to and helpful novelties, agent may tend to reinforce beliefs: for
searching is caused when agent achieves the drop action. instance, dropping food with unexpected good reward holds
  In addition, means-end reasoning processes are intro- agent to become Excited, reinforcing SEU in looking food of
duced when agents choose a path between the available ones that type near the respective LOI. Exciting surprises are in-
(means), to reach a target location (end). The risk is a neg- ternal signal for arousing the agent, for increasing the explo-
ative α expectation (a threat). Quantitatively risk is a fully rative activity and for searching for those good events. Hav-

represented variable inside the paths that agents use to move 8
and is augmented by unexpected negative events (e.g. ﬁre or A reactive agent can be considered as ordinary Markov process,
smoke threat).                                        where future state depends only on its present state. If the memory
                                                      on the past states has length k, then the agent that is making deci-
                                                      sions about future actions rely on the past k states and the process
  7See Jadex project at http://sourceforge.net/projects/jadex/ can be represented as a generalized Markov process of order k.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   510ing registered a close series of harmful events may signify
agent is in a dangerous area. The Mental State coupling with
alerting (negative) surprise is Cautiousness, which gives the
anticipatory effort of risk avoidance (i.e. anticipating threats).
Being cautious in a risky world, with hidden state, means
to become prudent and to adopt safe behaviors. We design
agent cautiousness distinguishing two aspects: ﬁrstly caution
elicits arousal and alert, holds to become more vigilant, to
look ahead, to check better while and before moving (pru-
dence against risks); secondly to be careful in doing danger-
ous actions, either augmenting the control or doing the ac-
tion in less risky way (e.g using alternatives in repertoire).
We suppose cautious agent able to escape from threats using
its safest plans. The investment in resources is exploitable
for adapting, learning, noticing world regularities and antici-
pating threats, but introduces pay-offs: [Castelfranchi et al.,
2006] showed that mobilizing more resources for epistemic
actions (actions explicitly directed to enhance knowledge)
and attentive processes has direct effects in reducing prompt-
ness and speediness and side effects in bodily reactions, as
further energy consumption. Caution holds to behavioral and
mental changes: we identify the following activities: (i) Per- Figure 2: Agent energy (a) and effectiveness (b) comparision
ceptive investment, reallocation of attentive resources S, Sr,
v, looking ahead, updating, focusing; (ii) Belief Revision,
e.g. signalling a dangerous area, increasing the path risk; 6 Experimental Results
(iii) Adapting of self-conﬁdence in beliefs (and expectations); We compared a benchmark agent with subjective expected
(iv) Intention reconsideration in the sense of selection of safe utility (SEU) and an agent adding to subjective expected util-
actions (e.g. selection of safest path). We design Boredom ity processing also mental states (MS) module. Experiments
as the mental state coupling with lack of surprising events have been conducted in environment with different level of
(i.e. empty buffers). The transition function gets to Boredom riskiness, indicated by the presence of more or less harm-
by persistence of empty buffers (where persistence is deﬁned ful objects (e.g. ﬁres). Our ﬁrst series of experiments ex-
by heuristic thresholds). In the long run, further lack of sur- tracted the course of energy in function of time: as in [Castel-
prise items produces a special ’mood’, Curiosity, whose out- franchi et al., 2006], while with low presence of riskiness MS
come is to shift from exploitation to exploration attitudes. In and SEU agents have comparable energy trends, we noticed
this case the agent activates the new goal of exploring and agent mean energy decay according to enhancing of risks.
searching for unexpected event in less visited areas, in order Fig.2a shows the trial with the presence of 7 ﬁres entities.
to update knowledge and expectation models. Curious agent It is interesting to note the discontinuities in slopes of the
uses an alternative searching policy: while the ﬁrst strategy is functions, caused by transitions of mental states and, conse-
based on evaluation of SEU (according to which agent selects quently, by the different energy consumption due to resource
searching actions towards best expected LOI) the second has allocation. Peaks indicate goal achievement (food released
the purpose to ’attain knowledge’ in order to update internal in the repository) and consequent energy recharge; downfalls
world representations, predicting models and beliefs: antici- indicate damaging by ﬁres. As we expected, MS agent out-
pation is indirectly elicited by appraisal, beliefs and expecta- performed SEU agent, being able to adapt behavior and re-
tion revision. Notice that Curiosity implies abandoning risk duce harms. SEU agent collided with more ﬁres and this
                                                      caused it to expire after 1200 sim time. Due to cautiousness,
  Mental States  Attitudes      Resources             repertoire of safe actions and risk evaluation in choosing of
                                r     Sr    S         paths, MS agent acted in safeness, succeeded to escape from
  Default        Exploitation   0.73  0.73  0.73      threats and suffered less damages. In these cases MS agent
  Excitement     Reinforcement  0.6   0.6   1.0       is able to anticipate dangerous areas and collisions and nega-
  Caution        Prudence       1.0   1.0   0.2       tive effects are minimized until agent shift to the cautiousness
  Curiosity      Exploration    1.0   0.2   1.0       mental state. It also been noticed that agent dynamics intro-
                                                      duce payoffs. During their lifetime, SEU achieved 5 forages
Table 1: Mental States and weights for epistemic resources while MS agent 4: SEU boldness and commitment ensure
deﬁned in (1). Note that the global amount of resources is higher speed and less time to accomplish the task. Otherwise,
limited to 2.2 for each state.                        trials with lower level of riskiness showed better MS agent
                                                      performances in searching on the long term, due to curios-
evaluation: it elicits the adoption of a new explicit epistemic ity. MS agent showed better exploration competencies, when
goal, leading the agent towards those areas where it foresee food valuables near LOI are consumed and the usual SEU
to enhance knowledge.                                 strategies lacks.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   511