                  Multi-Agent System that Attains Longevity via Death∗

                                   Megan Olsen, Hava Siegelmann
                                  University of Massachusetts Amherst
                                     Computer Science Department
                              molsen@cs.umass.edu, hava@cs.umass.edu


                    Abstract                          systems of interest are not limited to 2-D. Consider a dis-
                                                      tributed system of computer-camera pairs, the architecture of
    We propose a novel approach to self-regenerating  a distributed sensor network that acts in response to queries.
    systems which require continuous operation, such  Queries can start at each node and send processes to the var-
    as security surveillance. For that aim we in-     ious computers to tune the cameras appropriately. If some
    troduce HADES, a self-regenerating cooperative    of these processes start behaving irregularly they may choke
    multi-agent system with local monitoring. When    the system, especially if the irregularity involves excessive
    agents of HADES ﬁnd local failures they repair    querying. This may be initiated by a hostile environment or
    them. However, in extreme cases repair may not be developed naturally with a series of untreated failures. Re-
    possible and irregular aggressive agents will mul- moving the irregular processes quickly is best in either case,
    tiply. These irregular agents may use all of the  and regenerating will occur automatically to replace the miss-
    system’s resources and thus take over the system. ing agents. The protocol must assure that most agents killed
    To optimize system longevity, we identify proto-  are irregular and that healthy agents can regenerate after death
    cols for killing these irregular agents. Our primary in the system.
    contribution is a double communication protocol of  Aggressive treatment of this kind is also appropriate in the
    alert and death signals among the agents, making  case of cooperative robots. An irregular robot may begin to
    the multi-agent system robust to failures and at- attack the other robots, or damage resources needed to attain
    tacks.                                            the system’s goal. In this case the other robots must have a
                                                      way to end the irregular behavior so that the system goal may
1  Introduction                                       still be achieved. If the robot is unable to recognize that its be-
                                                      havior is unacceptable, there must be a secondary mechanism
Continuously functioning systems have the desired property of citizenship. The other robots could therefore convince the
of being able to survive damage and regenerate as neces- problematic robot to power itself off. Due to the amount of
sary. We propose a biologically-inspired, self-developing and damage the robot is capable of causing, the system is health-
regenerative system in which each agent contains the same ier without it. The assumption is that there are methods for
protocols for behaving and decision making, but presents outside help to repair the malfunctioning robot, or that the
the possibility of having failures in its protocols. Such fail- system goal is such that the other robots can still achieve it.
ures may occur due to environmental effects or naturally dur- Death in this case is a crucial step to preventing irreversible
ing the regeneration process. Agents that have acquired un- system damage.
repaired failures and are no longer aiding the environment are These examples demonstrate the ﬁne line required in the
considered irregular. If this malfunctioning escalates to the communication protocols, since irregular agents can also
point that the irregular agents take over the system, it is ben- send death messages to healthy agents. Irregular and healthy
eﬁcial for them to be taken away. Our solution to this prob- agents may compete in regenerating to replace killed agents
lem involves enticing agent death via communication. We de- as well. In the rest of this paper we outline a general frame-
velop such communication protocols and test their robustness work and describe the citizenship and communication proto-
with this system, called HADES (Healing and Agent Death cols necessary for achieving longevity via death.
Encouraging Stability). The purpose of HADES is to exam-
ine the role of death in self-regenerative systems as means to 2 Previous Work
achieve general longevity. Typically, an agent’s death is ir-
reversible and causes functional shortcomings [Klein et al., For a multi-agent system to be working continuously it must
2003; Dellarocas et al., 2000].                       adapt on-line to changes in the environment and internal fail-
  Our work is applicable to various distributed systems. ures. Diagnosis of a problem is a key requirement, as well
                                                                                     [                  ]
Since HADES is based on a 3-dimensional structure, the as having plans to react to problems Hamscher et al., 1992 .
                                                      Various frameworks exist for diagnosis in multi-agent sys-
  ∗Supported by NSF grant and DHS Fellowship          tems, including domain independent diagnosis [Horling et al.,

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  14282000]. Diagnosis for pre- and post-failure analysis for causal 3 The System
tasks can allow the system to both prevent failure and recover HADES is a cooperative multi-agent system on a 3-D lattice.
from it [Toyama and Hager, 1997]. Fault tolerance can allow It is arbitrarily bounded to a size of 40x40x20, therefore the
a system to recover from agents that die [Kumar et al., 2000]. total number of functioning agents cannot exceed the healthy
Our system, is built on the principle of regenerative agents equilibrium point of 4000. The system is created from a sin-
where all agents follow the same basic life protocol. Hence, gle agent that generates new agents until this equilibrium is
for HADES diagnosis consists of four steps. The ﬁrst is the reached. Agents can replicate up to 70 generations before it is
agent’s ability to determine whether its own life protocol has considered damaging, as each replication carries a possibility
been damaged and then to restore the healthy one. The sec- of damage to the agent. Each agent has a goal to stay healthy,
ond step of diagnosis is for agents to note that their neighbors therefore it will not replicate after 70 generations. Since the
are irregular, which causes the third step of communication agents share a system goal of keeping the equilibrium, repli-
with neighboring agents. These messages are passed along cation is a priority to all agents. These capabilities form the
and remain active for the relevant time period. The third step basis of the system’s self-regenerating property.
is designed for an agent that is so damaged that it cannot diag- We consider each agent to have life protocols that control
nose and repair itself. If this agent receives enough messages their actions and deﬁne their current state. The communica-
requesting it to die it must eventually do so to keep the system tion among agents occurs differently for each signal type. A
healthy. In the fourth step the irregular agent maintains some signal is emitted into the environment to be diffused equally
level of citizenship and therefore before killing itself commu- in all directions for presence signals. Death signals travel a
nicates its decision via signaling, causing neighboring agents speciﬁc distance after being emitted, but do not diffuse.
to raise their alert level.
  Approaches currently exist to react to agent death in a 4 Application Details
multi-agent system following survivalist or citizen concepts
[Klein et al., 2003; Dellarocas et al., 2000; Smith, 1980]. 4.1 Healthy Agents
Both approaches are aimed at increasing the adaptability Life Protocols
of the system to minimize the impact of agents’ death on There are four internal life protocols modeled in each healthy
the overall functionality of the system. The citizen ap- agent. They control both adherence to goals as well as actions
proach utilizes an external system that is alerted when an taken. The ﬁrst protocol is replication, which controls the fre-
agent dies and it then reallocates tasks so that the overall quency that an agent generates new agents and enables self-
system continues to function correctly [Klein et al., 2003]. testing prior to replication. The second protocol called sup-
The survivalist approach requires all agents to be capable pression controls the replication protocol by stopping replica-
of dealing with all problems internally [Klein et al., 2003; tion if damage is sensed. Repair is the third protocol, which
Dellarocas et al., 2000; Smith, 1980]. Each agent must there- ﬁxes any damage in the individual agent. The last protocol
fore be built with a great deal of error handling for any prob- enables an agent to induce self-death. Details of these proto-
lem that might occur [Dellarocas et al., 2000]. The survivalist cols will follow.
concept is part of the basic framework of the CNet protocol Goals
[          ]
Smith, 1980 . Our system naturally combines principles of Healthy agents have multiple goals. The system level goal is
both the survivalist and the citizenship approaches, and adds to maintain the system equilibrium by replicating when nec-
the communication protocols to handle irregular agents in a essary. Personal goals include: maintaining space, maintain-
novel manner.                                         ing self-health, maintaining system health, and maintaining
  Since our system is regenerative, agents will regenerate au- the shortest possible distance between itself and the center of
tomatically; the external communication process to alert for the system. Each of these goals have speciﬁc motivations and
irregular agents follows citizenship principles. Regenerative interactions.
systems have been investigated for at least the last 50 years,
and include minimalist ideas on what is needed for a system
to regrow [von Neumann, 1966], the use of chemicals to con-
trol the differentiation and growth [Miller, 2004], the ability
to use gene structures for regeneration [Meinhardt and Gierer,
1980], and regenerative agents [Fedoruk and Deters, 2002],
to mention the basics. Our main addition to these systems is
communication protocols as well.
  HADES investigates removing malicious agents. As Klein
et al points out, killing a malicious agent may be difﬁcult as Figure 1: 3D view of the system at its stable state. Shading is used
agents usually are not given the ability to directly kill each to make the rows more visible.
other. However, it may be beneﬁcial to the system overall for
problematic agents to die [Klein et al., 2003]. We study the A healthy agent maintains the shortest possible distance
option in which messages sent to an agent can only convince between itself and the center of the system so that the agents
it to die, thus alleviating the problem of agents directly killing will form a cohesive unit. Due to this goal, the system devel-
others. This approach helps protect against irregular agents ops in a sphere and is only forced into a rectangle due to the
sending death messages to healthy ones as well.       tight boundaries on the system.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1429  Healthy agents require empty space around them, as can 4.3 Irregular Agents
be seen in Figure 1. It is impossible for them to impede on If all four life protocols of a healthy agent have been dam-
another agent’s space unless the other agent dies. If an agent aged the agent cannot regulate itself, and will ignore all goals.
appears in the space directly next to an agent, the agent will The defective agent will continue to replicate, spreading its
attempt to move away if it can do so without encroaching on damaged life protocol to its daughters, creating a cluster of
another agent’s space.                                problematic agents. The probability of creating an irregular
  Agents maintain their own health by monitoring any dam- agent is incredibly low, since the processes have to be ruined
age that occurs to their protocols. If the repair mechanism in a particular order: repair damaged ﬁrst, then death, then
continuously fails, the agent will recognize that it may not suppression, and last replication. The probability of each in-
be functioning correctly and will kill itself so that it does not dividual process being ruined is simulated as 0.001, and the
damage the system. The agent is therefore preserving the sys- choice of which protocol to damage is random. The probabil-
tem health by preserving its own health.              ity of the damage occurring in the correct order is therefore
  The agent also maintains system health by guaranteeing extremely small. However, only one irregular agent is neces-
that it does not replicate too frequently. The replication pro- sary for the system’s behavior to change.
tocol controls replication rate but if it is damaged this rate
will increase, implying lack of self-testing prior to regenerat-
ing. An undamaged suppression protocol will halt this repli-
cation. An agent will also maintain system health by sending
kill signals to irregular agents, as will be discussed later.
Actions
After the initial development stage is completed the system
keeps the equilibrium by replacing agents that die, unless ir- Figure 2: Irregular agents (shown in black) take over the system
regular agents keep healthy agents from replicating by en- quickly by pushing the healthy agents out of the way and ignoring
tering their natural surrounding space. In our simulation we space.
have chosen for all healthy agents to make their decisions be-
fore the unhealthy agents, and while decisions are made se- Irregular agents replicate without respect to the amount of
quentially, the actions take effect at once. At each step of the space available or the diffused signals. Although the equilib-
simulation, an agent performs one action based on the envi- rium of healthy agents is 4000, if irregular agents completely
ronment:                                              take over the system they can grow to a size of 32,000 (Fig-
                                                      ure 2). If there is no room in any adjacent spots when an
 1. Repair: occurs if the agent is damaged.
                                                      irregular agent replicates, it “pushes” a neighboring healthy
 2. Death: occurs by three mechanisms, and is self-induced. agent into one of its buffer spaces. If this push causes the
    Death can occur when an agent has been unable to repair healthy agent to be directly next to another agent, neither it
    its life protocols. It can also occur with a probability of nor the adjacent agent will be able to replicate. If the agent
    0.0024 to include other causes of death such as age. The is instead pushed into another agent, it will be considered an
    third mechanisms is via kill signals sent by surrounding intruder. As the irregular agents form a cluster, they will con-
    agents.                                           tinue to exert this physical pressure on the same area. This
 3. Replication: occurs with a probability of 0.0025, if there process may continue until the system has no more healthy
    is available space and suppression is not activated. agents. We propose taking advantage of this style of growth
                                                      to design a communication protocol that will inhibit the prob-
 4. Movement: occurs if an agent cannot replicate but there lematic agents and save the healthy agents.
    is an available adjacent space with a higher concentra-
    tion of presence signals than its current spot, represent- 4.4 Controlling Irregular Growth via
    ing a space closer to the center of mass.              Communication
                                                      Our communication protocol allows agents to send signals
4.2  Presence Signals                                 to convince other agents to induce self-death. The initial
Agents emit a presence signal into the environment that is dif- signal is known as “Please Die,” and is sent by a healthy
fused equally in all directions for a speciﬁc radius and speed. agent that senses irregularity around itself. This irregular-
If the signal is strong enough to last more than one unit away, ity is represented by an invasion of space, although other
it will move by one unit each time step until it has reached systems could incorporate different representations. The in-
its limit. Therefore, the closer areas have a stronger chemical vading agent will either be an unhealthy agent, or a healthy
presence as the previous signal will linger.          agent that has been pushed by an unhealthy agent and there-
  Presence signals are used by agents to determine their fore forced to move. This signal initiates the inter-agent com-
proximity to other agents, as well as the direction of the center munication, and therefore has a low strength that was tested
of mass. If an agent moves or dies, the signal will slowly de- and chosen for optimality. The original “Please Die” signal
crease toward the original spot at the same rate that it diffused will only reach those agents in the original buffer space of the
out since it is no longer being emitted from that location. The sending agent. There is therefore a high probability that this
change is therefore not immediately obvious to other agents. signal will originally only be intercepted by irregular agents.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1430Although this mechanism allows the agent to eventually con-
vince close problematic agents to die, it is not enough to save
the entire system (Figure 3). We therefore propose a double
signal system inspired by agent trust [Ramchurn et al., 2004].


Figure 3: If only the “Please Die” signal is used and not the “I
Died” signal, there is a slower exponential growth of irregular agents
                                                      Figure 4: With a threat limit of 2 for both signal types, the number
until they reach a total of 30,000. The number of healthy agents have
                                                      of irregular agents peak at 446, and after 1000 ticks is at 105 (3.9%
already decreased to under 1000 after only 80 steps, and after 300
                                                      of agents in system). There are 2588 healthy agents in the system
steps is still slowly decreasing to under 400 agents. The same result
                                                      at this point, giving a ratio of 24.65 for healthy to irregular. With a
occurs when the signal limit for “Please Die” signals is either 3, 2,
                                                      limit of 3 for the “Please Die” signal and a signal limit of 2 for the
or 1. The ﬁnal ratio of healthy to irregular agents is 0.01.
                                                      “I Died” signal, the highest irregular agent count is slightly lower
                                                      than the previous one, at 435. The ﬁnal number of irregular agents
  The “I Died” signal is sent by an agent when it is dying, is 108 (4.13% of agents), giving a ratio of 23.21 healthy agents to
to alert neighboring agents that they should consider dying as each irregular one. A threat limit of 3 for both signal types has a
well. The signal is twice the strength of the “Please Die” sig- peak of 481 irregular agents. The number of irregular agents ends
                                                      at 170 (7.21% of agents), giving a ﬁnal healthy to irregular ratio of
nal, therefore affecting any agents within the buffer space or 17.37. With an increased signal limit of 10 for both signal types,
neighboring agents that are respecting the buffer space. Since the irregular agents grow to 1459 (97.56% of agents), almost three
the structure of irregular agents is a close cluster, this type of times as large as they did with the other limits, with a ﬁnal ratio of
signal is shown to be very effective in eliminating the major- 0.01 after 1000 ticks.
ity of them due to their close proximity, while not affecting
as many of the further apart healthy agents due to their spac-
ing. Recent descendants are likely to be close since irregular type, so all other tests utilized this limit. Tests were done
agents do not move, and they are therefore likely to have a with no “I Died” signal to verify its necessity (Figure 3). An
high level of trust. Irregular agents only send the “I Died” increasing signal limit was used to represent decreasing trust
signal, and therefore they only send one message during their among agents, where the limit for each signal separately starts
lifetime. It is therefore impossible for a single irregular agent at 2 and increases by 2 every 100 time steps (Figure 8). De-
to ﬂood its healthy neighbors with death signals.     layed signaling is a crucial property to test to examine how
  The propagation of these signals is different than the pres- the protocols work if they are initiated late. Signaling begins
ence signals. As it is not diffusion, the signal is the same to when a speciﬁc number of irregular agents exist, tested with
each agent it meets as opposed to being stronger to the closer delays of 500, 1,000, 10,000, and 25,000 (Figure 6). A com-
agent. We chose to represent the signal this way to facilitate bined signal scenario where the two signals were regarded as
more efﬁcient signal passing, therefore equally encouraging the same message by the receiving agent was also tested; in
all agents to die that receive the signal.            this case, once 2 messages are received it dies even if each
  An agent decides to die due to signals when the number message is of a different type (Figure 7).
of either type of signal it has received is above its limit. This
limit can either be the same or different for each type of agent, All scenarios were run for 1000 time ticks as a relative
can be different for each signal type, and can also change over equilibrium had been reached by the best cases, and the poor
time. The limit is determined by the trust an individual agent cases were at a point of no possible improvement. The ratios
has toward the agents surrounding it. The higher the level of of healthy to irregular agents were above 9 for all of the 7 sce-
trust, the lower the limit will be. Our results tested different narios with more healthy agents than irregular agents, which
levels of trust to determine the optimum.             is not great. The best three, however, had ratios of over 20,
                                                      giving the healthy agents a much better survival chance. For
                                                      the worst three scenarios, the irregular agents have success-
5  Results                                            fully comprised the system so that it cannot recover, with ra-
Eight main scenarios were tested with our communication tios around 0.03 healthy agents per each irregular agent. For
protocol. We began by testing four scenarios to determine the successful cases the ratio gives the healthy agents enough
the optimum signal limit. These scenarios included using a space to replicate away from the irregular agents since signal-
limit of 2 for both signal types, a limit of 3 for both signal ing is still occurring, and enables them to kill irregular agents
types, and limit of 10 for both signal types, and a limit of 3 quicker than originally. This quicker kill is possible because
for “Please Die” and a limit of 2 for “I Died” (Figure 4). The most irregular agents have already received some signals and
optimum was found to be a signal limit of 2 for each signal are therefore closer to death.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1431Figure 5: The ratio of healthy agents to irregular agents can change Figure 7: When the signals are interpreted identically by the agents
dramatically by scenario. A high ratio is ideal, as our goal is 100% so that once the total number of signals reaches the limit it dies, the
healthy agents and 0% irregular agents.               results for irregular agents are very similar to when there is a limit of
                                                      2 for either signal as in Figure 4, except that there are more healthy
                                                      agents in the end (2996). The ﬁnal ratio of healthy to irregular is
                                                      therefore much better, at 33.66.


                                                      Figure 8: When the number of signals required for death increases
                                                      over time for both signals by starting at 2 and increasing by 2 after
                                                      every 100 steps, the irregular agent count slowly increases. After
Figure 6: The “Please Die” signal can be stalled in the beginning 1000 steps it is at 159 (5.95% of the system), with a healthy to irreg-
so that it is not used until there are a certain number of irregular ular agent ratio of 15.80. The number of healthy agents stays around
agents. The number of irregular agents before signaling starts only 2500.
slightly affects the ﬁnal amount of stable irregular agents for most
delays, with around 200 irregular agents for a delay until 500 or
1000 agents and 600 for a delay of 10,000, although they comprise
different percentages of the total system (7.50% for 500, 9.98% for agents at the end of the run yields the same order of opti-
1000, 97.76% for 10,000). For a delay of 25000 problematic agents, mality. The best cases are the combined limit with a healthy
we have an increase to 1900 problematic agents (96.39% of agents) agent count of 2996 and irregular count of 89 (2.88% of all
and much less stability. All increases in the amount of delay signif- agents, Figure 7), followed by the limit of 2 with 2588 healthy
icantly affects the number of irregular agents in the beginning leap. agents and 105 irregular agents (3.90% of all agents, Figure
The ratios of healthy to irregular agents for each delay type (in order) 4). The limit of 3 and 2 was again a close third with a healthy
are: 12.33, 9.02, 0.02, 0.04.                         agent count of and an irregular agent count of 108 (4.13% of
                                                      agents, Figure 4), followed by the increasing limit with 2449
                                                      healthy agents and 155 irregular agents (5.95% of all agents,
  For the majority of the scenarios, the ratio of healthy agents Figure 8). The limit of 3 had 2187 healthy agents and 170
to irregular agents was higher at the end than it was during irregular agents (7.21% of agents, Figure 4), the delay of 500
the peak of irregular agents. The obvious worst scenarios are had 2367 healthy agents and 192 irregular agents (7.50% of
when the ratio decreased, as with a signal limit of 10, signals agents), and the delay of 1000 had 2021 healthy agents ad 224
delayed until 10,000 irregular agents exist, and signals de- irregular agents (9.98% of all agents, Figure 6). The worst
layed until 25,000 irregular agents exist (Figure 5). Overall, three scenarios were the limit of 10 with 18 healthy agents
the scenario of the combined limit performed the best, with and 720 irregular agents (97.56% of all agents, Figure 4), a
a ratio of 7.82 at the peak and 33.66 at the end. The regular delay of 10,000 agents with 15 healthy agents and 656 irreg-
limit of 2 was the second best with a ﬁnal ratio of 24.65, al- ular agents (97.76% of agents), and a delay of 25,000 agents
though its peak ratio was better at 8.67. The joint limit of 3 with 72 healthy agents and 1925 irregular agents (96.39% of
and 2 was third with the best peak ratio (8.97) and a ﬁnal ratio agents, Figure 6).
of 23.21. An increasing limit took fourth with ratios of 7.99 The obvious best case is the combined limit, as an agent
and 12.86, the delay of 500 came in ﬁfth with ratios of 4.55 can either get 2 of a speciﬁc type of signal before dying or it
and 12.33, and the delay of 1000 came in sixth with ratios of can receive 1 signal of each type. This scenario had the high-
2.81 and 9.02. The best improvement in ratios from peak to est ratio at the end (33.66) as well as the highest number of
end was the delay of 1000.                            healthy agents (2996) and lowest number and percentage of
  Examining the actual number of irregular and healthy irregular agents (89, 2.88%). Since the limit of 2 and the limit

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1432