                Emotions as Durative Dynamic State for Action Selection

                       Emmanuel Tanguy, Philip Willis and Joanna J. Bryson
                                    Department of Computer Science
                                           University of Bath
               e.tanguy@cs.bath.ac.uk, p.j.willis@cs.bath.ac.uk, j.j.bryson@cs.bath.ac.uk


                    Abstract                          which might be taken as the root of the agent’s goal structure.
                                                      The future state of a DER depends on its current state as well
    This paper presents a representation system for   as its environment. Note that in this fully modular system,
    maintaining interacting durative states to replicate additional ‘higher order’ emotions may either be interpreted
    realistic emotional control. Our model, the Dy-   as emerging from the interactions of fundamental emotions,
    namic Emotion Representation (DER) integrates     or they can be introduced with explicit representations — the
    emotional responses and keeps track of emotion in- choice is left to the developer or experimenter.
    tensities changing over time. The developer can     Although this system could be used to represent any similar
    specify an interacting network of emotional states durative action selection state (such as drives like hunger), for
    with appropriate onsets, sustains and decays. The the purpose of development and evaluation we have focused
    levels of these states can be used as input for ac- on emotional state. After presenting the DER framework, we
    tion selection, including emotional expression. We present also here an instance of a DER model. This model
    present both a general representational framework explores theories which postulate three types of emotional
    and a speciﬁc instance of a DER network con-      state changing over three different timescales — emotional
    structed for a virtual character. The character’s behaviours activations, conventional emotions, and moods.
    DER uses three types of emotional state as classi- For evaluation, we have integrated this system into an Emo-
    ﬁed by duration timescales, in keeping with current tionally Expressive Facial Animation System (EE-FAS) used
    emotional theory. The system is demonstrated with to drive a ‘talking head’ virtual actor. This paper shows that
    a virtual actor.                                  the system provides more diverse visual speech deliveries ac-
                                                      cording to the original state of the DER.
1  Introduction
Emotion is a popular topic in AI research, but most of exist- 2 Representing Emotional State
ing work focuses on the appraisal of emotions or mimicking Computational emotion models should include two parts:
their expression for HCI (see review below). Our research is • mechanisms eliciting emotions from external and inter-
concerned with their role in evolved action selection mech- nal stimuli, including potentially the agent’s own goals,
anisms. In nature, emotions provide decision state which  beliefs and standards;
serves as a context for limiting the scope of search for ac-
                                                        •
tion selection [LeDoux, 1996]. This state is sustained more emotion representations keeping track of the emotional
brieﬂy than traditional (life-long) learning, but longer than states and their changes over time.
simple reactive response. To study the role emotions play in In the design of emotion models the distinction between
intelligence, and to improve the realism of virtual reality char- mechanisms eliciting emotions and emotion representations
acters, we have developed a mechanism for modelling both is useful; the assessment of an emotional event can be the
the temporal course of emotional state and the interactions same but its impact on the actions and future emotional state
between such states, which can be both positive and negative. of the virtual actor can vary according to its current emo-
Our work is based on current emotion theory.          tional state. For instance the event of knocking over a cup
  Our model, the Dynamic Emotion Representation (DER), of tea might make somebody already angry lose their temper,
assumes other mechanisms for eliciting emotional responses whereas if this person was happy in the ﬁrst place this nega-
from an agent’s environment, but keeps track of emotion in- tive event might have little impact, just a slight reduction of
tensities changing and interacting over time. Modellers can happiness. An appropriate emotion representation can enable
specify the number and descriptions of fundamental emotions programmers to reduce the complexity of mechanisms elicit-
and express how they interact. Each emotion has character- ing emotions by assessing an identical event in the same way.
istic intervals of onset, sustain and decay, and each emotion Most existing emotion theories are concerned with mech-
may either excite or inhibit any other. In this respect, the DER anisms eliciting emotions [Plutchik, 1980; Lazarus, 1991;
can be used as spreading activation system [Maes, 1991, e.g.] Frijda, 1986; Izard, 1993; Sloman, 2003]. In contrast, the

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1537duration of emotions and their interactions are not the focus
of much research. The same imbalance is found in computa-
tional models of emotions — the focus is on the mechanisms
eliciting emotions and on their expression, but their represen-
tation is typically trivial. The Dynamic Emotion Representa-
tion (DER) model described in this paper is novel because:
  • it can represent any number of persisting states, such as
    moods, emotions, drives;
  • any emotion impulse can affect any state positively or
    negatively;
  • state responses to emotional impulses are inﬂuenced by
    the other states represented in the DER;
In addition, the DER focuses on usability — it is totally cus-
tomisable through an XML ﬁle.
  Besides simplifying the emotion elicitation process, the
DER makes it easier to generate variety in the behaviour
of real-time interactive character-based AI systems, since
the same stimuli can result in signiﬁcantly different (but lo-
cally coherent) responses, depending on the agent’s emo-
tional state. The DER also greatly simpliﬁes scripting for
virtual actors by decomposing the problems of specifying the
emotionally salient events from describing the agent’s indi-
vidual reaction to or expression of characteristic emotional
states. For instance, a script could specify the action of grab-
bing an object but characteristics of this action, such as its
space and effort [Badler et al., 2002], would be modiﬁed
per the current DER state producing different animations and
adding different interpretations. Finally, the DER presents a
powerful mechanism for specifying virtual agent personali-
ties, by allowing developers to for example specify moods or
other emotion-related attributes such as tension level.

3  Three Responses to one Series of Events
Before explaining the details of the DER we will ﬁrst clarify
its utility with a concrete example. This example involves
a speciﬁc instance of a DER system (described below) where
there are representations corresponding to three different time
courses:                                              Figure 1: Changes of DER states due to six emotional im-
                                                      pulses in three contexts. Graphs a, b and c show state changes
  • behaviour activations: happy, angry. These corre-
                                                      in the contexts of Negative Mood, Neutral Mood and Positive
    spond most directly to emotion-related behaviours such
                                                      Mood, respectively. Graph d shows the emotional impulses
    as smiling. Behaviour activations trigger pre-organised
                                                      sent over time to the DER.
    behaviours with different intensity levels which follow
    their own time course after their activations.
                                                                                +
  • emotions: happiness, anger. These build more slowly in Happy and Angry graphs have symbols on them when they
    response to events and provide a context inﬂuencing the result in signal being sent to the EE-FAS system to generate a
    current actions.                                  facial expression (see Figure 2). The EE-FAS also contains a
                                                      muscle model which results in smoothing between expressed
  •
    mood variables: tension, energy. These change very lit- states.
    tle during the period of the demonstration, but differen- Figure 2 shows the EE-FAS output. The intensities of the
    tiate the various conditions. They are the most persistent behaviour activations determine the strength of the displayed
    of the three state types.                         facial expressions. However the durations of facial expres-
  Figure 1 shows a DER in three different mood contexts sions are innate characteristics and do not relate to the du-
responding to the same series of six emotional impulses, three ration of behaviour activations, which are triggers inﬂuenced
happiness impulses followed by three anger impulses. Graph by other DER states. Between each screen shot shown Figure
d shows these impulses, while graph a shows the response 2 expressions decay slowly to return to its neutral position,
in a negative mood (high tension, low energy), b a neutral or to be replaced by a new expression. Typically a happy ex-
mood, and c a positive mood (high energy, low tension). The pression is shown by raising the lip corners and low-eyelids;

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1538                                                      pulses.
                                                        In row 2, the neutral mood, the response of the ﬁrst anger
                                                      impulse is more stronger than the responses of the two other
                                                      anger impulses. In fact, Figure 1 shows that no behaviour
                                                      activation has been triggered by the second anger impulse,
                                                      therefore no facial expression should be displayed. The ex-
                                                      pression shown at the time of the second anger impulse is
                                                      due to the visual momentum of the expression produced by
                                                      the ﬁrst anger impulse which is still fading. The third anger
                                                      impulse does produce an emotional expression, since hap-
                                                      piness has decreased. The difference between these is the
                                                      emotional momentum produced by the previous happiness
                                                      impulses. Happiness impulses increase the level of happi-
                                                      ness, which takes time to disappear and inhibits the effects of
                                                      anger impulses. In contrast, the negative agent (row 1) never
                                                      became very happy in the ﬁrst place. While for the positive
                                                      agent, (row 3) no anger impulses produce any behavioural re-
                                                      sponse. This is due to two reasons. First, the positive mood
                                                      reduces the effects of anger impulses. Second, the happiness
Figure 2: The top through bottom rows show EE-FAS screen- momentum produced by the previous happiness impulses also
shots of the Negative, Neutral and Positive Mood, corre- reduce the effects of anger impulses. The largest impact of the
sponding to charts a, b and c of Fig. 1. Columns correspond bad news is the reduction of happiness which had previously
to the time when an emotional impulse is sent to the DER. soared.

and an angry expression is represented by eyebrow frowns 4 The DER Basic Representation
and tight lips.                                       The basic unit of the DER model is a modular representa-
  In this example, emotional impulses could be due to the tion based on the Picard description of emotion intensity and
appraisal of six declarations from the employer of the charac- emotion ﬁlters [Picard, 1997]. A DER network consists of a
ter: “You are our best employee (ﬁrst happiness stimulus), system of modules connected by ﬁlters.
you have helped us tremendously (second stimulus) and I We assume an emotion appraisal mechanism, such as those
should increase your salary (third); however I can’t do this based on the OCC model [Ortony et al., 1988], classiﬁes
(ﬁrst anger stimulus) — the company is not doing well (sec- events, actions and objects, outputting emotion types and in-
ond anger), so we will need to work harder (third)”. This se- tensities. We call this output emotional impulses. Emotional
quence of events produces various reactions (such as a smile) impulses are deﬁned by the name of an emotion, an intensity
depending on the agent’s mood, but they also change the emo- value and a valence, which can be 1, 0 or -1. The valence
tional state of the character. This could in turn inﬂuence the speciﬁes whether an emotional impulse is positive, neutral or
character’s next action.                              negative.
  In row 1, the ﬁrst screen-shot shows some response to the Emotional impulses are transformed by the DER into emo-
happiness impulse. However this response is reduced due to tion stimuli. The stimuli include timing information typical
the inﬂuence of negative mood. The next two impulses show of an emotion type and represent intensity changes over time.
no response because the happiness impulse intensities are too The activation curve representing emotional stimuli, shown at
low. In the neutral mood context, row 2, the ﬁrst happiness the bottom of Figure 3, was chosen to represent the slow de-
impulse produces a stronger response than in the context of cay of emotion intensity [Picard, 1997]. The effects of small
negative mood. Here the second impulse also produces a re- emotional events are cumulative. Therefore emotional stim-
sponse but the intensity of the third impulse is still too low to uli are summed to compute the intensity of an emotion, as
generate a response. The positive mood, row 3, ampliﬁes the shown by the top curve in Figure 3.
happiness impulses, therefore they all produce facial expres- As shown in the example (Section 3), the effect of an emo-
sions, and these expressions have stronger intensities than in tional event depends on an agent’s current emotional state.
the previous contexts.                                This is implemented in the DER by connecting modules
  The effects of anger impulses are inﬂuenced by mood through a system of dynamic ﬁlters. Sigmoid functions have
states but in addition, they are also inﬂuenced by the level of been chosen for this role because they describe “a large va-
the emotion happy generated by the previous happiness im- riety of natural phenomena” [Picard, 1997]. The use of sig-
pulses. In row 1, all three anger impulses produce responses, moid functions is inspired by the description of the inﬂuence
showing an expression of anger represented by an eyebrow of mood on these functions given by Picard [Picard, 1997].
frown and tight lips. The different impulse intensities, 100%, The sigmoid function parameters can be modiﬁed depending
50% and 50%, produce different strengths of expression, but on the DER model’s state, resulting, for example, in a shifted
the differences are not marked since the effect of negative sigmoid curve as show in Figure 4. This effect simulates the
mood and the building anger ampliﬁes the lower intensity im- change of sensitivity, e.g. emotion threshold activation, to

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1539                                                                           D.F.

                                                                                      Happiness


                                                                Happiness  D.F.
                                                                Impulses

                                                                Anger
                                                                Impulses
                                                                           D.F.

                                                                                      Anger

Figure 3: Emotional stimuli are summed to compute the in-                  D.F.
tensity of an emotion.

                                                                                      Sadness

                                                      Figure 5: Example of a network of inﬂuences between emo-
                                                      tional states and emotional impulses in the DER model. D.F.
                                                      stands for Dynamic Filters.

                                                      tions controlling the effects of emotional stimuli anger are
                                                      shifted to the right. This mechanism decreases the positive
                                                      effect of anger stimuli on the emotional state anger. This sim-
                                                      ulates the effects of good and bad news on different moods as
                                                      demonstrated above.
                                                        The system can be conﬁgured such that any type of emo-
Figure 4: Sigmoid functions are used as dynamic ﬁlters by tional impulse can affect any emotional state and any emo-
changing their parameters.                            tional state can inﬂuence the effects of emotional impulses
                                                      on any emotional state. For the instance of the DER model
                                                      integrated in the EE-FAS (described below), the tuning has
particular emotional stimulus in relation to the current emo- been carried out using heuristic values and visualisation soft-
tional state of a person.                             ware plotting the resulting sigmoid functions as well as the
  In the DER model, we refer to each module as a dimension. modiﬁed emotional stimuli.
A dimension may represent for instance a particular emotion
or a particular behaviour activation. Dimensions consists of 5 An Embedded Instance of a DER
a list of dynamic ﬁlters. One dynamic ﬁlter modiﬁes one pa-
rameter of a particular type of emotional stimulus, for exam- Using the representations just described, we created an in-
ple its peak intensity. Some characteristics, such as the decay stance of a DER and integrated it into the EE-FAS. As men-
duration, can be modiﬁed. In Figure 4, the horizontal axis tioned earlier, this DER is composed of three types of mod-
represents the input value, such as the peak intensity of an ules: behaviour activations, emotions and moods. Each
emotional stimulus, and the vertical axis represents the out- represents persisting states changing on different timescales.
put value, such as a new peak intensity value.        Figure 6 shows a graphical representation of this DER.
  Modules inﬂuence each other by passing their output to The behaviour activations are generated by the DER due to
a bus which modiﬁes the parameters of other module’s dy- emotional impulses, which currently can be either scripted or
namic ﬁlters. This bus is the same one conducting the emo- provided in real time through button presses on a GUI inter-
tional stimuli; the inﬂuence on other modules occurs through face. Each behaviour activation is displayed by the EE-FAS
their ‘input’ ﬁlter. Figure 5 shows states affected by two types as one of the Ekman’s emotional facial expressions. However,
of emotional stimulus, Anger and Happiness, and whether the duration of an emotional facial expression is different to
the inﬂuence is positive or negative for each type of emo- the duration of the corresponding behaviour activation, they
tional stimuli. For instance, happy stimuli affect positively have their own innate time courses. The graphs a, b and c
the emotional state of Happiness and negatively the state of in Figure 1 show the behaviour activations Happy and Angry.
Anger. This ﬁgure also shows that the emotional state Hap- Emotions, such as Happiness and Anger, also produced by
piness ampliﬁes the effects of happy stimuli and reduces the emotional impulses, last longer than behaviour activations.
effects of angry stimuli. In practise, the higher the level of In the EE-FAS, emotions are also used to select facial sig-
the emotional state Happiness, the more the sigmoid func- nals corresponding to communicative functions, e.g. semi-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1540 DER    Mood Module               Key:                  The DER   is inspired by the various appraisal theo-
        DynamicFilters Tension
                                   Dimension          ries [Lazarus, 1991; Ortony et al., 1988; Plutchik, 1980;
                      Energy       ImpulsePath        Frijda, 1986; Izard, 1993], and the pioneering work of sev-
                                                      eral inﬂuential researchers [Picard, 1997; Sloman, 2003].
        Emotion Module             Influenceto
                     Happiness     DynamicFilters     Many systems use appraisal to inﬂuence the decision pro-
        DynamicFilters                                cesses and behaviours of virtual actors [Ca˜namero, 2003;
                       Fear
                                                      Gratch and Marsella, 2004; Andr´e et al., 1999; Delgado-Mata
                      Surprise                        and Aylett, 2004].
                      Disgust                           Relatively few systems provide dynamic emotion represen-
                       Anger                          tations on multiple time scales like the DER, and none of
                      Sadness                         these are as conﬁgurable as our system. Paiva et al. [Paiva
                                                      et al., 2004] present an emotion model which assigns a de-
        Behaviour Activation Module                   cay function to each emotion elicited with a value higher
        DynamicFilters Happy                          than a personality threshold. In contrast to the DER, Paiva et
                      Afraid                          al.’s work does not implement any interaction between emo-
                     Surprised                        tions in its emotion representation. Egges et al. [Egges et
                     Disgusted                        al., 2004] describe a generic emotion and personality repre-
                      Angry                           sentation composed of two types of affective states, moods
                                                      and emotions. Any number of moods and emotions can be
                       Sad
                                                      represented. In the implementation of their model the only
                                                      inﬂuences between states is the inﬂuence of mood on emo-
Figure 6: A DER composed of three types of state changing tions. Egges et al. compute the intensity of affective states
on different timescales: behaviour activations, emotions and by linear functions through the use of matrix operations. In
moods.                                                the DER, sigmoid functions are used to control and change
                                                      the inﬂuences of emotional stimuli on emotions and the inﬂu-
                                                      ences between emotions. This mechanism produce non-linear
deliberate facial expressions synchronised with the speech, behaviours closer to natural phenomena.
such as emphasis or deliberate smiles. Mood changes on a
                                                        The Duy Bui does use a decay function to represent the
slower timescale than emotions and it inﬂuences and is in-
                                                      durations of emotions, but the effects of new emotional im-
ﬂuenced by the effects of emotional impulses on the DER
                                                      pulses on an emotion are inﬂuenced by the intensity of the
state. More detail on the design of this DER can be found
                                                      other emotions. Their decay functions are also inﬂuenced by
elsewhere [Tanguy, 2006]. These include details of experi-
                                                      personality parameters [The Duy Bui, 2004].Vel´asquez’s
ments on the human perception of emotion from components
                                                      representation, the computation of the intensity changes of an
of facial expressions which were conducted using this tool.
                                                      emotion takes into consideration the intensity of other emo-
                                                      tions, the decay in intensity and the previous intensity of the
6  Discussion and Related Work                        emotion itself [Velasquez, ´ 1997]. The inﬂuences of emotions
A fundamental concept of the DER model is the division on others are of the types inhibitory or excitatory. The DER
of emotion models into mechanisms eliciting emotions and model differs less from these, however it is customisable; any
emotion representations. This greatly simpliﬁes scripting or durative state, such as mood, and any number of emotions can
direction for characters, since once the DER is set and an ini- be represented; inﬂuences of emotional stimuli on emotions
tial mood described, the script or direction can describe com- can also be deﬁned by the researcher. The main advantage
municative actions abstractly rather than describing precise of the DER model is that its representation can be adapted to
facial expressions. For agents situated in long-term real-time different emotion theories and to different mechanisms elic-
domains such as web pages or interactive environments, this iting emotions from the agent’s environment. It is a tool that
also provides a mechanism for greater variety of behaviour can help the community to model different emotion theories.
per scripted response, since the mood can depend on the re- Compared to some systems though we have simpliﬁed the
cent interaction history.                             system slightly to make it more generic. Our deﬁnition of
  Emotion models are heavily researched now; of these a emotional impulses carries less information than the emo-
number of researchers have made systems to which the DER tional structures described by Reilly, which also contain the
is more or less similar. The main advantage of the DER is cause or referent of the emotions [Reilly, 1996]. Reilly and
its modularity, ﬂexibility, ease of conﬁguration and relative colleagues’ interest was primarily in creating ‘believable’
autonomy (lack of required direction) once completed. It’s agents, like classic animated cartoon characters which exist
main disadvantage is that it takes some time “out of the box” to entertain and communicate. We have focussed instead on
to conﬁgure, but this is partially addressed by the fact we dis- realistic models, which are more useful for experiments and
tribute it with the EE-FAS instance described earlier. The long-term plotless semi-autonomous applications. The DER
DER can a) represent any number of emotions, b)represent model focuses on the duration and interaction of emotions,
emotions or other forms of durative state with different time cognitive referents can be tracked in other parts of an agent’s
scale, c) deﬁne interactions between emotions, and d)cus- intelligence, or the deﬁnition of impulse can be expanded.
tomise the inﬂuences of emotional impulses on each emotion. In our system every emotions decays over time. An emo-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1541