      Voronoi Random Fields: Extracting the               Topological Structure of Indoor
                               Environments via Place Labeling

                          Stephen Friedman, Hanna Pasula, and Dieter Fox
                            Department of Computer Science & Engineering
                                       University of Washington
                                           Seattle, WA 98195

                    Abstract                          speciﬁc structures and rely on hand-tuned rules to do so. Re-
                                                      cently, [Mozos et al., 2005] introduced a technique that uses
    The ability to build maps of indoor environments  AdaBoost to learn place classiﬁers based on various features
    is extremely important for autonomous mobile ro-  extracted from laser range-scans and cameras. While they
    bots. In this paper we introduce Voronoi random   achieve good results in classifying individual points in an en-
    ﬁelds (VRFs), a novel technique for mapping the   vironment, their approach does not take the connectivity of
    topological structure of indoor environments. Our these points into account, and so does not generate a topolog-
    maps describe environments in terms of their spa- ical, spatially consistent representation of an environment.
    tial layout along with information about the differ- The goal of our research is to generate semantically mean-
    ent places and their connectivity. To build these ingful, topological-metric descriptions of indoor environ-
    maps, we extract a Voronoi graph from an occu-    ments. We aim to label every location in a metric map of
    pancy grid map generated with a laser range-ﬁnder, an environment with the type of place it belongs to. These
    and then represent each point on the Voronoi graph labels provide an intrinsic segmentation of the map, one that
    as a node of a conditional random ﬁeld, which is a represents the topological structure of an environment. Such
    discriminatively trained graphical model. The re- a structure will enable robots to better communicate with hu-
    sulting VRF estimates the label of each node, inte- mans about places, goals, and trajectories.
    grating features from both the map and the Voronoi
                                                        To achieve this goal, we introduce Voronoi random ﬁelds
    topology. The labels provide a segmentation of
                                                      (VRFs), a novel method for generating semantically mean-
    an environment, with the different segments corre-
                                                      ingful descriptions of indoor environments. Our approach
    sponding to rooms, hallways, or doorways. Experi-
                                                      uses a state-of-the-art SLAM technique to generate a metric
    ments using different maps show that our technique
                                                      occupancy grid map of an environment [Fox et al., 2006].It
    is able to label unknown environments based on pa-
                                                      then extracts the Voronoi graph of this map [Latombe, 1991],
    rameters learned from other environments.
                                                      which provides a compact representation of the free space
                                                      and the connectivity structure of the environment. For each
                                                      point on the Voronoi graph, VRFs then estimate the type of
1  Introduction                                       place it belongs to. This is done by generating a conditional
Building semantically meaningful representations of indoor random ﬁeld with hidden nodes corresponding to the points
environments is a fundamental goal of robot mapping. Over on the Voronoi graph. Conditional random ﬁelds are discrim-
the last few years, the SLAM (simultaneous localization and inatively trained graphical models that have been shown to
mapping) community has made tremendous progress in the outperform generative approaches in areas such as natural
development of efﬁcient and highly accurate map-building language processing [Lafferty et al., 2001] and computer vi-
techniques. Most of these techniques focus on accurately cap- sion [Kumar and Hebert, 2003]. The place labels estimated
turing the metric layout and/or topological structure of an en- by our Voronoi random ﬁeld provide a segmentation of an
vironment. While raw metric maps have the advantage of be- environment, with the different segments corresponding to
ing well suited for robot navigation tasks, they are typically rooms, hallways, junctions, or doorways. Since a robot’s
unstructured and contain no information about the different place labels should be consistent with how humans perceive
types of places or objects in an environment. Topological the structure of environments, we use human-labeled training
approaches are more compact and expressive in that they de- data to learn the parameters of our VRFs.
scribe locally distinctive places, but these distinctive places The paper is organized as follows. After describing related
are often deﬁned in a robot’s perceptual space and are not work in Section 2, we introduce Voronoi random ﬁelds, our
necessarily related to indoor areas such as rooms or hallways. application of conditional random ﬁelds to labeling Voronoi
  Other researchers, for instance [Beeson et al., 2005],fo- graphs, and also show how to perform inference and learn-
cused on detecting places such as rooms, hallways, and door- ing in this model. Experiments are described in Section 4,
ways. However, most of these techniques detect only very followed by conclusions and a discussion of future work.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  21092  Related Work                                       thus especially suitable for classiﬁcation tasks that rely on
                                                      complex and overlapping data and features.
Voronoi graphs are an extremely useful topological repre- The nodes in a CRF represent hidden states, denoted y =
                            [             ] [
sentation of indoor environments Latombe, 1991 . Thrun, y1, y2,...,yn, and data, denoted x. Note that while indi-
1998] constructs topological representations of environments vidual observations xi are often connected to the correspond-
by segmenting and pruning a Voronoi graph extracted from ing hidden states yi, our data x consists of a complete map of
an occupancy grid map. This approach does not distinguish an environment, and we connect all hidden states to this sin-
between different types of places and is rather brittle since gle map. The nodes yi, along with the connectivity structure
it makes deterministic modeling decisions based on manually represented by the undirected edges between them, deﬁne the
tuned, local features. In order to learn a topological map of an conditional distribution p(y|x) over the hidden states y.Let
                                                      C
environment, [Kuipers and Beeson, 2002] generate distinc- be the set of cliques in the graph of a CRF. Then, a CRF fac-
tive views by unsupervised clustering of raw laser range-data torizes the conditional distribution into a product of clique po-
                                                      tentials φc(x, yc),whereeveryc ∈Cis a clique in the graph
and associate these views with distinctive states. [Tomatis et
                                                      and x and yc are the observed data and the hidden nodes in
al., 2003] represent places in a hybrid topological-metric map the clique c, respectively. Clique potentials are functions that
as corners and openings detected with a laser range-ﬁnder. map variable conﬁgurations to non-negative numbers. Intu-
Their focus is on place recognition for SLAM, and the topo- itively, a potential captures the “compatibility” among the
logical nodes are not classiﬁed into types of places. variables in the clique: the larger the potential value, the more
  [Beeson et al., 2005] detect topological places based on likely the conﬁguration. Using clique potentials, the condi-
                                                      tional distribution over the hidden states is written as
gateways and pathways in a reduced extended Voronoi graph,                         
which they extract from occupancy grid maps. Their tech-                       1
                                                                 p(y | x)=            φc(x, yc),       (1)
nique relies on various hand-tuned rules to detect places and                 Z(x)
                                                                                   c∈C
the authors do not show how it generalizes to complex sce-             
narios in unseen environments.                         where Z(x)=    y   c∈C φc(x, yc) is the normalizing par-
  Our work focuses on place classiﬁcation. We do not intend tition function. The computation of this partition function is
to detect individual, distinctive places, but rather aim at label- exponential in the size of y since it requires summation over
ing any location in an environment. Furthermore, we do not all possible conﬁgurations of hidden states y. Hence, exact
try to solve the place recognition, or data association, prob- inference is possible for a limited class of CRF models only.
lem, which aims at detecting when a robot has returned to a Potentials φc(x, yc) are described by log-linear combina-
previously visited place [Tomatis et al., 2003]. We build on tions of feature functions fc(), i.e.,
the fact that this problem is solved sufﬁciently well by state-                              
                                                                                   T
of-the-art SLAM techniques, which generate accurate laser      φc(x, yc)=expwc       · fc(x, yc) ,    (2)
range-maps of indoor environments [Fox et al., 2006].
                                                            wT                                   w
  In a similar vein as our research, [Stachniss et al., 2005] where c is the transpose of a weight vector c,and
                                                      f (x, y )
use AdaBoost to learn place classiﬁers based on features ex- c c is a function that extracts a vector of features from
tracted from laser range-scans and camera images. They the variable values. Using feature functions, we rewrite the
                                                      conditional distribution (1) as
show how to connect the classiﬁer outputs to a hidden Markov                                     
                                                                                  
model, which then performs HMM ﬁltering on the trajectory                 1            T
                                                            p(y | x)=        exp      wc · fc(x, yc)   (3)
followed by a robot. While this technique performs very well,            Z(x)
it still has several limitations compared to our approach. The                    c∈C
HMM only operates on the given trajectory, so the classiﬁca- Before we describe how to perform efﬁcient inference and
tion of places in an environment depends on the actual path learning in CRFs, we will show how CRFs can be used for
followed by a robot. Furthermore, the approach is not able labeling places in an environment.
to make use of the connectivity of an environment when la-
beling places. In contrast to HMM ﬁltering, we show how to 3.2 Voronoi Random Fields for Place Labeling
perform collective labeling on a Voronoi graph of an environ-
                                                      To label the different places in an environment, we estimate
ment. Our model thus takes both local features and connec-
                                                      the place types at the points of a discrete Voronoi graph of
tivity information into account. Additionally, it is able to gen-
                                                      the environment. Such a graph is deﬁned via the points that
erate a topological, semantically labeled graph description of
                                                      are equidistant to the closest two or more obstacles in an en-
an environment.
                                                      vironment [Latombe, 1991]. The left panel in Figure 1 shows
                                                      an occupancy grid map generated by our laser mapping ap-
3  Voronoi Random Fields                              proach along with the corresponding Voronoi graph (after
                                                      pruning). As can be seen, the Voronoi graph nicely repre-
3.1  Conditional Random Fields                        sents the connectivity structure of the environment. Hallway
Conditional random ﬁelds (CRFs) are undirected graphical intersections and their entries into rooms are typically repre-
models that were developed for labeling sequence data [Laf- sented by points that have three or more neighbors. Note that
ferty et al., 2001]. Unlike HMMs and Markov random ﬁelds, any point in the environment can be associated with a point
which assume that observations are independent given the on the Voronoi graph. Thus, by estimating place labels on the
hidden state, CRFs make no assumptions about the depen- Voronoi graph, we can determine the place type of any point
dency structure between different parts of the data. CRFs are in the environment.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2110  We label the points on a Voronoi graph by converting the node, and then feeding them through the log-linear func-
the graph into a conditional random ﬁeld, which we call a tion (2) (we actually use derived features, see Section 3.4).
Voronoi random ﬁeld (VRF). A VRF is constructed from a  BP generates provably correct results in graphs with no
Voronoi graph by representing the points vi on the Voronoi loops, such as trees or polytrees. However, since virtually
graph as the hidden nodes yi of the VRF. The state of the all VRFs contain loops, we apply loopy belief propagation,
hidden nodes ranges over the different place types: room, an approximate inference algorithm that is not guaranteed to
doorway,  hallway, junction,andother. The neigh-      converge to the correct probability distribution [Murphy et
boring points in the Voronoi graph are also connected in the al., 1999]. In our experiments, we compute the MAP labeling
VRF, thereby allowing the VRF to take the labels of neigh- of an environment using max-product loopy BP. Fortunately,
boring points into account and thus probabilistically model even when the algorithm failed to converge, our experiments
connectivity constraints. The observed data x is extracted showed reasonable results.
from the Voronoi graph and the local map area visible from
each Voronoi point. We use two types of features extracted 3.4 Learning
from the data:                                        CRF Parameter Learning
Spatial features describe the layout of the local area around a The goal of CRF parameter learning is to determine the
  Voronoi point. Most of of our spatial features are inspired weights of the feature functions used in the conditional likeli-
  by those used by [Stachniss et al., 2005] for laser-based hood (3). CRFs learn these weights discriminatively by max-
  place detection. These features are extracted from the oc- imizing the conditional likelihood of labeled training data.
  cupancy grid map; they include distance to the closest ob- While there is no closed-form solution for optimizing (3), it
  stacle and shape information about the area visible from can be shown that (3) is convex relative to the weights w.
  the Voronoi point.                                  Thus, the global optimum of (3) can be found using a nu-
Connectivity features make use of the connectivity informa- merical gradient algorithm. Unfortunately, this optimization
  tion encoded by the Voronoi graph. These features include runs an inference procedure at each iteration, which can be
  place types of the neighboring nodes, number of neigh- intractably inefﬁcient when using loopy BP in large VRFs.
  bors in the Voronoi graph, and shape information about the We therefore resort to maximizing the pseudo-likelihood
  graph, such as curvature. Additionally, we use a feature of the training data, which is given by the sum of local likeli-
                                                      hoods p(yi | MB(yi)),whereMB(yi) is the Markov blanket
  that describes the size of the minimal loop going through a
                                                      of variable yi: the set of the immediate neighbors of yi in
  node in the Voronoi graph. This feature is extremely use- the CRF graph [Besag, 1975]. Optimization of this pseudo-
  ful for tasks such as distinguishing doorways from narrow likelihood is done by minimizing the negative of its log, re-
  passages in rooms. While doorways are typically not part sulting in the following objective function:
  of a small loop, small loops with narrow passages are often
                                                                n                            T
  caused by furniture such as tables (see Figure 1).                                   (w−w
 ) (w−w
)
                                                       L(w)=−      log p(yi | MB(yi), w)+              (4)
                                                                                             2σ2
Our VRFs contain three types of cliques. First, each node in    i=1
the VRF is a single node clique, the potential of which is a
weighted function of the spatial and connectivity features ex- Here, the terms in the summation correspond to the neg-
                                                      ative pseudo log-likelihood and the right term represents a
tracted at that node. The second type of clique contains pairs                         w
             σ2
of VRF nodes that are connected in the Voronoi graph. The Gaussian shrinkage prior with mean and variance .
potential of these cliques measures the spatial compatibility Without additional information, the prior mean is typically set
between place types. A third type of clique is generated for to zero. In our approach, we use unconstrained L-BFGS [Liu
each node that has three neighbors. While such “junction” and Nocedal, 1989], an efﬁcient gradient descent method,
nodes often correspond to intersections in hallways, they also to optimize (4). The key advantage of maximizing pseudo-
occur frequently in rooms. This ﬁnal clique type contains likelihood rather than the likelihood (3) is that the gradient of
four nodes and measures the compatibility between the labels (4) can be computed extremely efﬁciently, without running
of all nodes connected at such a junction in the Voronoi graph an inference algorithm. Learning by maximizing pseudo-
(more than three neighbors could be handled if necessary). likelihood has been shown to perform very well in different
                                                      domains; see [Richardson and Domingos, 2006] or [Kumar
3.3  Inference                                        and Hebert, 2003] for an example.
Inference in CRFs can estimate either the marginal distribu- AdaBoost for Feature Induction
tion of each hidden variable yi or the most likely conﬁgura- While the features described in Section 3.2 could be used di-
tion of all hidden variables y (i.e., MAP estimation), as de- rectly as continuous observations in CRFs, we found that this
ﬁned in (3). Both tasks can be solved using belief propagation approach did not yield very good results. This is due to the
(BP), which works by sending local messages through the fact that the log-linear representation underlying CRFs corre-
graph structure of the model. Each node sends messages to sponds to a unimodal Gaussian likelihood for each continu-
its neighbors based on messages it receives and the clique po- ous feature, which is not ﬂexible enough to capture the com-
tentials, which are deﬁned via the observations and the neigh- plex relationships between place types and feature values.
borhood relation in the CRF. For instance, the “observation” We overcome this limitation by extracting suitable features
potential of a node is computed by ﬁrst extracting the features from our continuous feature values using AdaBoost [Fre-
described in Section 3.2 at the map location corresponding to und and Schapire, 1996], which has been applied success-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2111fully by [Mozos et al., 2005] in the context of place recog- 4 Experimental Results
nition. Speciﬁcally, we learn a binary AdaBoost classiﬁer
                                                      We evaluated our approach on maps of four indoor environ-
for each place type by using maps of labeled indoor environ-
                                                      ments, acquired as laser range-data from the Radish robot
ments to generate training data for every class c in the form of
  c                                                   data repository [Howard and Roy, 2003]. For each data set,
D  = {x1,y1, x2,y2,...,xn,yn}, where each xi con-
                                                      we generated an occupancy grid map and extracted a Voronoi
tains the features extracted for a speciﬁc Voronoi point, and
                                                      graph from that map. We then manually labeled each point
yi ∈{−1,  +1} speciﬁes whether or not this point belongs
                                                      on each graph as either room, doorway, hallway,or
to the class c. As weak classiﬁers we use binary decision
                                                      junction,whereajunction      can be an intersection be-
stumps applied to the features. In this case, AdaBoost se-
                                                      tween hallways or an entry area into a room. The training set
quentially learns a weighted set of T decision stumps, each
                  c              c                    contained approximately 1,250 Voronoi points. We extracted
deﬁned by a feature f and a threshold θ . Note that the same
                 t               t                    53 different features at each point and used AdaBoost to gen-
feature can be used multiple times with different thresholds.
                                                      erate 25 decision stumps for each of the four classes, resulting
The weighted combination of these decision stumps gives the
                                                      in a total of 100 binary features used in our VRFs. AdaBoost
classiﬁcation of whether or not a feature vector x belongs to
                                                      learning took about a minute; learning the parameters of a
place type c,                        
                           T                         VRF took an additional minute on a standard desktop PC.
            c                   c c
          H  (x)=sign          αt ht (x)        (5)   Loopy-BP MAP inference generally took less than a minute
                           t=1                        per test map when it converged. However, we allowed for
      c                 c                             a generous time-out based on the graph diameter, such that
Here ht (x)=sign(xf c − θt ) is the output of the t-th deci-
               c   t                                  those that did not converge would run for up to 5 minutes.
sion stump, and α is the learned weight associated with it.
               t                                        To assess the contributions of the different aspects of our
Essentially, AdaBoost automatically determines which of the
                                                      VRF framework, we compared the following four approaches
continuous features (and thresholds applied to them) are most
                                                      using leave one out cross-validation on the maps. The ﬁrst,
useful in supporting good classiﬁcation results.
                                                      denoted ABS , uses AdaBoost along with the spatial features
  We investigated two ways of combining AdaBoost and
                                                      to classify each point on the Voronoi graphs. The second,
CRFs. The ﬁrst, which we call VRFD, takes all the Ada-
                     c                                ABSC, additionally uses connectivity features extracted from
Boost decision stumps h (x) learned for all the classes c
                     t                                the Voronoi graphs. These features include information such
and uses them as binary features in a CRF. The CRF then
                                                      as number of neighbors in the graph, size of the smallest
learns the weights for those stumps and for the neighbor-
                                                      loop containing a node, and the distance to the closest ob-
hood potentials using pseudo-likelihood maximization as de-
                                                      stacle. The third approach, VRFD, is a VRF that uses the
scribed above. The second approach, called VRFM ,uses
                                                      AdaBoost decision stumps as binary features. The ﬁnal ap-
the weighted sum, or margin [Niculescu-Mizil and Caru-
                                                      proach, VRFM , uses the weighted sum, or margin, of each
ana, 2005], of each AdaBoost classiﬁer as a continuous fea-
                                                      AdaBoost classiﬁer as features. For learning, we set the prior
ture (the sum inside the sign in (5)). For C place types,
                                                      mean of all weights w
 to zero (compare (4)).
VRFDuses  CT  binary features, T for each of the C place
types, and VRFM uses the C continuous features that are
generated by weighted summation of the decision stumps.          ABld.   Allen  Frbg.  Intel    Avg.
                                                        ABS       87.0   90.8    82.0  81.1   85.2 ± 4.4
3.5  Summary                                            ABSC      88.6   92.1    86.6  83.7   87.8 ± 3.5
                                                        VRF                                       ±
Our approach learns the parameters of VRFs from labeled      D    93.6   93.3    91.5  86.4   91.2  3.3
                                                        VRF                                       ±
maps of training environments. To do so, it ﬁrst learns a bi- M   94.2   93.1    91.3  88.2   91.7  2.6
nary AdaBoost classiﬁer for each place type from manually   Table 1: Accuracy of leave one out place labeling.
labeled maps. For each map, we generate the corresponding
Voronoi random ﬁeld using the features learned by AdaBoost. Table 1 summarizes the accuracy of the different tech-
The parameters of these VRFs are then learned by maximiz- niques in terms of the percentages of correct labels for the
ing the pseudo-likelihood (4) of the training data, using para- four test environments. Not surprisingly, the accuracy of
meter sharing. The resulting parameters are the weights of the AdaBoost increases consistently when adding connectivity
different types of cliques occurring in a VRF. After learning, features (for an average increase from 85.2% to 87.8%). The
a novel environment is labeled as follows:            lower two rows display the accuracy of using AdaBoost for
 1. Generate occupancy grid map using mobile robot laser- feature induction in VRFs. Both VRF approaches perform
    range SLAM techniques [Fox et al., 2006].         signiﬁcantly better than AdaBoost, though the difference be-
 2. Extract Voronoi graph from the map.               tween them is not signiﬁcant. Note that the test maps are
                                                      very diverse, so the cross-validation demonstrates good gen-
 3. Generate Voronoi random ﬁeld with nodes and edges
                                                      eralization to new environments for all techniques.
    corresponding to the Voronoi graph.
                                                        While these numbers indicate an improvement of VRFs
 4. Extract spatial and connectivity features from the map over AdaBoost, they do not adequately reﬂect the true per-
    and generate the learned AdaBoost decision stumps to formance gain achieved by our VRF technique. To get an
    be used as observations in the VRF.               additional assessment of the techniques, we considered the
 5. Run max-product loopy BP inference to estimate the following scenario. A mobile robot is placed at a random
    MAP labeling of the nodes in the VRF.             location in the map and takes the shortest path to another

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2112Figure 1: Intel test map: (left) Occupancy grid map built via SLAM along with Voronoi graph. (middle) The labeled Voronoi graph deﬁnes
a place type for each point on the map. Hallways are colored gray (red), rooms light gray (green), doorways dark grey (blue), and junctions
are indicated by black circles. (right) Topological-metric map given by the segmentation of the labeled Voronoi graph. The spatial layout of
rooms and hallway sections is provided along with a connectivity structure indicated by lines and dots (doorways are dark gray (blue) dots).

randomly chosen location. Along its path, the robot records of individual rooms and hallway sections. Figure 2 provides
the sequence of rooms, hallway sections, junctions, and door- a visual comparison of VRFDwith ABSC(AdaBoost using
ways it passes through. We used edit distance to compare spatial and connectivity features). In agreement with the re-
sequences recorded on maps labeled using our algorithms to sults given in Table 2, our approach generates signiﬁcantly
those recorded on ground truth maps. Edit distance deter- more consistent segmentations of the environments. For in-
mines the minimum number of operations (insertions, dele- stance, AdaBoost generates a large number of false-positive
tions) needed to make the inferred path match the ground doorways and hallways, especially in the cluttered rooms of
truth path. Our resulting measure, called topological edit dis- the Freiburg map. Our labelings are also more consistent than
tance (TED), reports the ratio of edit distance to path length; those reported by [Stachniss et al., 2005].
a lower TED ratio means better performance. The ﬁnal re-
ported statistic is the average of 100 randomly selected paths 5 Conclusions
in the map. The random paths taken on the correspond-
ing maps in different tests were chosen consistently to al- We presented Voronoi random ﬁelds, a novel approach to
low a straightforward comparison. The TED scores of the generating semantically meaningful topological-metric de-
aforementioned experiments are summarized in Table 4. The scriptions of indoor environments. VRFs apply discrimina-
                                                      tively trained conditional random ﬁelds to label the points of
VRFDmethod offers clear improvements signiﬁcant at the
                                                      Voronoi graphs extracted from occupancy grid maps. The
p<0.06 level over ABSC.TheVRFM   method appears bet-
ter, but the overall improvement is insigniﬁcant due to poor hidden states of our VRFs range over different types of
performance on the Allen map. One explanation for this is places, such as rooms, hallways, doorways, and junctions. By
                                                      performing inference in the graph structure, our model is able
that VRFM failed to correctly label several junctions between
hallways, which many paths will pass through.         to take the connectivity of environments into account. We
                                                      use AdaBoost to learn useful binary features from the contin-
                                                      uous features extracted from Voronoi graphs and occupancy
           ABld.  Allen  Frbg.  Intel     Avg.        maps. The parameters of our model are trained efﬁciently
  ABS      79.4    60.5   76.6  62.6   69.8 ± 9.4
  AB                                       ±          using pseudo-likelihood. Experiments show that our tech-
     SC    35.7    30.9   74.2  59.8   50.1  20.0     nique enables robots to label unseen environments based on
  VRFD     18.2    22.1   23.7  25.7   22.4 ± 3.1
  VRF                                      ±          parameters learned in other environments, and that the spatial
      M    14.3    50.6   21.0  22.2   27.0  15.8     reasoning supported by VRFs results in substantial improve-
Table 2: Topological Edit Distance of leave-one-out place labeling. ments over a local AdaBoost technique.
                                                        We consider these results extremely encouraging; they pro-
  Figure 1 shows the performance of our technique on one vide mobile robots with the ability to reason about their en-
of our test maps (shown for VRFD, VRFM is very similar). vironments in terms more similar to human perception. As a
The coloring of the middle map is given by labeling all points next step, we will add high-level contextual information such
with the label of the nearest point in the VRF. The right panel as the length of hallways and the shape of rooms to our model.
shows the exploded topological-metric map resulting from Each segmentation will then correspond to a two-level CRF,
grouping contiguous room and hallway regions of the same with the upper level representing the features of these places
label into topological nodes. As can be seen, the topological- (similarly to [Liao et al., 2006]). To avoid summing over
metric map generated automatically by our VRF nicely rep- all possible CRF structures, we will replace MAP estimation
resents the environment’s connectivity structure (indicated by with a sampling or k-best technique.
lines and doorway and hallway nodes) and the spatial layout An obvious shortcoming of our current approach is the re-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2113