                   Online Speed Adaptation using Supervised Learning
                      for High-Speed, Off-Road          Autonomous Driving

                       David Stavens, Gabriel Hoffmann, and Sebastian Thrun
                               Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory
                                       Stanford, CA 94305-9010
                              {stavens,gabeh,thrun}@robotics.stanford.edu

                    Abstract                          damage to the vehicle, its mechanical actuators, and its elec-
                                                      tronic components. Second, a key perceptive technology,
    The mobile robotics community has traditionally   laser range scanning, relies on accurate estimation of orien-
    addressed motion planning and navigation in terms tation. Shock causes the vehicle to shake violently, making
    of steering decisions. However, selecting the best accurate estimates difﬁcult. Third, shocks substantially re-
    speed is also important – beyond its relationship duce traction during oscillations. Finally, we demonstrate that
    to stopping distance and lateral maneuverability. shock is strongly correlated with speed and, independently,
    Consider a high-speed (35 mph) autonomous vehi-   with subjectively difﬁcult terrain. That is, minimizing shock
    cle driving off-road through challenging desert ter- implies slowing on challenging roads when necessary – a cru-
    rain. The vehicle should drive slowly on terrain that cial behavior to mitigate risk to the vehicle.
    poses substantial risk. However, it should not daw-
                                                        Our algorithm uses the linear relationship between shock
    dle on safe terrain. In this paper we address one
                                                      and speed which we derive analytically. The algorithm has
    aspect of risk – shock to the vehicle. We present an
                                                      three states. First, the vehicle drives at the maximum allowed
    algorithm for trading-off shock and speed in real-
                                                      speed until a shock threshold is exceeded. Second, the vehicle
    time and without human intervention. The trade-off
                                                      slows immediately to bring itself within the shock threshold
    is optimized using supervised learning to match hu-
                                                      using the relationship between speed and shock. Finally, the
    man driving. The learning process is essential due
                                                      vehicle gradually accelerates. It returns to the ﬁrst state, or
    to the discontinuous and spatially correlated nature
                                                      the second if the threshold is exceeded during acceleration.
    of the control problem – classical techniques do not
    directly apply. We evaluate performance over hun-   To maximize safety, the vehicle must react to shock
    dreds of miles of autonomous driving, including   by slowing down immediately, resulting in a discontinuous
    performance during the 2005 DARPA Grand Chal-     speed command. Further, it should accelerate cautiously,
    lenge. This approach was the deciding factor in our because rough terrain tends to be clustered, a property we
    vehicle’s speed for nearly 20% of the DARPA com-  demonstrate experimentally. For these reasons, it is not pos-
    petition – more than any other constraint except the sible to determine the optimal parameters using classical con-
    DARPA-imposed speed limits – and resulted in the  trol techniques. The selection of parameters cannot be tuned
    fastest ﬁnishing time.                            by any physical model of the system, as the performance is
                                                      best measured statistically by driving experience.
                                                        Therefore, we generate the actual parameters for this al-
1  Introduction                                       gorithm – the shock threshold and acceleration rate – using
In mobile robotics, motion planning and navigation have tra- supervised learning. The algorithm generates a reasonable
ditionally focused on steering decisions. This paper presents match to the human teacher. Of course, humans are proac-
speed decisions as another crucial part of planning – beyond tive, also using perception to make speed decisions. We use
the relationship of speed to obstacle avoidance concerns, such inertial-only cues because it is very difﬁcult to assess terrain
as stopping distance and lateral maneuverability. Consider roughness with perceptive sensors. The accuracy required ex-
a high-speed (35 mph) autonomous vehicle driving off-road ceeds that for obstacle avoidance by a substantial margin be-
through challenging desert terrain. We want the vehicle to cause rough patches are often just a few centimeters in height.
drive slower on more dangerous terrain. However, we also Still, experimental results indicate our reactive approach is
want to minimize completion time. Thus, the robot must very effective in practice.
trade-off speed and risk in real-time. This is a natural pro- Our algorithm is part of the software suite developed for
cess for human drivers, but it is not at all trivial to endow a Stanley, an autonomous vehicle entered by Stanford Univer-
robot with this ability.                              sity in the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge [DARPA, 2004].
  We address this trade-off for one component of risk: the Stanley is shown in Figure 1. The Grand Challenge was a
shock the vehicle experiences. Minimizing shock is impor- robot race organized by the U.S. Government. In 2005, ve-
tant for several reasons. First, shock increases the risk of hicles had to navigate 132 miles of unrehearsed desert ter-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2218Figure 1: Stanley won the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge by
completing a 132 mile desert route in just under 7 hours. The
algorithm described in this paper was the deciding factor in
Stanley’s speed for nearly 20% of the race – more than any
other constraint except the DARPA-imposed speed limits.

                                                      Figure 2: We ﬁnd empirically that the relationship between
rain. The algorithm described here played an important role perceived vertical acceleration amplitude and vehicle speed
in that event. Speciﬁcally, it was the deciding factor in our over a static obstacle can be approximated by a linear function
robot’s speed for nearly 20% of the competition – more than in the operational region of interest.
any other constraint except the DARPA imposed speed limit.
It resulted in the fastest ﬁnishing time of any robot.
                                                      For example, two teams from Carnegie Mellon University
2  Related Work                                       (CMU) used “preplanning” for speed selection [Gutierrez et
                                                      al., 2005; Urmson et al., 2006; 2004; NOVA, 2006].For
There has been extensive work on terramechanics [Bekker,
                                                      months, members of the CMU teams collected extensive en-
1956; 1969; Wong, 1989], the guidance of autonomous vehi-
                                                      vironment data in the general area where the competition was
cles through rough terrain. That work generally falls into two
                                                      thought to be held. Once the precise route was revealed by
categories. One focuses on high-speed navigation. However,
                                                      DARPA, two hours before the race, the team preprogrammed
it requires that terrain maps and topology be known before-
                                                      speeds according to the previously collected data. The end-
hand [Shimoda et al., 2005; Spenko et al., 2006]. The other
                                                      result of the CMU approach is similar to ours. However, our
analyzes terrain ruggedness in an online fashion by driving
                                                      fully-online method requires neither human intervention nor
over it [Sadhukhan et al., 2004; Brooks and Iagnemma, 2005;
                                                      prior knowledge of the terrain. The latter distinction is par-
Iagnemma et al., 2004]. However, vehicle speed is very slow,
                                                      ticularly important since desert terrain readily changes over
less than 1.8 mph. Further, classiﬁcation focused on ter-
                                                      time due to many factors, including weather.
rain type, not roughness. Our work combines the strengths
of both categories: online terrain roughness assessment and
high-speed navigation.                                3   Speed Selection Algorithm
  Successful obstacle detection systems have been built for
                                                      Our algorithm is derived in three steps. First, we derive the
high-speed autonomous driving [Thrun et al., 2006b; 2006a;
                                                      linear relationship between speed and shock. Second, we
Urmson et al., 2006; 2004; Kelly and Stentz, 1998].How-
                                                      leverage this relationship to build an algorithm for determin-
ever, as we mentioned in Section 1, the precision needed for
                                                      ing an appropriate speed. Finally, we tune the parameters of
determining terrain ruggedness exceeds that required for ob-
                                                      the algorithm using supervised learning.
stacle avoidance by a substantial margin. Thus, while these
systems are excellent at detecting and avoiding static obsta- 3.1 Z Acceleration Mapping and Filtering
cles, they do not protect the vehicle from the effects of road
roughness.                                            The mapping between vehicle speed and shock experienced
  Some work has explicitly considered speed as important is fundamental to our technique. Here, shock is measured by
for path planning. For example, [Fox et al., 1996] presents a the amplitude of acceleration in the vertical, z-direction, of
method for trading off “progress” and “velocity” with regard the vehicle’s main body. The vehicle’s speed is v and posi-
to the number and type of obstacles present. That is, slower tion along the path is p. The ground varies in height, zg(p),
speeds are desirable in more cluttered environments. Faster pushing stifﬂy on the car’s tires. The ground is modeled to
speeds are better for open spaces. This concept, applied to be the sum of sinusoids of a large number of unknown spatial
desert driving, is analogous to slowing for turns in the road frequencies and amplitudes. Consider one component of this
and for discrete obstacles. Our vehicle exhibits those behav- summation, with a spatial frequency of ωs, and an amplitude
                                                      A
iors as well. However, they are separate from the algorithm z,g,ωs . Due to motion of the vehicle, the frequency in time
                                                        z      ω = vω
we describe in this paper.                            of g,ωs is      s. By taking two derivatives, the accelera-
                                                          z¨                    v2ω2A
  Other entrants in the 2005 DARPA Grand Challenge re- tion, g,ωs , has an amplitude of s z,g,ωs and a frequency
alized the importance of adapting speed to rough terrain. of vωs. This is the acceleration input to the vehicle’s tire.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2219                                                      nance in the suspension system around 10 to 20 Hz, followed
                                                      by an exponential drop off in Az¨, to zero.
                                                        Although the acceleration is approximately a linear func-
                                                      tion of v, a barrier to the use of pure z-accelerometer inertial
                                                      measurement unit (IMU) data is that acceleration can reﬂect
                                                      other inputs than road roughness. First, the projection of the
                                                      gravity vector onto the z-axis, which changes with the pitch
                                                      of the road, causes a large, low frequency offset. Second,
                                                      the driveline and non-uniformities in the wheels cause higher
                                                      frequency vibrations.
                                                        To remove these effects, we pass the IMU data through a
                                                      40-tap, FIR band pass ﬁlter to extract the excitation of the
                                                      suspension system, in the 0.3 to 12 Hz band. This band was
                                                      found, experimentally, to both reject the offset of gravity and
                                                      eliminate vibrations unrelated to the suspension system, with-
                                                      out eliminating the vibration response of the suspension.
                                                        A comparison of the raw and ﬁltered data is shown in Fig-
Figure 3: Filtered vs. unﬁltered IMU data. The 40-tap FIR ure 3. The mean of the raw data, acquired on terrain with no
band pass ﬁlter extracts the excitation of the suspension sys- slope, is about 1G, whereas the mean of the ﬁltered data is
tem, in the 0.3 to 12 Hz band. This removes the offset of about 0G. Therefore, solely for presentation in this ﬁgure, 1G
gravity, as terrain slope varies, and higher frequency noise, was subtracted from the raw data.
such as engine system vibration, that is unrelated to oscilla-
tions in the vehicle’s suspension.                    3.2  Generating Speed Recommendations
                                                      Our speed selection algorithm (the velocity controller) has
  To model the response of the suspension system, we use three states. Each road is assumed to have a speed limit (γ,in
the quarter car model [Gillespie, 1992]. The tire is modeled mph) that represents the upper bound on vehicle speed along
as a connection between the axle and the road with a spring that road. First, the vehicle travels at the speed limit until
with stiffness kt, and the suspension system is modeled as a a road event generates a shock that exceeds an acceptable
connection between the axle and the vehicle’s main body, us- threshold (α, in Gs). Second, it reduces speed such that the
                                                                                  α
ing a spring with stiffness ks and a damper with coefﬁcient cs. event would have been less than . Finally, it accelerates (at
Using this model, the amplitude of acceleration of the main rate β, in mph/s) back to the speed limit.
body of the vehicle can be easily approximated, by assuming More formally, recall that, for a given rough segment of
inﬁnitely stiff tires, to be                          road, the shock experienced by the vehicle is linear with re-
                                                     spect to speed. Every dt seconds, the vehicle takes a reading
                           (c vω )2 + k2                                p                          z¨
 A    =  v2ω2A               s  s     s               at its current location along the route. Filtered shock p and
   z,ω¨ s   s z,g,ωs (c vω )2 +(k  − mv2ω2)2    (1)   speed v are observed. The optimal speed at p should have
                       s  s      s        s                  p
                                                      been
where m is the mass of one quarter of the vehicle, and the
magnitude of the acceleration input to the tire is taken to be                     v
v2ω2A     , as described above. The resonant frequency of                v∗  =   α  p
   s  z,g,ωs                                                              p       |z¨ |               (2)
a standard automobile is around 1 to 1.5 Hz. Below this fre-                        p
quency, the amplitude increases from zero at 0 Hz, slowly, but v∗
                                                      That is, p is the velocity that would have delivered the max-
exponentially, with frequency. Above this frequency, the am-               α
                                csvωs                 imum acceptable shock ( ) to the vehicle.
plitude increases linearly, approaching A  . Modern                                                ∗
                                 m    z,g,ωs            Our instant recommendation for vehicle speed is v .No-
active damping systems further quench the effect of the reso-                                      p
                                                      tice that the vehicle is slowing reactively. Reactive behavior
nant frequency, leading to a curve that is nearly linear in fre-
                                                      has no effect if shock is instant, random, and not clustered.
quency throughout, to within the noise of the sensors, which
                                                      That is, our approach relies on one shock event “announcing”
also measure the effect of random forcing disturbances.
                                                      the arrival of another, momentarily. Experimental results on
  The frequency, ω, is directly proportional to speed v,so
                                                      hundreds of miles of desert indicate this is an effective strat-
the amplitude of acceleration response of the vehicle is also
                                                      egy.
approximately a linear function of the velocity. Now, by su-         ∗
                                                        We consider v an observation. The algorithm incorpo-
perposition, considering the sum of the responses for all com-       p
                                                      rates these observations over time, generating the actual rec-
ponents of the terrain proﬁle at all spatial frequencies, the am-     vr
                                                      ommended speed,  p:
plitude of the acceleration response of the vehicle, Az¨,isthe
                                        v
sum of many approximately linear functions in , and hence                                   
                      v                                           r              ∗  r
is approximately linear in itself. This theoretical analysis     v   =minγ,v      ,v −1 + βdt         (3)
can also be veriﬁed experimentally as in Figure 2.                p              p  p
                                                                                  vr
  This approximation assumed inﬁnitely stiff tires. In reality, For our purposes, we also clamp p such that it is never less
                                                                          vr
the ﬁnite stiffness of tires leads to a higher frequency reso- than 5 mph. We call the p series a velocity plan.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2220                                                        We do not model driver reaction time, and we correct for
                                                      the delay due to IMU ﬁltering. Thus, in this data, driver ve-
                                                      locity at position p is the vehicle’s recorded velocity at po-
                                                      sition p, according to the UKF. The algorithm’s velocity at
                                                      position p is the decision of the velocity controller consider-
                                                      ing all data up to and including the IMU and UKF data points
                                                      logged at position p.
                                                        The parameterization learned was (α, β)=(.27Gs,
                                                      .909 mph/s). This is illustrated in Figure 4. The top and
                                                      bottom halves of the ﬁgure show the training and test sets,
                                                      respectively. The horizontal axis is position along the 2004
                                                      Grand Challenge route in miles. The vertical axis is speed
                                                      in mph. For practical reasons we rounded these parameters
                                                      to .25 and 1, respectively, which are essentially identical in
                                                      terms of vehicle performance. The robot used these parame-
                                                      ters during the Grand Challenge event and they are evaluated
                                                      extensively in future sections.
                                                        We notice a reasonable match to human driving. Without
                                                      the penalty for speeding, a closer match is possible. However,
Figure 4: The results of coordinate descent machine learning
                                                      that parameterization causes the vehicle to drive too aggres-
are shown. The learning generated the race parameters of
                                                      sively. This is, no doubt, because a human driver also uses
.25 Gs and 1 mph/s, a good match to human driving. Note that
                                                      perceptual cues to determine speed.
the human often drives under the speed limit. This suggests
the importance of our algorithm for desert driving.     Notice that the speed limits are often much greater than
                                                      the safe speed the human (and the algorithm) selects. This
                                                      demonstrates the importance of our technique over blindly
3.3  Supervised Machine Learning                      following the provided speed limits. Notice also, however,
We use supervised machine learning to select α and β.Some both the human and the algorithm at times exceed the speed
might argue we should select these parameters using explicit limit. This is not allowed on the actual robot or in the experi-
hardware lifetime calculations rather than matching a human ments in Section 4. However, we permit it here to simplify the
teacher. However, an autonomous vehicle has hundreds of scoring function, the learning process, and the idea of match-
components. Analyzing the effect of shock on each would ing a human driver’s speed.
require a great deal of time. It would also be costly – each
component would have to break before we could determine 4 Experimental Results
its limit. We believe that matching a human’s speed provides
a useful and more efﬁcient bound on acceptable shock. 4.1  Qualitative Analysis
  The velocity plan generated by a speciﬁc parameterization In our ﬁrst experiment, we evaluate the algorithm on sections
is scored against a human driver’s velocity decisions at all p. of off-road driving that we identify (qualitatively) as partic-
The parameters are then iteratively modiﬁed according to a ularly easy and, alternatively, as challenging. The purpose
scoring function and coordinate descent.              of this experiment is to spot-check performance. We seek to
     vh                                      p
  Let p be the speed of the human driver at position .The verify that our algorithm, as tuned by the learning, does not
objective/scoring function we wish to minimize is     drive too slowly on easy terrain or too fast on difﬁcult terrain.
                                                       We select two seven mile stretches from the 2005 Grand
                                                  Challenge route. The ﬁrst stretch includes miles 0-7. This is
              ψ vh − vr 1+αβ−1
                 p    p                         (4)   very easy terrain consisting of wide dirt roads and dry lakes.
             p                                        The second includes miles 122-129. This terrain is very chal-
     ψ  =1   vr ≤  vh    ψ =3                ψ
where       if p    p and      otherwise. The  term   lenging: a narrow mountain road with a 200 ft drop on one
penalizes speeding relative to the human driver. The value 3 side. Both sections were graded (smoothed with a large plow)
was selected arbitrarily. The αβ−1 term penalizes parameter- not long before the Grand Challenge event. Based on video
izations that tolerate a great deal of shock or accelerate too collected by the vehicle and by DARPA, the mountain road
slowly.                                               is clearly much more challenging to drive. However, neither
  For this experiment, a human driver drove 1.91 miles of has obviously greater potential for vertical shock.
the previous year’s (2004) Grand Challenge route. The vehi- Figure 5 presents results from the ﬁrst seven miles of the
cle’s state vector was estimated by an Unscented Kalman Fil- course – the easy example. In the ﬁgure, points represent a
ter (UKF) [Julier and Uhlmann, 1997]. The UKF combined single shock event along the route. The vertical axis plots
measurements from a Novatel GPS with Omnistar differen- shock the vehicle experiences while driving the route with
tial corrections, a GPS compass, the IMU, and wheel speed the velocity controller. The horizontal axis plots shock expe-
encoders. The GPS devices produced data at 10Hz. All other rienced driving the speed limits alone. We notice two things.
devices and the UKF itself produced data at 100Hz. All data First, shock above our .25G threshold is very rare. This re-
is logged with millisecond accurate timestamps.       ﬂects on the particularly straightforward driving conditions.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2221Figure 5: Each point indicates a speciﬁc shock event with Figure 6: Each point indicates a speciﬁc shock event with
both the velocity controller (vertical axis) versus speed limits both the velocity controller (vertical axis) versus speed limits
alone (horizontal axis). There are very few high shock events alone (horizontal axis). There are many high shock events
on this easy terrain. The velocity controller does not reduce on this difﬁcult terrain. The velocity controller reduces shock
shock or speed much.                                  and speed a great deal.

Second, we notice that the shock experienced with the speed Whenever the vehicle travels along a road – regardless of
limits alone is, for all events, roughly the same as that expe- whether under human or autonomous control – it can map the
rienced with the velocity controller. Thus, because shock is road for velocity control experiments. Each raw IMU read-
linear with speed, the velocity controller did not signiﬁcantly ing is logged along with the vehicle’s velocity and position
reduce speed on this easy terrain. This supports the idea that according to the UKF. Then, ofﬂine, each IMU reading can
the algorithm, with the learned parameters, does not cause be ﬁltered and divided by the vehicle’s speed. This generates
the vehicle to drive too slowly on easy terrain. Figure 6 is a sequence of position tagged road roughness values in the
the same type of plot, with the same axis ranges, as Figure 5. units Gs-felt-per-mile-per-hour. We use these sequences in
However, here, we plot data from the more difﬁcult segment, this section to evaluate the velocity controller.
miles 122-129. In this terrain, poor perceptive sensing or loss We calculate completion time by summing the time spent
                                                                                         p   p
of traction – both due to excessive shock – could result in to- traversing each route segment (ie: from i to i+1) accord-
tal vehicle loss. The velocity controller is very active, lower- ing to the average speed driven during that segment. 1/dt
ing vehicle speed. The lower speed results in reduced shock, is 100Hz. Because the velocity controller may change speed
                                                                     p
better traction, and generally more favorable conditions for instantly at each i, we track the velocities it outputs – for
successful navigation of this challenging terrain.    these simulations only – with a simple controller. It restricts
                                                      the maximum amount of change in velocity between succes-
4.2  Quantitative Analysis                            sive pi’s, approximating vehicle capabilities. The limits are
                                                      .02 mph for increases and .09 mph for decreases. We use the
Experimental Setup
                                                      controller output for completion time and shock calculations.
Having veriﬁed the basic function of the algorithm, we now
proceed to analyze its performance over long stretches of Time vs. Shock for Four Desert Routes
driving. For long stretches, it becomes intractable to com- We consider the trade-off of shock versus completion time on
pare algorithm performance to human decisions (as in Sec- four desert routes. See Figure 8. The horizontal axis plots
tion 3.3) or relative to qualitatively assessed terrain condi- completion time. The vertical axis plots shock felt. Both are
tions (as in Section 4.1). Therefore, we must consider other for the algorithm normalized against speed limits alone. Each
metrics. Over long stretches of driving, we use the aggregate of the four curves represents a different desert route: the 2005
reduction of large shocks to measure algorithm effectiveness. Grand Challenge route, the 2004 Grand Challenge route, and
  However, to evaluate the reduction of large shocks, we can- two routes outside of Phoenix, Arizona, USA that we created
not simply sum the amount of shock. Extreme shock is rare. for testing purposes. Individual points on the curves depict
Less than .3% of all readings (2005 Grand Challenge, Speed the completion time versus shock trade-off for a particular set
Limits Alone) are above our maximum acceptable shock (α) of (α, β) values. For these curves, α is ﬁxed and β is varied.
threshold. Thus, the aggregate effect of frequent, small shock The asterisk on each curve indicates the trade-off generated
could mask the algorithm’s performance on rare, large shock. by the parameters selected in Section 3.3. The ﬁfth aster-
To avoid this problem, we take the 4th power (“L4 Metric”) isk, at the top-left, indicates what happens with speed limits
of a shock before adding it to the sum. This accentuates large alone. We notice that, for all routes, completion time is in-
shocks and diminishes small ones in the aggregate score. creased between 2.5% and 5% over the baseline. However,

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2222