         Layout Analysis of Tree-Structured Scene Frames in Comic Images

               Takamasa Tanaka, Kenji Shoji, Fubito Toyama, and Juichi Miyamichi
                                   Department of Information Science
                            Faculty of Engineering, Utsunomiya University,
                                    Utsunomiya-shi, 321-8585 Japan
                                   taka@athena.is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp

                    Abstract                          the name of a YAHOO! JAPAN Comics2. Digital Comic
                                                      of Rakuten ICHIBA3 is selling comics of about 6000 vol-
    Today, the demand of services for comic contents  umes. Many of them provide comic images to users page
    increases because paper magazines and books are   by page. Some of new comics such as “SALARY MAN
    bulky while digital contents can be read anytime  KINTARO”4  are published as the exclusive use of online de-
    and anywhere with cellular phones and PDAs. To    livery services. They are displayed on personal computers
    convert existing print comic materials into digital with respect to each scene frame having BGMs and sound
    format such that they can be read using the cellular effects. Their presentations are advanced to next frames au-
    phones and the PDAs with small screens, it is nec- tomatically. “comic i” and “comic cmoa”5, which are the ser-
    essary to divide each page into scene frames and to vices intended for cellular phones, have been favorably well
    determine reading order of the scene frames. The  received at the point of presenting each scene frame reedited
    division of comic images into the scene frames can with action effects.
    be considered as a type of document layout analy-   To convert existing print comic materials into digital for-
    sis. We analyzed layout of comic images using den- mat such that they can be presented using the cellular phones
    sity gradient. The method can be applied to comics and the PDAs with small screens, it is necessary to divide
    in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over each page into scene frames and to determine reading order
    scene frames. In this research, a method for detect- after converting each page into digital form using a scanner.
    ing the scene frame division in comic images using  It is very convenient not to have to use any keyboard or
    the density gradient after ﬁlling the quadrangle re- mouse when personal computer users would enjoy comic
    gions in each image with black is proposed. Exper- contents lying sprawled.
    imental results show that 80 percent of 672 pages in As a method for providing such lazy viewing to us, au-
    four print comic booklets are successfully divided tomatic page turning by eye-gaze tracking is considered. In
    into scene frames by the proposed method.         order to implement the automatic page turning, it is neces-
                                                      sary to detect the timing when a user ﬁnishes the reading of
1  Introduction                                       a current page. To detect the timing, it is considered that a
                                                      eye-gaze tracking system can be used. For that purpose, it is
In this paper, a technique for searching the order to be read necessary to know the arrangement of scene frames and the
and the position of the scene frame in the page is proposed reading order in the page.
based on structure analysis for the image of each page of print The division of comic images into the scene frames can
comic materials.                                      be considered as document layout analysis for comic images.
  Today, communication networks are in wide spread use, In document layout analysis [Ishitani, 2001], the shape of re-
copyright management systems are in practical use, and many gion of interest is assumed to be only rectangle in most cases,
services using digital contents have been started in various while shapes of scene frames in comic images are fundamen-
ﬁelds. The demand of the service for comic contents in- tally quadrangle which is not limited to rectangle. Therefore,
creases because paper magazines and books are bulky while a new analysis method for comic images is needed.
digital contents can be read anytime and anywhere with cel- We ﬁnd that the most of comic pages can be divided into
lular phones and PDAs. Actually, some services for digi-
                                    1                 scene frames by recursive guillotine cut, and that the pro-
tal comics have been started. eBooksJapan is the specialty cess of the guillotine cut makes the tree structure of the scene
site which sells the digital books, and the number of sell-
ing comics has exceeded 10,000. In the portal site YAHOO! 2Yahoo Japan Corporation, http://comics.yahoo.co.jp/
JAPAN, an online delivery service for comics is started by 3Rakuten,Inc., http://dl.rakuten.co.jp/shop/rt/comic/
                                                         4
  1                                                      author Hiroshi Motomiya,
   eBOOK Initiative Japan Co.,Ltd.,                           http://dl.rakuten.co.jp/shop/rt/sp/kintaro/
                                                         5NTT SOLMARE CORPORATION,
        http://www.ebookjapan.jp/shop/                        http://dl.foobio.net/free/cmoa/index.html

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2885frames which has an information to determine the order of the                          H
scene frames to be read. The concept of guillotine cut is used        1
by optimization of cutting a sheet into quadrangles requested 3
[Ono, 1999].
                                                                                  V    4   V
  As a layout analysis method of comics, Yamada et al. [Ya-          2                          Layer1
mada et al., 2004] has been realized an algorithm for divi-                     H   365         Layer2
sion and alignment of the scene frame by tracking white re-       4
gion between the scene frame of the comic image. But, only                    12                Layer3
23 images of comics pages are used by experiments, since
                                                             6                  V   Vertical Division
main purpose is a realization of the method of image com-             5
pression and extraction efﬁciently considered built-in mem-                     H  Horizontal Division
ory capacity and telecommunications cost of cellular phone.
And, when the comic balloon or picture are drawn over scene
frame, the division of the scene frame can not be well detected Figure 1: The structure of a comics page (left) and the tree
in this algorithm.                                    structure of it (right).
  We analyzed layout of comic images using density gra- Figures within scene frames in comics page shown reading
dient [Tanaka et al., 2006]. The method can be applied to order, and this reading order is shown by the depth ﬁrst search
comics in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over of this tree.
scene frames. Experimental results of the method show that
60 percent of 672 pages in four print comic booklets are suc-
cessfully divided into scene frames.
  In this research, we propose an improved detection method
of scene frame division for our previous method by prepro-
cessing comic images before detection of division line. And
experimental results of scene frame division for sum total of
672 pages of 4 print comic materials are reported.

2  Comics Structure

2.1  Comics Scene Frame Deﬁnition
In this study, the scene frame of comics is deﬁned as a quadri-
lateral frame composed of four straight lines including pic- Figure 2: The structure of a comics page before division into
ture in its interior. Then, the frame lines interrupted by a scene frames (left) and the tree structure of it (right).
balloon or a picture are also regarded as scene frame. In addi-
tion, the scene frame that consists of imaginary quadrilateral
frame line made by other scene frame or the edge of the page Thirdly, the right frame is divided into top and bottom
is also contained. Though scene frames of comics are mere scene frame, and two leaves are made under the node.
frame in single panel cartoons, scene frames of comics repre- Finally, the bottom of three frames divided into ﬁrstly is
sent time and space in multiple panel cartoons [Takekuma and divided into right and left frames, and two leaves are made at
Natsume, 1995]. In Japanese comics, reading order is funda- the node.
mentally from right to left and downward. Reading order is In this way, the tree in right part of Figure 1 is created. The
uniquely decided by the arrangement of scene frames.  order of scene frames is decided by ordering the leaves of this
                                                      tree by means of the depth ﬁrst search. Thus, it is shown that
2.2  Comics Tree Structure                            the order of scene frames of the comics is decided by forming
The structure of a comics page can be represented by a tree, the tree structure.
whose root is the whole comic image (see Figure 2). The tree
is obtained by dividing the image recursively. An example 2.3 Structure of the Scene Frame out of Scope in
of the structure of comics represented by a tree is shown in Our Proposed Method
Figure 1.
  In the example, ﬁrstly the comic image is divided into In the case where scene frames exist inside of a scene frame,
three frames by horizontal division lines in left part of Fig- the page can not form the tree structure by dividing the image
ure 3 (gray lines are these horizontal division lines), and three recursively. Figure 5 shows an example of such page.
leaves are made under the root in right part of Figure 3. In such case, it is considered one scene frame including the
  Secondly, the top of the frames (the left leaf which is the scene frame which exists in the inside. If such scene frame is
elder son on layer 1 in left part of Figure 4) is divided into the whole image of a page, the scene frame is not chosen as
right and left frames by a vertical division line in left part of the object of experiments. And if such scene frame appears
Figure 4, and two leaves are made under the node of the elder in the stage on the way of the scene frame division, the scene
son in right part of Figure 4.                        frame division is not subsequently carried out.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2886                                H


                                         Layer1


                         V    Vertical Division
                         H  Horizontal Division

Figure 3: The structure of a comics page at ﬁrst step (left) and
the tree structure of it (right).
                                                      Figure 5: An example page out of scope in the proposed
                                H                     method (source: title Ranma 1/2, author Rumiko Takahashi,
                                                      publisher Shogakukan Inc., volume 38 p.108).

                            V            Layer1           Image f(x, y)
                                         Layer2


                         V    Vertical Division
                                                                     (0,0)
                         H   Horizontal Division
                                                                           θ          x
                                                                       ρ
Figure 4: The structure of a comics page at second step (left)
and the tree structure of it (right).                                               Straight line L(ρ, θ)
3  Division Line Detection Using Density
   Gradient
                                                                        y
3.1  Representation of Straight Line
A straight line is represented by ρ which is the length of the
                                                           Figure 6: Representation of straight line L(ρ, θ).
perpendicular line from the origin to the straight line and θ
which is the angle between the X-axis and the perpendicular
line (see Figure 6). Here, the origin (0, 0) is the center of L(ρ, θ). The set of pixel positions on the straight line L(ρ, θ)
comics image, the x-axis is deﬁned that the rightward direc- is deﬁned as S(ρ, θ). The density gradient value A(ρ, θ) of
                                                      the straight line L(ρ, θ) on an image is given as follows:
tion is positive and the y-axis is deﬁned that the downward                  
direction is positive in a comics page image.
                                                                 A(ρ, θ)=          gθ(x, y)           (3)
  The straight line L(ρ, θ) are expressed as follows:
                                                                          (x,y)∈S(ρ,θ)
              ρ = x cos θ + y sin θ             (1)     The central part of the image is expected that there is the
3.2  Weighted Accumulation Value of Gradient          high possibility a division line is located. Therefore, in order
                                                      to raise the weight of the central part of the image, a weighted
The density gradient θ  of the direction at the position
                 g (x, y)    θ                        accumulation value of gradient AW (ρ, θ) is obtained by mul-
(x, y) on an image is given as follows:               tiplying A(ρ, θ) by a Gaussian function G(ρ) on ρ as shown
                                                      in Figure 7.
      gθ(x, y)=gx(x, y)cosθ + gy(x, y)sinθ      (2)
                                                                    W                                 (4)
  where gx(x, y) is the density gradient of the X-axis direc-      A  (ρ, θ)=G(ρ)A(ρ, θ)
tion, and gy(x, y) is the density gradient of the Y-axis direc- where
tion.                                                   G(ρ)=exp(−ρ2/σ2),andσ    =[Image height]/4.
  The accumulation value A(ρ, θ) of the density gradient We use an evaluation value based on the AW (ρ, θ) to
value of the θ direction is obtained along the straight line search division lines.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2887                             Gaussian function
                                   G(ρ)


     Image f(x, y)

                                           ρ

                                           x


                                                      Figure 8: Input image (source: title DRAGON BALL, au-
                       y                              thor Akira Toriyama, publisher SHUEISHA Inc., volume 42
                                                      p.205) (left), and the scene frame division image for input
                                                      image using the convetional method (right).
   Figure 7: Weighted Accumulation Value of Gradient.

                                                      zontal lines respectively are calculated. Last, if Tv >Th,
3.3  Continued White Pixels                           HW  (ρp,θp) for the vertical division line is increased by mul-
Since scene frames are separated by a white pixel region, tiplying it by the ratio of Tv to Th, and vice versa, so that the
white pixels continued to some extent length exist in the origi- T-type is well divided by the following processing.
nal image near division lines detected by the density gradient.
Therefore, the constant width (the width ±10 pixels) of the 3.5 Division Line Decision
original image is scanned at the same angle and white pixels The straight line judged as division line is stored in a taboo
continued to some extent length are searched after the divi- list. The straight line which is similar to the straight line
sion line was detected from the density gradient image. Then, stored in the taboo list is not chosen as a division line in the
the evaluation value HW (ρ, θ) of segment without white pix- matter of subsequently division line detection. Under the con-
els of some extent length is lowered by multiplying AW (ρ, θ) straint, the candidate of division line is obtained as
by the ratio of the length of the longest white pixel column to
                                                                   (ρp,θp) = arg max HW (ρ, θ).
that of the segment. Here, the threshold of the white pixel is                  ρ,θ
set to 224 in 256 tones of gray scale.
                                                        Whether L(ρp,θp) is division line or not is decided by
3.4  T-type Division Line Judgment                    whether HW (ρp,θp) ≥ hth or not. As hth is raised, divi-
In our previous method, the failure showed the side effect that sion lines detected is limited more. We decided hth heuris-
                                                      tically. When the range of θ of detected division lines is
can be applied to the case where comic balloons or pictures ◦         ◦
                                                      −45   <θP   ≤ 45 , the division line L(ρp,θp) is made to
overlap with scene frames. For example, when the shape of                              ◦             ◦
                                                      be a vertical division line. When −90 <θP ≤−45   or
the region of interest is vertically extending and its correct di- ◦ ◦
vision lines are T-type, the division of it by the horizontal line 45 <θP ≤ 90 , the division line L(ρp,θp) is made to be a
should be followed by the division of the lower half by the horizontal division line. In each divided region, the division
vertical line. But the vertical division line actually is ﬁrstly is repeated by the same procedure until a division line is not
detected because of the superiority of the accumulated gradi- detected.
ent value of the vertical division line over the horizontal one
(the division line of layer 1 in Figure 8)            3.6  Implementation
                                                                          ◦     ◦   ◦
  The ﬁgures “1” to “3” in Figure 8 are the layer numbers in θ is changed from −90 to 90 at 1 step, and ρ is changed
the tree structure. In order to correct this problem, a process- within the image at 1 pixel step. We used straight line gener-
ing for judgment of a T-type division line is added. In vertical ation algorithm DDA in the digital image when accumulating
division lines and horizontal division lines, each division line the density gradient of each pixel along straight line.
that the evaluation value HW (ρp,θp) is the highest is chosen. Since the outside frame of a page image should not be de-
Then, T-type judgment is processed when the ratio between tected as a division line, we trim input page images such that
each evaluation value HW (ρp,θp) is less than 3 times. they do not include the outside frame in advance.
  First, the intersection point of a candidate of the vertical
division line and that of horizontal one is detected. Next, in 3.7 Preprocessing
the neighborhood at the intersection point (40 × 40pixels) As a preprocessing of the division line detection, we approx-
the evaluation values Tv and Th of the vertical and hori- imate the outlines of input images with polygons. In the

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2888polygonal approximation, we use the Douglas-Peucker ap-
proximation [Hershberger and Snoeyink, 1992].Fromthe
approximated polygons we choose quadrangles. Then we ﬁll
the region of the quadrangles with black in order to reduce
the inﬂuence of pictures within scene frames on the evalua-
tion value for division line detection and to avoid detecting
division lines within scene frames.

4  Experiments

Experiments were conducted for the images of pages in print
comics excluding the pages composed of single scene frames
such as title pages, contents pages, and particular pages in
main volume. We used here 672 pages in four print comics.
Each image of page was scanned in the resolution of 650 by Figure 9: The scene frame division image for left part of Fig-
1000 pixels.                                          ure 8 using the proposed method.
4.1  Experimental Results
Experimental results for the image set of 672 pages in four within scene frames was reduced. But, when scene frames
print comics are shown in Table 1.                    that comic balloons or pictures are drawn over scene frames
  Method A in Table 1 denotes our previous method, method and the outline of comic image is part of scene frame, the
B indicated the proposed method without the preprocessing, scene frames are hardly detected as quadrangles. An exam-
and method C is the proposed method with the preprocessing. ple of the latter is shown in Figure 10. In the bottom scene
  The results were classiﬁed into ﬁve groups such as “suc- frames, two lines have also been detected as a division line.
ceeded”, “failed”, “-1”, “+1”, and “the others”. The term
“succeeded” means the success for the scene frame division.
The term “failed” means the failure for the scene frame divi-
sion. The term “-1” means that one division line is lacking
for the correct scene frame division. The term “+1” means
that there is one division line over the correct ones. The term
“the others” means that there is an excess or deﬁciency of two
division lines and over.
  For the left part of Figure 8 as an input image, a result by
the proposed method is shown in Figure 9. In this case the
proposed method judging T-type division line is succeeded
while our previous method is failed.

Table 1: Experimental results for the comic image set of 672
pages. Values separated by ” / ” within each cell show the
number of pages and ratio(%) respectively.
                                                      Figure 10: Input image (source: title SLAM DUNK, author
                                                      Takehiko Inoue, publisher SHUEISHA Inc., volume 31 p.71)
                                                      (left), and the scene frame division image for input image
                                                      (right).

                                                        Several T-type division lines didn’t be detected without the
                                                      preprocessing. But, by preprocessing, some of them are de-
                                                      tected. These examples are shown in Figure 11. The scene
                                                      frame division succeeded by judging T-type division line us-
                                                      ing the proposed method.
                                                        Since comic drawing style, such as the arrangement of the
                                                      scene frame, the picture which overlapped with the frame line
                                                      of the scene frame, and so on, is different by comic artists, the
4.2  Discussion                                       success rate of the experiments is greatly different by each
In these experimental results, proposed method have a 16% comic. The experimental results for the comic image set of
higher success rate than our previous method. By ﬁlling the DRAGON BALL volume 42 are shown in Table 2. In the
region of the quadrangles with black, detecting division lines comic image set of DRAGON BALL volume 42, experimen-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2889