                  Case-based Learning from Proactive Communication

                                 Santiago Ontan˜on´  ∗ and  Enric Plaza
                             IIIA - Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Institute
                             CSIC - Spanish Council for Scientiﬁc Research
                           Campus UAB, 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia (Spain)
                                        {santi,enric}@iiia.csic.es

                    Abstract                            An alternative approach might be to centralize all data.
                                                      However, there are several reasons for not following this
    We present a proactive communication approach     path always (i.e. centralization is feasible and efﬁcient on
    that allows CBR agents to gauge the strengths and some situations but not on others). First, since we assume
    weaknesses of other CBR agents. The communi-      data distributed over several sites (each with a case base Ci),
    cation protocol allows CBR agents to learn from   centralization means basically sending all data to everyone’s
    communicating with other CBR agents in such a     site. In this way, every CBR agent will have all known cases
    way that each agent is able to retain certain cases on its case base (C = C1 ∪ ...∪ Cn); this scenario is simple
    provided by other agents that are able to improve but hardly efﬁcient nor scalable, and may be unfeasible in
    their individual performance (without need to dis- situations where the different sites would agree to partially
    close all the contents of each case base). The    disclose some data but not all data all the time.
    selection and retention of cases is modeled as a
                                                        However, simply having more cases does not assure better
    case bartering process, where each individual CBR
                                                      CBR performance [Smyth and Keane, 1995], and we need
    agent autonomously decides which cases offers for
                                                      to use case base maintenance techniques or retain policies to
    bartering and which offered barters accepts. Exper-
                                                      select the subset of cases that improves CBR performance
    imental evaluations show that the sum of all these
                                                      [Lopez´ de Mantaras´ et al., 2006]. Thus, when using the
    individual decisions result in a clear improvement
                                                      centralized approach, after receiving all cases from the other
    in individual CBR agent performance with only a
                                                      agents each agent will proceed to purge its individual case
    moderate increase of individual case bases.                                                  R
                                                      base to obtain an individual reduced case base C ⊂ C.
                                                      In fact, a CBR agent Ai would have only needed to acquire
                                                                            R
1  Introduction                                       the the cases in the set C − Ci to achieve this situation.
                                                      Therefore, all that is needed is for Ai to acquire from the other
Distributed case-based reasoning (CBR) aims at studying and                  R
                                                      agents a subset of cases (C − Ci or a similar one) such that
applying CBR techniques for situations where distributed
                                                      allows a real improvement of Ai’s individual performance.
resources are present [Plaza and McGinty, 2006]. Current
                                                        Therefore, a more intelligent strategy is to ﬁnd a subset of
approaches range from one CBR agent using several case
                                                      cases to be acquired from the other agents that is equivalent
bases [Leake and Sooriamurthi, 2001] (or several agents
                                                      (for the purposes of improving a CBR agent performance) to
using one case base) to multiple agents having individual  R
                                                      the C  − Ci set. Our proposal is developing a distributed
case bases [Plaza and Ontan˜on,´ 2001], and applications span
                                                      and decentralized strategy that achieves exactly this effect:
from classiﬁcation [Plaza and Ontan˜on,´ 2001] and planning
                                                      instead of a centralized process we propose a protocol of
[McGinty and Smyth, 2001]  to engineering applications
                                                      cooperation (that respects the agents autonomy of decision)
[Watson and Gardingen, 1999].
                                                      based on communication and bartering. This approach is also
  Our goal in this paper is studying learning opportunities
                                                      feasible in situations where the different agents involved are
derived from communication among different CBR agents
                                                      willing to share only part of their data, a situation where the
possessing individual case bases. Communication among
                                                      centralized approach is not feasible.
agents offers the possibility of using the other agents as an
additional source of information. Typically, a CBR system Communication may allow the agents to discover how
learns by retaining the cases they solve during the Retain they can help one another. However, we need to deﬁne
stage [Aamodt and Plaza, 1994]. The presence of cases which kind of communication protocol is needed to facilitate
owned by other CBR agents presents the opportunity of the agents discovering which part of their respective data
acquiring some of those cases to improve an individual CBR should be exchanged and with whom — without recourse to
agent performance.                                    simply disclosing and transferring all data to all agents. The
                                                      next section (§2) presents our proposal for a communication
  1Current address: Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA process aimed at discovering the individual informational
303322/0280                                           deﬁcits and the possible sources to overcome them.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                   999  Case bartering provides an equitable and practical way
to reach agreements on what they effectively share once the
individual information deﬁcits and the possible sources to
overcome them have been identiﬁed. Section 4 presents
an interaction protocol for case bartering and an individual
policy for the agents to decide on the contents of each barter
exchange. An experimental evaluation is discussed in Section
5, and the paper ends with a conclusions section.

2  Learning from Communication
Centralized CBR only considers learning from the problems Figure 1: Example of symbolic justiﬁcation returned by LID
the CBR system solves, i.e. the Retain stage only considers in the marine sponges identiﬁcation task.
the cases “owned” by the system. In a distributed CBR
scenario, however, a CBR agent may learn from the cases The main goal of a proactive communication process is
solved by another agent. For this purpose, it is necessary to establish an interaction among CBR agents that allows to
to deﬁne a way to determine which cases of other CBR  determine which information deﬁcits each individual agent
agents are of interest for an individual CBR agent to retain has; once these deﬁcits are determined the case bartering
in addition to those it has already in the case base. In process can proceed with the involved CBR agents possessing
this paper we consider that the cases of interest are those the necessary knowledge to offer and accept proﬁtable case
that if present in an individual case base would improve the exchanges (see the case selection policy explained in §4.2).
individual performance of that CBR agent. In this section we However, determining those deﬁcits is not obvious, since an
will present the process of communication (for information agent cannot determine its individual deﬁcits.
exchange) and bartering (for case exchange) proposed for Our proposal is then that an agent determines the deﬁcits
improving the individual performance of CBR agents.
                                                      of other agents. Imagine, for instance, that an agent Ai
                            [    ]
  Previously, Ontan˜on´ and Plaza 2002 used case bartering sends three cases from its case base (c1,c2,c3) and stripping
to improve performance in multiagent case-based reasoning. them from their known solutions sends the three problems
However, their goal is that of improving performance for (c1.P, c2.P, c3.P ) to an agent Aj. Agent Aj solves the three
situations where the individual case bases were biased (when problems and sends back to Ai three justiﬁed predictions
the contents of an individual case base is not a good sample c1 c2 c3
                                                      (JA ,JA ,JA ). Then, Ai  compares the predictions with
of all cases it is said to be biased). In this approach, the j j  j
                                                      the known solutions and determines, for instance, that Aj
communication process was simple and efﬁcient: the only
                                                      has solved correctly problems c1.P and c2.P but has given
exchanged information that were class-distribution statistic
                                                      an incorrect solution to c3.P ; thus, Ai has discovered a
data that indicated which agents have more (or respectively
                                                      deﬁcit of Aj, one of which Aj is necessarily unaware of.
less) cases of a particular class than the average, information
                                                      Moreover, Ai is surely in a disposition to help Aj to improve
that is then used to barter cases of a speciﬁc class from
                                                      its performance by repairing this deﬁcit. The direct solution
agents that have more than average to those that have less
                                                      would be to offer case c3 to agent Aj in exchange of some
than average. Therefore, Ontan˜on´ and Plaza [2002] did not
                                                      other case of Aj that would help Ai (case bartering).
address the issue of improving a CBR agent performance
                                                        In fact, since agents are exchanging justiﬁed predictions,
in general circumstances, since in the absence of bias no
                                                      Ai can ﬁnd several cases that would be interesting for Aj
bartering would take place.
                                                      to exchange with. Ai can examine its individual case base
  In order to enrich the communication process we will use for those cases that satisfy the symbolic description sent in
the notion of justiﬁed prediction, introduced at [Ontan˜on´ and           J c3
                                                      the justiﬁed prediction Aj and that have the same solution
Plaza, 2003] as a useful tool for multiagent learning. Using c                                      A
justiﬁed predictions, an agent communicates to another agent as 3 — since any of those cases are likely to help j in
not just the solution of a given problem (the prediction)but avoiding similar errors in the future. Therefore, we can
also a symbolic description of the aspects that were important design a proactive communication process with which CBR
in determining the solution for that problem. Figure 1 shows agents can ﬁnd out which deﬁcits the other agents have,
a graphical representation of the justiﬁcation given by a CBR and determine the cases they own that can be useful for
agent in the domain of marine sponges identiﬁcation (used other individual agents; engaging this process insures to
later in §5). This justiﬁcation means: “The problem P be- each participating agent that the other agents will detect its
longs to the class Hadromerida because it has no Gemmules, own deﬁcits and determine useful cases for him. The next
the spiculate skeleton does not have a uniform length and sections formalize these ideas deﬁning justiﬁed predictions
                                                      (§3) and specifying a collaboration strategy for a system of
the megascleres (in the spiculate skeleton)haveatylostyle        §
smooth form”. This justiﬁcation was obtained using the CBR agents ( 4).
CBR technique LID [Armengol and Plaza, 2001], but eager
learning methods can also produce symbolic justiﬁcations — 3 Justiﬁed Predictions
e.g. a decision tree can produce as justiﬁcation the collection In this section we will formally deﬁne the concept of justi-
of branch conditions satisﬁed by the problem at hand. ﬁed prediction and some related notions required to clearly

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1000present our case bartering interaction protocol. We will use                       
the following notation for cases. A case c = P, S is a tuple           
containing a case description P ∈Pand a solution class                                       
S ∈S. We will use the dot notation to refer to elements inside       
a tuple. e.g., to refer to the solution class of a case c, we will
write c.S. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a justiﬁed prediction as:
                                             J   =        Set of subsumed
Deﬁnition 3.1 A Justiﬁed Prediction is a tuple            cases by in the
S, D, P, A         A          S                                                   
           where agent  considers the correct solution    case base                   
for problem P , and that prediction is justiﬁed a symbolic
                                                                                       
description D such that J.D < J.P .                                                       
                                                                                    
  Thus, a justiﬁed prediction provides a way in which an                               
agent A can explain or justify, using a symbolic description
J.D, the reason why A predicts solution J.S for problem     
                                                                                     
J.P . The symbolic description has to subsume the problem                             
(J.D <  J.P ) because J.D has to be a generalization of
J.P
    such that includes only those aspects of the problem that  Figure 2: Refutation set of an agent A1.
have determined predicting J.S as the solution. For example,
Figure 1 shows a symbolic description that is a generalization
of (subsumes) a problem description (generated by the LID an incorrect justiﬁcation received from some agent. Agents
CBR technique [Armengol and Plaza, 2001] on the sponges keep collecting refutation sets and each time that two agents
data set used in §5).                                 have counterexamples to send each other (i.e. that an agent
  Moreover, when an agent Ai receives an incorrect justiﬁed Ai has some refutation sets for another agent Aj and at the
                                                               A                     A
prediction JAj from another agent Aj, Ai can examine this same time j has refutation sets for i), they will exchange
justiﬁcation, and determine whether it has some cases in its cases to improve their individual case bases. Figure 2 shows
                                                                   A                      R
local case base Ci that can contradict JAj , i.e. those cases that how an agent 1 creates a refutation set after receiving
would be useful to Aj to repair its knowledge deﬁcit. These from another agent A2 an incorrect justiﬁed prediction J at
                                            J                    t A                     C
cases are counterexamples of the justiﬁed prediction Aj . a given time . 1 checks in its casebase 1 fort those cases
                                                      subsumed by the explanation J.D (grey area), ﬁnding cases
Deﬁnition 3.2 A counterexample of a justiﬁed prediction J
                                                      c2,c3 and c4; the refutation set R incorporates those cases (c2
is a case c such that J.D  c.P ∧ c.S  = J.S, i.e. a case c
                                                      and c4) with correct solution S1.
subsumed by the justiﬁcation J.D that has a solution different
                                                        Speciﬁcally, let A = {A1, ..., An} be a multi-agent system
from the predicted solution J.S.
                                                      where each agent Ai keeps a collection Ii = {R1, ..., Rn}
  Using these deﬁnitions, we can now proceed to present the of refutation sets. When an agent Ai receives a case c to be
case bartering interaction protocol.                  retained, it proceeds as follows:

                                                        1. Ai asks the rest of the agents to make a justiﬁed
4  The PCCL Collaboration Strategy                        prediction for c.P .
We present now a collaboration strategy that supports a proac-
                                                        2. Every agent Aj that has received c.P generates a justi-
tive communication process and a case bartering protocol.              J c                  A
                                                          ﬁed prediction Aj and sends it back to i.
Deﬁnition 4.1 The Proactive Communication Case-based
                                                        3. Ai now looks for counterexamples to all the received
Learning (PCCL)   Collaboration Strategy is a tuple
I     ,D           I                                    justiﬁed predictions that are wrong (i.e. those which
 PCCL    CS  , where  PCCL  is the PCCL interaction                                   c.S
        §         D                                       predict a solution different than ). For each wrong
protocol ( 4.1) and CS is the Case Selection decision                      J c
      §                                                   justiﬁed prediction Aj for which a non empty set of
policy ( 4.2) used to decide which cases to offer to a given             C                           R =
agent in exchange of other cases.                         counterexamples  is found, add a refutation set
                                                          Aj,t,C to Ii (where t is the current time).
  The PCCL interaction protocol does not separate a proac- A             c               C
tive communication stage from a case bartering stage; in- 4. i ﬁnally retains into its case base i.
stead, PCCL interleaves proactive communication and case 5. For each agent Aj for which Ai has some non empty
bartering into a single process.                          refutation sets in its collection Ii of refutation sets:
                                                              A          D
4.1  Case Bartering Interaction Protocol                   (a)  i uses its CS decision policy to construct the
                                                              belying set Bi→j (explained in §4.2).
The main idea of the case bartering interaction protocol is that
                A                  c             A         (b) Ai informs Aj that Ai offers a number #(Bi→j) of
each time an agent receives a new case to be retained,                         A
uses c to ﬁnd deﬁcits of other agents. Speciﬁcally, A sends   cases to barter with j.
them the problem c.P and looks for counterexamples for     (c) Then Aj uses its DCS decision policy to construct
any incorrect justiﬁed prediction received from them. These   the belying set Bj→i.
counterexamples form the refutation sets. A refutation set (d) If Bj→i = ∅ then, Aj has no cases to offer to Ai,
is a record that contains a set of coutnerexamples found for  and thus Aj sends a message to Ai rejecting the

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1001                                       


                

   
                                                           Sponges

      
                      Differents sets of
                              counterexamples
                        found for different
                               justified predictions
                                   received from  
     
                                                           Soybean

    Figure 3: A belying set Bi→j by agent Ai to agent Aj .

        bartering offer. Otherwise, (Bj→i  = ∅) agent Aj
        sends a message to Ai accepting the bartering offer
        and informing that has a number #(Bj→i) of cases
        to barter with.
     (e) When a bartering offer is accepted both agents


        select a subset of cases from their belying sets with Zoology
        exactly min(#(Bj→i), #(Bi→j))  cases. Then
        those cases are actually bartered (i.e. a copy of each
        bartered case is sent in a message), and the bartered
        cases are removed from the stored refutation sets in
        I     I                                       Figure 4: Individual average accuracy with only individual learning
         i and j.                                     (IL) and with learning from communication (LFC).
  The next section explains the decision policy used in the
protocol at step 5.a to select the cases offered to barter with
another speciﬁc CBR agent.                            5   Experimental Evaluation
4.2  Case Selection Decision Policy                   In this section we empirically evaluate our learning from
                                                      communication framework. We have made experiments in
The Case Selection decision policy DCS is in charge of
                                                      three different data sets: sponges, soybean, and zoology.
selecting a set of cases that would be offered to a given agent
                                                      The Sponges  data set is a marine sponges identiﬁcation
Aj in exchange of other cases.
                                                      task, contains 280 marine sponges (of class Demospongiae)
  Intuitively, when an agent Ai uses its DCS decision
                                                      represented as a relational cases and they have to be identiﬁed
policy to select cases, the process is the following one: Ai
                                                      as pertaining to one of three different orders (Astrophorida,
has collected counterexamples in the refutation sets Ii =
                                                      Hadromerida or Axinellida). Soybean is a standard data
{R1, ..., Rm} during the past iterations of the PCCL inter-
                                                      set from the UCI machine learning repository with has 307
action protocol. Moreover, since the stored counterexamples
                                                      examples pertaining to 19 solution classes, why the Zoology
are cases that may help other agents to improve their pre-
                                                      data set is also from UCI and has 101 examples pertaining to
dictions (since those cases bely some of the other agents’
                                                      7 solution classes.
wrong predictions), they are the cases that Ai will offer to
other agents.                                           In order to evaluate PCCL, we have used a 5 agent system.
                                                      In an experimental run the data set is divided into training
  Speciﬁcally, given an agent Ai that wants to offer cases to
                                                      set (90% of the cases) and test set (10%), a 25% of the
another agent Aj, DCS works as follows:
                                                      training cases are initially distributed among the 5 agents
    B    := ∅
 1.  i→j     .                                        without replication, i.e. there is no case shared by two agents.
 2. For each Rk ∈ Ii such that Rk.A = Aj              The remaining training cases are sent to the agents one by
     (a) Select a case ck ∈ Rk such that ck  ∈ Bi→j.  one. When an agent receives a training case, the agent uses
                                                      PCCL to ﬁnd opportunities of learning from communication
     (b) If ck exists then Bi→j := Bi→j ∪ ck.
                                                      with other agents. Moreover, periodically, test cases are sent
 3. Bi→j is the set of cases to be offered to agent Aj. to the agents to evaluate their improvement in classiﬁcation
  We call Bi→j the belying set because this is the set of cases accuracy as they receive more training cases.
that contradict the justiﬁcations received from Aj that were Figure 4 shows the learning curves for a 5 agents system in
found incorrect. Figure 3 illustrates this process, and shows the sponges, soybean and zoology dataset. The vertical axis
how an agent Ai generates the belying set Bi→j for another shows the individual classiﬁcation accuracy of the 5 agents
agent Aj by selecting one case of each of the refutation sets on average, and the accuracy values are evaluated (over the
it has collected for Aj.                              horizontal axis) with different percentage of training cases

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        erig(L n ihlann rmcmuiain(LFC). communication from learning with and (IL) learning
                                          aebreig hl ihu atrn cuayi ny80.73 using only accuracy is 70%) accuracy (at set bartering average without the data on while cases bartering, zoology in case retained the cases 17.74 in with (random) 82.18 instance, is the For by set. achieved training more that with with bartering that clear average the is communication) it improves. proactive accuracy Thus individual via the for (acquired useful cases agent. showing are communication increases, CBR from set individual learnt training cases the the as that bartering higher case getting higher with achieves accuracy keeps agent the Moreover, CBR individual values. an accuracy which 4 at Figure speed of increases process the plots communication proactive three the The that an show average. in also retained on the cases base of LFC: case number and individual the learnt shows IL axis cases for vertical training the both of and agents percentage CBR represents axis the horizontal of size base case wit t-test three a the to for according the signiﬁcant sets Finally, data statistically shared). is are accuracy cases be in all additional would difference where cases scenario of of a number number in “large” sharing a modest what relatively to learning improvement (compared a cases this case individual Moreover, with improves additional achieved sets. data is clearly the three the bartering that in accuracy case see from can the We obtained show plot collaboration PCCL LFC the strategy). (using set the communication training from the while also The from and learning set, learning for accuracy for 100%). training individual accuracy average to the individual 25% from average (from the only shows agent plot individual IL an by learnt 5: Figure
                                                                               e snwcmaeteacrc civduigcase using achieved accuracy the compare now us Let                individual average the of evolution the shows 5 Figure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Zoology                                                                Soybean                                                                Sponges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                vrg ubro ae eandwt nyindividual only with retained cases of number Average
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.05. = p h
         IJCAI-07
1003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          aebs fec B agent. CBR each of base case individualized and small the ( policy in bartering selected ( case been the say, speciﬁcally protocol have to useful is they That useful are strategy. which collaboration they are PCCL for but bartering individual cases, the case new for being via as acquired experiments just improves three cases not case the the in new the that results any the show situation apparent: up, this as Summing in agents present. not CBR accuracy. and a is is cases, when few effect effect degrades rapidly has this same accuracy set that the 50.4 is data with reason soybean i.e. 79.21 the 100%); is In (at bartering cases PCCL. case accuracy 55%) retained in (at that without cases is realized retained accuracy 50.4 set, cases with while 82.07 data is of sponges bartering this case selection the with and a the in — with example, to higher say, Another is to due accuracy is is the that effect cases 100%); of (at number cases smaller retained 18.18 with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tp5etkstemnmmcriaiyo h w belying two the of cardinality minimum the sets takes determined. is 5.e bartered effectively Step cases of number the where is strategy. protocol one’s beneﬁcial mutually bartering (improving a goals the into accuracy) individual Thirdly, much transforming a bartering in cases. of effective means of by amount grow could larger bases case of size
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    hnol  aei atrdadteohr4(htmgtbe might (that 4 other the and bartered is for useful case 1 only then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o  ai.A rtsgt hsmyse o restrictive, too seem may this sight, ﬁrst At agent if basis. since 1 for 1 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ihracrc ees eody  saleog”stof set enough” the “small by a selected Secondly, is cases levels. achieve accuracy not would higher bases case compact more otherwise policy;
                                          epyterao o hsefc,w oieta h selection the that notice we effect, more this examine we for If all reason policy. principle the retaining retain deeply best the simply the of always not section: instance is Introduction cases an the is in situation individ- mentioned This average the accuracy. increasing not ual are are more they they but since retains process redundant, agent communication proactive CBR the each from cases Thus, increases. appreciably sets data three as the in strict showed that the experiments than the better Speciﬁcally, not is policy recipient. the for useful very be may
                                                                                                                                                                                             hsi o nesnbe rdtoa atrde o formally not does barter a traditional enforce unreasonable: of not regardless allow is exchanged we this are —i.e. agent they two numbers barter the their as to long cases as that some of way have 5.e a step in protocol the interaction changing the experiments same the performed we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              he atr.Frty  go eeto”(ntesneo being of of result sense the a (in as individualized selection” explained “good a be Firstly, only factors. three can accuracy) of level given
                                                                                                                                                                  o aebreig ..fra for true be e.g. also bartering, may This case different. for quite be may barterer each for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                h feto civn more achieving of effect The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ial,ltu ou nse . fteitrcinprotocol, interaction the of 5.e step on focus us let Finally,
                                                                                                                                               h xeiet hwdta hslooser this that showed experiments The
                                                                                                          1:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              →
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .)aheeteslcinadefciertnino a of retention effective and selection the achieve 4.2)
                                                                                                          atrn u h vrg niiulcs aesize base case individual average the but bartering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                                                    1:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .)tgte ihteCs eeto decision Selection Case the with together 4.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r ls. nodrt vlaeti assumption, this evaluate to order In “lost.” are )
                                                                                                                    atrn civsruhytesm accuracy same the roughly achieves bartering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fcssi bandb the by obtained is cases of )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                                                    xhneo od ic h tlt fgoods of utility the since goods of exchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             fes5cssto cases 5 offers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              →
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               suigtebre xhne ae on cases exchanges barter the assuring
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e fcssta lal mrv the improve clearly that cases of set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CS
                                                                                                                                                                  1:3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         eiinplc;ohriethe otherwise policy; decision
                                                                                                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                compact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                      :
                                                                                                                                                                  xhnetesnl case single the exchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            j
                                                                                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                      1:1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h fesbc  case 1 back offers who
                                                                                                                                                                                                      atr.I principle, In barters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                aebss(o a (for bases case
                                                                                                                                      xhnepolicy. exchange
                                                                                                                                               n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                               :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CS
                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                               exchange
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     decision