            Computational Aspects of Analyzing Social Network Dynamics

             Chris Barrett  1  Harry B. Hunt III   2   Madhav V. Marathe     1   S. S. Ravi 2
                 Daniel J. Rosenkrantz   2   Richard E. Stearns   2   Mayur Thakur    3


                    Abstract                            The following two examples present the motivation for the
                                                      problems considered in this paper.
    Motivated by applications such as the spread of epi-
    demics and the propagation of inﬂuence in social  Example 1.1 Consider the contact network for the popula-
    networks, we propose a formal model for analyz-   tion of a city, where the nodes represent individuals and
    ing the dynamics of such networks. Our model      edges represent contact between individuals; that is, there is
    is a stochastic version of discrete dynamical sys- an edge between two nodes if the corresponding individuals
    tems. Using this model, we formulate and study    come into contact with each other during a certain period of
    the computational complexity of two fundamental   time. We want to study the spread of epidemics in this popu-
    problems (called reachability and predecessor ex- lation and how to best control it. A popular method of mod-
                                                                                             [
    istence problems) which arise in the context of so- eling the spread of epidemics is the SIR model Eubank et al.,
                                                          ]
    cial networks. We also point out the implications of 2004 , where the acronym stands for Susceptible-Infected-
    our results on other computational models such as Recovered, the three possible states for each individual. As-
    Hopﬁeld networks, communicating ﬁnite state ma-   sume for simplicity that the total population is ﬁxed; that is,
    chines and systolic arrays.                       there are no births or deaths. At any time, a susceptible node
                                                      may become infected with a certain probability, depending
                                                      on the number of infected neighbors. At any given time step
                                                      t,lets(t) denote the fraction of susceptible individuals, i(t)
1  Introduction and Motivation                        denote the fraction of infected individuals and r(t) denote the
                                                      fraction of recovered individuals. In this context, it is of in-
With the growing importance of social networks, analysis of
                                                      terest to study questions of the following form: Given positive
the dynamics of these networks is attracting the attention of
                                                      numbers 0 <α<1,   0 <β<1,    0 <p<1, and a positive
researchers. In this paper, we propose a multiagent-based for-
                                                      integer τ, is the probability of the event “i(t0 + τ) >β” con-
mal model of social network dynamics and study two funda-
                                                      ditioned on the event “i(t0) <α”atleastp? This question is
mental analysis problems arising in that context. We take an
                                                      an example of the reachability problem for the formal model
abstract view of social network dynamics. In our model, each
                                                      considered in this paper.
individual (agent) in the social network is represented by a
node in the underlying undirected graph. The edges of the Example 1.2 As a second example, consider the social in-
graph model dependencies among the agents. Depending on ﬂuence network, where an edge between individuals denotes
the context, an edge in the underlying graph may denote a that they can exert a certain degree of inﬂuence on each other.
“knows” relationship, a “can be infected by” relationship, a Suppose a company wants to market a new product using
“lives close to” relationship, a “has common interests” rela- word of mouth advertising [Kempe et al., 2005].Thecom-
tionship, etc. Further, each node has a state and a stochastic pany’s goal is to identify a suitable initial subset of individ-
transition function that it evaluates at each time step to com- uals to whom free samples should be sent so that with prob-
pute the value of its state at the next time step. The inputs to ability at least p the number of individuals to whom the idea
the transition function at a node are the state of the node itself will propagate in t stepsisatleastN. (It is reasonable to
and those of its neighbors in the underlying graph.   model this propagation as a stochastic process since individ-
                                                      uals may use different criteria to decide whether or not to par-
  1
   Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory, Vir- ticipate in the propagation.) This example represents a more
ginia Bioinformatics Institute and Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA
           {cbarrett, mmarathe}@vbi.vt.edu            general form of the predecessor existence problem studied in
24061. Email:                                 .       this paper.
  2Department of Computer Science, University at Albany–
SUNY, Albany, NY 12222.  Email: {hunt, ravi, djr,       Formally, we model dynamics of social networks using dis-
res}@cs.albany.edu.                                   crete dynamical systems. We refer to our model as a Stochas-
  3Department of Computer Science, University of Missouri– tic Synchronous Dynamical System (SSyDS). Each SSyDS
Rolla, Rolla, MO 65409. Email: thakurk@umr.edu.       S over a domain D is speciﬁed as a pair S =(G, F). Here,

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2268G(V,E) is an undirected graph with n nodes, with each node version of the problem mentioned in Example 1.1. We use
having a state value from the domain D. This graph repre- REACHABILITY to denote this problem. We also study a vari-
sents the topological structure of the social network. The set ant of this problem, called the t-REACHABILITY problem,
F = {f1,f2,...,fn} is a collection of stochastic interaction where an integer t is also speciﬁed as part of the problem in-
functions in the system. Here, fi denotes the stochastic local stance and the goal is to determine whether S starting from I
transition function associated with node vi, 1 ≤ i ≤ n.A can reach B in at most t steps with a probability of at least p.
conﬁguration of an SSyDS is an n-vector (b1,b2,...,bn), In the predecessor existence problem (denoted by PRE),
where bi ∈ D is the value of the state of node vi (1 ≤ i ≤ n). we are given a dynamical system S, a conﬁguration C and
  A single SSyDS transition from one conﬁguration to an- a probability value p; the question is whether there is a con-
other is obtained by updating the state of each node syn- ﬁguration C such that the system starting from C can reach
chronously using the corresponding local transition function. C in one step with a probability of at least p. This is an ab-
For 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the inputs to the function fi are the state stract version of the problem discussed in Example 1.2 above.
values of node vi and those of the neighbors of vi. For each While Example 1.2 addresses t-step predecessors for some
combination of inputs to fi and each element θ of D, the func- t ≥ 1,thePRE problem is concerned with ﬁnding immediate
tion fi speciﬁes the probability that the next state value of vi (i.e., 1-step) predecessors.
is θ. (For each combination of inputs, the sum of the proba- Sequential Dynamical Systems (SDSs) where nodes up-
bilities assigned by fi over the values θ ∈ D must be 1.) date their states in a given sequential order (rather than syn-
  To further clarify the notion of stochastic local transition chronously) have also been considered in the literature (see

functions used here, consider a node vi and let vi1 , vi2 , ..., for example [Barret et al., 2003a]). A stochastic version of

vir represent the neighbors of vi in G.Foranyj and t,let SDSs (denoted by SSDSs) can be deﬁned in a manner sim-
 t
sj denote the state of node vj at time t. The local transition ilar that of SSyDSs. The results presented in this paper are
function fi at node vi satisﬁes the following equation: applicable to SSDSs as well.
           t−1      t−1           t−1
Pr{st = θ | s = θ,s   = θ1 ,...,s   = θ1 } =
    i      i        i1    i1      ir    ir            2   Summary of Results
           (  1      1   )
         fi θ ,θi1 ,...,θir ,θ .(1)Reachability in SSyDSs and SSDSs
                                                      Two versions of the reachability problem (denoted by
  The generalized phase space PS of an SSyDS S is a di-
                                                      REACHABILITY   and t-REACHABILITY) for SSyDSs were
rected graph deﬁned as follows. There is a node in PS for
                   S                                  deﬁned in the previous section. We show that both the ver-
each conﬁguration of . There is a directed edge from the                              4        ( )
node representing conﬁguration C to that representing con- sions are hard for the complexity class RSPACE n .There-
ﬁguration C if the probability that the system will reach C sult is proven by showing how a stochastic dynamical system
from C in one step is (strictly) greater than zero. More gen- can efﬁciently simulate a linear space bounded probabilistic
erally, the directed edge from C to C may be associated with Turing machine. Moreover, the hardness results hold even
a positive number p, 0 <p≤ 1, representing the probability when the underlying graph is a simple path. By a minor mod-
of the one-step transition. With the probability value for di- iﬁcation to this proof, the hardness result can also be shown
rected each edge, the generalized phase space represents the to hold for SSDSs (where nodes update their states sequen-
                                                      tially). These results point out that, unless the complexity
Markov chain for the dynamical system. Note that for a dy-                ( )
namical system over the Boolean domain with n nodes, the classes P and RSPACE n coincide, there is no efﬁcient way
number of possible conﬁgurations is 2n. Thus, the size of the of predicting the behavior of a stochastic dynamical system.
                                                        In contrast to stochastic dynamical systems, where reach-
Markov Chain is exponential in the size of the underlying dy-                    ( )
namical system. For this reason, known results for Markov ability problems are RSPACE n -hard, the corresponding
chains cannot be directly used to obtain the results obtained reachability problems for deterministic discrete dynamical
                                                                                   ( ) [                ]
in this paper.                                        systems are complete for DSPACE n Barret et al., 2003a .
                                                                            ( ) ⊆         ( 3/2)
  In the generalized phase space, when there is a directed It is known that RSPACE n DSPACE n   [Saks and
edge from C to C, we say that C is a predecessor of con- Zhou, 1995]; however, it is not known whether the exponent
ﬁguration C. In general, a conﬁguration in generalized phase of n can be reduced to 1. Thus, under reasonable complex-
space may have multiple predecessors.                 ity theoretic assumptions, reachability problems for stochas-
  The goal of an analysis problem is to determine whether tic systems are harder than the corresponding problems for
a given SSyDS has a speciﬁed property. We consider two deterministic systems.
analysis problems in the context of such dynamical systems, Predecessor Existence in SSyDSs
namely reachability and predecessor existence.Asmen-
                                                      We show that the predecessor existence (abbreviated as PRE)
tioned earlier, a study of such analysis problems is useful problem for SSyDSs over any ﬁnite domain can be solved
in obtaining an understanding of the dynamics of social net- in polynomial time when the following conditions hold: (i)
works. Deﬁnitions of the problems considered in this paper the treewidth5 and maximum node degree of the underlying
are given below.
  In the reachability problem, we are given a dynamical  4For deﬁnitions of the complexity classes used in this paper, we
system S, two conﬁgurations I and B and a probability value refer the reader to [Papadimitriou, 1994].
p; the question is whether S starting from I can reach B with 5For deﬁnitions of treewidth and related terms, we refer the
a probability of at least p. This is an abstract and general reader to [Bodlaender, 1997].

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2269graph are both bounded and (ii) the number of distinct prob- 1/2. Once the machine reaches an accepting or rejecting con-
ability values used in specifying the probability distributions ﬁguration, it halts.
for the local transition functions is bounded. The algorithm Given a probabilistic O(n)-space bounded Turing machine
is based on dynamic programming. This result can also be M which always halts after 2O(n) moves and input string x,
extended to SSDSs.                                    we say that M accepts x if the probability of the event that
  It should be noted that the PRE problem remains NP- M  reaches an accepting conﬁguration starting from the ini-
complete for deterministic dynamical systems, when either tial conﬁguration on input x is at least 1/2.Onewaytoview
the treewidth or the maximum node degree is unbounded the computation of M on x is via a proof tree: the leaf nodes
[Barrett et al., 2003b]. As a consequence, the problem re- are labeled as either accepting or rejecting conﬁgurations, the
mains computationally intractable for such stochastic dynam- root is the initial conﬁguration and each internal node has ex-
ical systems as well.                                 actly two children with the labels on the edges being 1/2,de-
  Our results for reachability and predecessor existence noting the probability of transition to that conﬁguration. Thus
problems also initiate the study of stochastic discrete dynam- the probability of reaching a leaf node (or a terminating con-
ical systems on graphs of bounded treewidth. It is known ﬁguration) l, denoted by Pr(l), is the product of weights of
that 1D-CA with radius R can be equivalently viewed as syn- the edges on the unique path from the root to the leaf. The
                                               (  )
chronous dynamical systems on graphs with treewidth O R probability of accepting an input string is l∈A Pr(l),where
[Barrett et al., 2003b]. Thus, SSyDSs on treewidth bounded A is the set of leaves marked as accepting.
graphs can be viewed as generalized stochastic CA.
                                                      Theorem 3.1 There exists a constant μ such that the t-
Applications to Other Computational Models            REACHABILITY   and REACHABILITY  problems for SSyDSs
SSyDSs can be viewed as stochastic analogs of systolic net- and SSDSs are RSPACE(n)-hard, even when the following
works [Kung, 1982]. Since SSyDSs are closely related to restrictions hold: (i) The underlying graph is a simple path
stochastic CA [Wolfram, 1986],theyalsoserveasaformal  (and thus has pathwidth and treewidth of 1); in particular, the
model for studying problems in the context of multiagent degree of each node is at most two. (ii) The size of the domain
systems [Wooldridge, 2002]. In addition, SSyDSs are also of state values for each node is at most μ. (iii) The number of
related to other well known computational models including distinct local transition functions is at most three.
discrete recurrent Hopﬁeld networks [Orponen, 2000] which
are used in machine learning and pattern recognition and con- Proof sketch: We sketch the proof for the t-REACHABILITY
current communicating ﬁnite state machines [Harel et al., problem SSyDSs. The proof for REACHABILITY is similar.
                                                                =(     Σ Σ         )
2002] which are used to model and verify distributed sys- Let M     Q,  ,  ,q0,qf ,F  denote a linear space
tems. The hardness results for the reachability problems for bounded probabilistic Turing machine where Q is the (ﬁnite)
                                                                 Σ                   Σ ⊂ Σ
SSyDSs immediately imply analogous results for each of the set of states, is the tape alphabet, is the input al-
                                                                ∈                       ∈
above models.                                         phabet, q0  Q  is the initial state, qf Q is the ﬁnal ac-
                                                      cepting state and F is the transition relation: given the cur-
3  Complexity of Reachability for SSyDSs and          rent state and the current symbol scanned by the (read-write)
                                                      head, F speciﬁes the next state, the symbol to be written on
   SSDSs                                              the cell scanned by the head and the direction of head move-
In this section, we show that the reachability problems ment (left or right by one tape cell or stay on the same cell).
for SSyDSs and SSDSs are hard for the complexity class The relation F speciﬁes two moves, each with probability
RSPACE(n). Our proof also shows that the problem remains 1/2. Let x = a1a2 ...an be the input string given to M
computationally intractable even for simple SSyDSs and SS- with a1 =$and an = c being the end markers. A con-
DSs (e.g. systems in which the underlying graph is a simple ﬁguration or instantaneous description (ID) of M consists of
path).                                                the current state, the contents of the tape cells and the po-
  As mentioned earlier, we establish this complexity result sition of the head. The machine starts at q0 with its head
by showing that a given linear space bounded probabilistic on the tape cell containing a1 =$. The ID at time zero is
Turing Machine (TM) can be simulated by an appropriate I = (q0,a1),a2,...,an . We may assume without loss of
SSyDS. We recall a few deﬁnitions related to probabilistic generality that if M accepts x, it replaces all the symbols on
TMs.                                                  the tape cells between the end markers with the symbol 
 b,
  A probabilistic Turing machine [Papadimitriou, 1994] M moves the head to the cell containing $, and halts in state qf .
is a TM consisting of a ﬁnite control and a read-write tape Thus, the ﬁnal ID is B = (qf , $), 
 b,...,
 b,  c . The ID of
which initially contains the input string. The ﬁnite control M at time τ will be denoted by ID(τ).

has one accepting state, one rejecting state and a collection Given M and input string x, we create an SSyDS SMx =

of coin tossing states. A conﬁguration of the Turing ma- (G, F) whose set of conﬁgurations include those of M. SMx
chine speciﬁes the state of the ﬁnite control, description of is constructed so that for any t ≥ 0,ifM starting from I
the contents of the tape and the position of the head on the reaches a conﬁguration C in t steps with probability p,then

tape. A conﬁguration is accepting, rejecting or coin-tossing SMx starting from I reaches conﬁguration C in 2t steps with
if the state of the ﬁnite control is accepting, rejecting or coin probability p.

tossing respectively. The transition relation of the Turing ma- The underlying graph G(V,E) of SMx is a simple path on
                                                                                                   th
chine is such that from any coin tossing conﬁguration, there n nodes, where n = |x|. Node vi corresponds to the i tape
are exactly two possible next moves, each with probability cell, 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Node vi is adjacent only to nodes vi−1

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2270and vi+1, with the exceptions that node v1 is adjacent only to the function produces only one output which becomes the
node v2 and node vn is adjacent only to node vn−1.Thestate next state of the corresponding node. We use SyDS to de-
of each node vi takes a value from the domain Σ ∪ (Q × Σ) ∪ note a deterministic synchronous dynamical system. Refer-
(Q × Σ ×{0, 1}).                                      ence [Barrett et al., 2003b] presents a polynomial time algo-
  For any τ  ≥  0,astepofM     that transforms ID(τ)  rithm for the PRE problem for SyDSs over the Boolean do-
into ID(τ +1) probabilistically, can be captured by the main, where the underlying graph is treewidth bounded and
collection of local probabilistic transition functions F = each node computes a symmetric6 function. Since our algo-
f1,f2,...,fn  where fi is the function at node vi, 1 ≤ i ≤ rithm relies on the approach used in [Barrett et al., 2003b],
n, as follows. The SSyDS simulates each step of M in two we begin with a sketch of the algorithm from that reference.
steps. Let ID(τ)=c1,...cj−1, (q, cj ),cj+1,...cn . Here,
                                                      Theorem 4.2 [Barrett et al., 2003b] The PRE problem for
(q, cj) denotes that the current state is q, the content of tape
                                                      SyDSs over the Boolean domain where the underlying graph
cell j is cj and the head is currently scanning cell j. The node
                                                      is treewidth bounded and each node computes a symmetric
corresponding to cell j is vj. In the ﬁrst step, all nodes except
                                                      function can be solved in polynomial time.
vj make a deterministic move; they copy their contents and
do not change their state. Node vj does a coin toss and mod-
    (   )   (     )                                   Proof sketch: Let S be the given SyDS whose underlying
iﬁes q, cj to q, cj ,σ where σ denotes the outcome of coin   (    )
toss (which is either 0 or 1). Note that ID(τ +1)is identi- graph G V,E has a treewidth of k. It is well known that
                                                      a tree decomposition ({Xi | i ∈ I},T =(I,F)) of G can
cal to ID(τ), except possibly for cj−1, (q, cj ) and cj+1.Let
                                                      be constructed in time that is a polynomial in the size of G.
these three values be dj−1, dj and dj+1 with probability 1/2
                                                      Moreover, this can be done so that T is a binary tree; that is,
and aj−1, aj, aj+1 with probability 1/2. Note that the aj, dj
                                                                                        [              ]
values also encode the head location. Correspondingly, in the each node of T has at most two children Bodlaender, 1997 .
                                                        For a given node i of the tree decomposition, the SyDS
next step, all nodes of the SSyDS except vj−1, vj and vj+1
                                                      nodes in i are referred to as explicit nodes of .Ifagiven
again copy their state; vj goes to dj or aj, vj−1 goes to dj−1 X                               i
                                                      explicit node of is also an explicit node of the parent of ,
or aj−1 and vj+1 goes to dj+1 or aj+1, depending on the coin        i                                   i
toss value σ. These moves again are deterministic. Thus, the that node is referred to as an inherited node of i; and if it
probability of reaching either of the conﬁguration is 1/2 over does not occur in the parent of i,itisreferredtoasanorig-
the two steps.                                        inating node of i. The set of all explicit nodes occurring in
                                                      the subtree of T rooted at i that are not explicit nodes of i are
  It can be seen that SMx reaches conﬁguration B with prob-
ability at least 1/2 iff M accepts x with probability at least referred to as hidden nodes of i. Without loss of generality,
                                                      it can be assumed that the number of nodes of T with fewer
1/2. The size of the domain of SMx is a constant that depends
only on Σ and Q.                                      than two children is at most n, the number of nodes in G.
                                                        Let C be the conﬁguration speciﬁed in the given instance
  It is also possible to formulate reachability problems where of the PRE problem for S. Consider a given node i of the
a family of ﬁnal conﬁgurations is speciﬁed and the question is tree decomposition. Suppose α is a given assignment of state
whether the system can reach any of these conﬁgurations with values to the explicit nodes of i and β is a given assignment
a given probability. An example of such a family consists of of state values to the hidden nodes of i. The combined as-
conﬁgurations in which at least k of the nodes have the state signment α ∪ β is said to be viable for i if for every hidden
value 1. In the context of studying the spread of epidemics node w of i, the evaluation of the local transition function
in social networks, such a family of conﬁgurations may rep- fw gives the value C(w), using the value β(w) for w and the
resent situations where a large section of the population is value (α ∪ β)(u) for every neighbor u of w. The combined
infected. By slightly modifying the proof of the above theo- assignment α ∪ β is said to be strongly viable for i if the
rem, it is possible to show that the corresponding reachability above condition holds for every node w that is either a hidden
                      ( )
problem remains RSPACE n -hard.                       node or an originating node of i.
                                                        For a given node i of the tree decomposition, and a given
4  Results on Predecessor Existence                   assignment β to the states of the hidden nodes of i,deﬁne
This section develops a polynomial time algorithm for the a function hβ : Xi −→ N,whereN is the set of natural
PRE problem for restricted forms of stochastic dynamical sys- numbers, as follows. For y ∈ Xi,
tems. The main result of this section is the following.
                                                          hβ(y) is the number of hidden nodes w of i such
Theorem 4.1 Consider the class of SSyDSs over the Boolean that {w, y}∈E and β(w)=1.
domain satisfying the following conditions: (a) The degree
                                                      The value hβ(y) is the number of hidden nodes w of i whose
of each node in the underlying graph is bounded. (b) The
                                                      old value is an input parameter to the computation of the new
treewidth of the underlying graph is bounded. (c) The num-
                                                      value of y,andβ(w)=1.
ber of distinct probability values used in specifying all the
                                                        For a given node i of the tree decomposition, and a given
stochastic node functions is bounded. The PRE problem for
                                                      assignment  to the states of the explicit nodes of ,deﬁne
such SSyDSs can be solved in polynomial time.                   α                                 i
                                                      the set Hα to be the set of functions h from Xi to N such that
  Our proof of the above theorem is based on a known re- there exists an assignment β to the states of the hidden nodes
sult for a restricted class of deterministic SyDSs. In a deter-
ministic SyDS, each local transition function is determinis- 6A Boolean function is symmetric if its value depends only on
tic; that is, for each combination of inputs to the function, the number of inputs which are 1.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2271of i satisfying the following two conditions: α ∪ β is viable probability values used to specify fi are ρ1,ρ2, ..., ρt,then
for i and h is hβ.                                    Γi represents the number of distinct values in the collection
  Let d be the maximum node degree of G. For any given {ρ1, 1 − ρ1,ρ2, 1 − ρ2, ..., ρt, 1 − ρt}.)
β and y ∈ Xi, the maximum possible value of hβ(y) is d. We now show how to construct a deterministic SyDS S1
The maximum possible value of |Xi| is k +1(where k is the over the Boolean domain from the stochastic SyDS S.The
treewidth). So, function hβ can be represented as a table with underlying graph G1(V1,E1) of S1 is constructed as follows.
at most k +1entries, where each entry is an integer value To begin with, G1 contains a copy of all the nodes and edges
in the range 0 through d. Hence, an upper bound on |Hα| is of G. Next, for each node vi of G, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, we create
      k+1                                                                         1  2      q
(d +1)   .                                            q =Γi  additional nodes. Let vi , vi , ..., vi , denote these
  The PRE problem for S can be solved by using bottom-up additional nodes, called the auxiliary nodes associated with
dynamic programming on the decomposition tree. For each vi. (Thus, each auxiliary node of vi is associated with one
node i of T , a table with an entry for each assignment α to the probability value from the speciﬁcation of the stochastic local
                                                                                              j
states of the explicit nodes of i is computed. The value of the transition function fi in S.) Each of the nodes vi , 1 ≤ j ≤ q,
                                     α     i
entry for each such assignment α is the set H .LetJ refer to is adjacent to vi;further,ifvi is adjacent to vi1 , vi2 , ..., vi
the entire table for node i. Since the treewidth k is a constant,              j 1 ≤  ≤
                                                      in G, then each of the nodes vi , j q, is adjacent to vi1 ,
the size of the table for each node of the decomposition tree
                                                      vi2 , ..., vi in G1. Finally, G1 has one more node, denoted
is a polynomial in n, the number of nodes of the underlying by . There is an edge between and each auxiliary node
       (   )                                             X                        X
graph G V,E . Using these facts, it can be shown that the created above.
bottom-up computation of the tables for all the nodes can be The local transition functions for the nodes of G1 are cho-
carried out in polynomial time.                       sen as follows. For each node vi, 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the local tran-
  To obtain the polynomial time algorithm alluded to in the sition function gi is the constant function which outputs 1 for
statement Theorem 4.1, we need to extend the above dynamic every input. For each node vi, the local transition functions
                                                                                                    C(  )
programming algorithm to a more general class of symmetric for the auxiliary nodes of vi are chosen as follows. Let vi
functions, namely r-symmetric functions. A Boolean func- denote the state value of node vi in the speciﬁed (ﬁnal) con-
                                                      ﬁguration for S. For each j, 1 ≤ j ≤ q, consider the auxiliary
tion is r-symmetric if its inputs can be partitioned into at j                                         j
most r classes such that the value of the function depends node vi ,andletρj denote the probability associated with vi .
                                                           j                              j
only on the number of 1’s in each class. Note that every Let Ni denote the set of all neighbors of vi , except X.The
                                                                                         j    j
symmetric function is 1-symmetric. Also, if the maximum (deterministic) local transition function g at v outputs 1 if
                                            Δ                                            i   i
node degree of the underlying graph of a SyDS is ,then and only if one of the following conditions holds.
each node function is (Δ + 1)-symmetric. The following                       j
                                                        (a) The initial value of vi is 1, and for the input combina-
lemma shows that the result of Theorem 4.2 can be extended                                       j
to the case where each node computes an -symmetric func- tion formed by the values assigned to the nodes in Ni and the
                                   r                                 C(  )
tion. The corresponding algorithm is obtained by modifying transition of vi to vi , the probability assigned by fi equals
                                                      ρj.
the dynamic programming outline given in the proof of The-                   j
orem 4.2. (The details are omitted because of space reasons.) (b) The initial value of vi is 0, and for the input combina-
                                                                                                 j
                                                      tion formed by the values assigned to the nodes in Ni and the
Lemma 4.3  The PRE problem for SyDSs over the Boolean                 C( )
domain where the underlying graph is treewidth bounded and transition of vi to vi , the probability assigned by fi does
each node computes an r-symmetric function for some r ≥ 1 not equal ρj.
can be solved in polynomial time.                       The local transition function gX at node X is deﬁned as
                                                      follows. Let NX denote the set of neighbors of X. (By our
  We can now state the main idea behind the proof of The- construction, NX is the set of all auxiliary nodes.) For any
                                                      w  ∈ Nx, deﬁne the function η(w) as follows: If the state
orem 4.1: the PRE problem for SSyDSs satisfying the con-
                                                      value of w is 0, then η(w)=1;otherwise,η(w) is the proba-
ditions of Theorem 4.1 can be efﬁciently reduced to the PRE
problem for deterministic SyDSs over the Boolean domain bility value associated with the auxiliary node w.Thevalueof
                                                      the function X is equal to 1 if and only if Πw∈N ( ) ≥ ,
where each local transition function is r-symmetric (for some    g                             x η w   p
                                                      where   is the probability threshold speciﬁed as part of the
r ≥  1) and the underlying graph has bounded treewidth.     p
                                                      PRE problem instance for the SSyDS S.
Since the latter problem can be solved in polynomial time                    C     S
(Lemma 4.3), Theorem 4.1 would follow. We now sketch    The ﬁnal conﬁguration 1 for 1 has the value 1 for all
this reduction.                                       the nodes of G1. This completes the reduction. It can be
  Let S be an SSyDS satisfying the conditions of Theo- seen that the reduction can be carried out in polynomial time.
rem 4.1. Let C denote the given conﬁguration for which The following lemma points out some properties of the above
we need to determine whether there is a predecessor with construction.
probability at least p.Letk and Δ (ﬁxed values) denote Lemma 4.4 (a) The graph G1 is treewidth bounded. (b)
the treewidth and the maximum node degree of the under- Each of the local transition functions of S1 is r-symmetric
lying graph G(V,E), with n denoting |V |. Consider any for some r. (c) For the stochastic SyDS S and conﬁguration
node vi,andletΓi (also a ﬁxed value) denote the total num- C, there is a predecessor with probability at least p if and
ber of probability values used to specify the stochastic lo- only if there is a predecessor for the conﬁguration C1 for the
cal transition function fi at vi. (Note that if the distinct deterministic SyDS S1.

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  2272