        A Multi-agent Medical System for Indian Rural Infant and Child Care 

                             Vijay Kumar Mago1 and M. Syamala Devi2 
                   1Department of Computer Science, DAV College, Jalandhar, India. 
       2Department of Computer Science and Applications, Punjab University, Chandigarh, India. 
                               v_mago@yahoo.com. syamala@pu.ac.in. 


                                                       STATES    Orissa   Madhya     Uttar    Rajasthan 
                    Abstract                                              Pradesh   Pradesh 
                                                         IMR 98             98        85         83 
    In this paper, a Multi-agent System (MAS) is 
    presented for providing clinical decision support to Table 1. IMR within Indian States (1999) per thousand 
    healthcare practitioners in rural or remote areas of The responsibility of providing treatment to young 
   India for young infants or children up to the age of infants/children in rural India is with the general health care 
   5 years. The government is unable to appoint child practitioner posted in Primary Health Center (PHC) or rural 
    specialists in rural areas because of inadequate  dispensaries. Because of the shortage of funds  and 
    number of available pediatricians. It leads to a high inadequate trained specialists, the government appoints a 
    Infant Mortality Rate (IMR). In such a scenario,  child specialist at Community Health Care Center (CHC) 
    software agents provide a realistic solution. The only.  Therefore, CHC serves as a first referral center to 
    agent-based prototype has been developed that     PHC  and dispensaries. At some rural places, even less 
    involves a knowledge component    called an       qualified health care professionals are somehow managing 
    Intelligent Pediatric Assistant (IPA); and User   the situation. They lack proper knowledge to diagnose and 
    Agents (UA)  along with their Graphical User      treat the patient.  Whenever they face any critical problem 
    Interfaces (GUI). The GUI of UA provides the      related to childhood diseases, they refer these patients to 
    interface to the healthcare practitioner for      CHC. This increases the number of patients for the child 
    submitting sign-symptoms and displaying the 
                                                      specialist at CHC. The main diseases that young infants and 
    expert opinion as suggested by IPA. Depending 
                                                      children suffer from include: Pneumonia, Diarrhea, Measles, 
    upon the observations, the IPA decides  the 
    diagnosis and the treatment plan. The UA and IPA  and Malaria etc. These are often curable at local levels if 
    form client-server architecture for knowledge     proper diagnosis and treatment plans are administered 
    sharing.                                          timely. 
                                                        The situation demands a system that works beyond these 
1   Introduction                                      limitations. One can think of incorporating the concept of 
                                                      client-server architecture with an expert system on the 
A majority of the Indian population is living in rural or server and a dumb client or a telemedicine system. But the 
remote areas. The healthcare practitioners in these areas are problem with client-server architecture, without the 
not specialized in dealing with infant or childhood diseases. involvement of agents, is the loss of collaborative and 
They simply refer child related critical cases to specialized proactive behavior that is often required in such cases and 
doctors in urban areas. There is also an acute shortage of limits the scope for future expansions. The problem with the 
funds and adequate trained child specialists in India. telemedicine is that, it needs direct involvement of a 
According to the National Commission on Population    pediatrician to diagnose the disease. Because of these 
(India), in 2002, approximately Rs. 643.1 million were limitations software agents are more suitable in this domain. 
needed for infrastructure and services of 1,774 more  A number of research papers  supporting the usage of 
pediatricians were required. Hence, the government is software agents to handle such circumstances have been 
unable to appoint child specialists in rural areas. All this produced in recent years. Some of the health care 
leads to high Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) i.e. 68/1000 live applications based on agent metaphor are discussed in 
births.                                               section 2. 
 The National Commission on Population observes that    In this paper, a Multi-agent system (MAS) is presented to 
main contributors to high IMR in India are states having help healthcare professionals to diagnose the disease of 
majority of population residing in rural areas as shown in young infant/child, classify it (severe, moderate, mild), and 
Table 1.                                              identify the treatment plan. The Intelligent Pediatric 


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1396Assistant (IPA) has been developed for deciding the   a patient for collaborative diagnosis in the department of 
diagnosis as per the sign-symptoms provided by  the   pathology. [Iqbal et al, 2002] have developed an Intelligent 
healthcare professional. It also keeps track of the number of Healthcare Knowledge Assistant which uses multi agent 
diseases diagnosed from a particular rural/remote site. The system for dynamic knowledge gathering, filtering, 
GUI of User Agent (UA) provides the practitioner a user adaptation and acquisition from Health care Enterprise 
interface to feed in the measured values and observations. Memory unit. [Koutkias et al, 2005] created a Multi agent 
The UA and IPA use the disease ontology that specifies the system that aims to enhance monitoring, surveillance and 
vocabulary and semantics for understanding the child  educational service of a Medical Contact Center (MCC) for 
related diseases. The GUI of IPA is used to display the chronic disease management in Greece. [Tian and Tianfield, 
activity of PHC practitioners. The system works without the 2003] discuss a case study involving various agents for 
direct involvement of a pediatrician as IPA is responsible to providing consultation and therapy to patients suffering 
emulate a child specialist in dealing with some childhood from diabetes. 
diseases. The system has been designed to support even a The works mentioned above are domain specific, e.g. 
naïve healthcare practitioner in dealing with child diseases. catering to special types of patients or providing assistance 
                                                      to patients for appointments or supporting doctors in 
2   Related Work                                      diagnosing specific diseases, etc. These systems are 
                                                      therefore, not capable of handling problems related to young 
Software agents are proving to be promising because of 
                                                      infants/children, especially in Indian scenario as presented 
their reactive, proactive, autonomous, collaborative and 
                                                      in section 1. More precisely, the efficacy of agents in this 
knowledge-sharing capabilities. 
                                                      application area has still not been explored. So, in the 
 [Nealon and Moreno, 2002] have discussed the potential 
                                                      subsequent sections we are introducing and highlighting the 
and application of agents to assist in a wide range of 
                                                      concept of using agent technology in this regard 
activities in health care environments. [Lieberman and 
Mason, 2002] discuss a browsing assistant agent ‘Letizia’ 
that has been developed to find serendipitous connections 3 Multi Agent System for Infant and Child 
when a user searches something related to medicine, and a Care 
software agent ‘Aria’ that has been developed to integrate A multi agent system is concerned with intelligent 
the annotation and retrieval of images into a single, connected systems that interact and decide for themselves 
integrated application. [Heine et al, 2004] simulate an agent what they should do in order to achieve the design 
oriented environment for German hospitals with  the   objectives. Agents with specific abilities can be developed 
objective to improve or optimize   the  appointment   and deployed in the domain of our problem. In the 
scheduling system, resource allocation and cost benefit of following section, the functionality of the proposed MAS 
clinical trials. [Mabry et al, 2004] employ the Multi agent model is presented to provide an overview of the system. 
system for providing diagnosis and advice to health care 
personnel dealing with traumatized patients. An Emergency 3.1 Functional Model 
Medical Assistant (ERMA) using Intelligent Monitoring The MAS is designed  according to the requirements for 
agents has been developed to demonstrate the system for the effective diagnosis and delivering the treatment plans for 
trauma environment with particular emphasis on types of young infant/child in the child-care setting described above. 
shock and stabilization of arterial blood gases. [Zachewitz, It provides an interaction mechanism with the healthcare 
2004] develops agent based system to improve vaccination professional at a rural site and delivers diagnosed disease 
rates in Germany. Agents have been developed to maintain and suggests treatment plans as per the supplied sign-
consistency of patient’s medical record at pharmacy level, symptoms. Figure 1 illustrates the abstract interaction model 
specialist level and at family doctor level. [Greenwood et al, of the system. The UA is located at PHC while IPA is 
2003] are concerned with the accurate dosage advice for located at CHC. The IPA is behaving as a server to User 
diabetic patients and aim to produce a Personal Digital Agents. The sequence of interactions that takes place 
Assistant based system into which patients enter various between the UA and IPA is discussed below: 
details about their diet and physical condition.[Nealon and The main problem is posed before the patient in the form 
Moreno, 2003] discuss various applications of MAS in  of questions denoted as  
health care e.g., coordination of organ transplants among 
                                                           qi ∈ Q , where Q = {q1, q2… qk}, set of all possible 
Spanish hospitals, patient scheduling, senior citizen care etc.            questions. 
[Riaño et al, 2002] have worked on a research project, 
                                                      The qi is passed by the UA to the IPA. ‘S’ is a set that 
called PalliaSys. It incorporates information technology and contains all possible symptoms that a child may be suffering 
multi-agent systems to improve the care given to palliative from. i.e. 
patients. [Mea, 2001] has developed TOMAS                     S= {Symptom , Symptom … Symptom   } 
(Telemedicine-Oriented Medical Assistant ) which is used                  1         2          N
                                                      Now depending on qi, IPA intelligently selects some of the 
by each specialist to transfer microscopic images and data of sign-symptoms to be answered by the health care  


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1397      Figure 1 An abstract agent-based interaction model. instance, a mother brings her one year old child with 
                                                      complaints of loose motions and fever. After observing the 
                                                      child health, if the rural health practitioner feels the need of 
             User Agent                               assistance of a child specialist, he uses the GUI of UA 
                                                      located at his site to pass the sign-symptoms and other 
                                                      observations to the IPA. The IPA uses (1) to generate 
                                                      related questions that indicate possible diseases like 
       qi      s         v          Rk                bacterial infection, viral disease, malaria, malnutrition or 
                                                      food allergy. In the second phase, UA supplies back the 
                                                      observed and measured values   corresponding to the 
                                                      questions generated earlier by IPA. UA  answers the 
          α            β       χ                      questions like: checking for general danger   signs 
                                                      (convulsions y/n; unconsciousness y/n) bloody diarrhea y/n; 
                                                      Sunken eyes y/n; able to drink y/n; stiff neck y/n; bulging 
        Intelligent 
        Pediatric    KB                               fontanelle y/n etc.  IPA uses (2) to: decide the possible 
         Assistant                                    disease, choose the degree of severity and generate 
                                              α       treatment plan. Figure 2 depicts a hypothetical case scenario 
professional by observing and or querying the patient.  is of a child suffering from moderate dehydration. 
a function responsible for selection of sign-symptoms from 
                                                       Symptom/    Disease     Treatment      Severity 
S depending upon qi. 
                α (q ) = s where s ⊆ S  (1)              Sign                                  level 
                    i                                                        Oral treatment with 
where s = { Symptom1, Symptom2… SymptomM} , M<=N.      Restlessness,           ORS solution 
                                                                   Some de-                       
                                                         irritable           according to WHO 
The relation between qi and selected set of sign symptoms is       hydration                  Moderate 
R.                                                     Sunken eyes          treatment guidelines 
                                                                                    
 R: Q →  2S (This relation is a mapping from set of 
questions to power-set of sign-symptoms.)                   Figure 2 Disease Identification and Treatment Plan. 
       UA   responds back with values for these sent    The presence/absence or values of some of the sign-
symptoms as a vector                                  symptoms need due importance. That is why, some sign-
               v = {val1, val2,….,valM}               symptoms are given more priority than others. For example 
IPA maps all this processed data with the KB using β, that presence of ‘lethargy or unconsciousness’ is assigned higher 
contains (s,v) ordered pair of symptoms and their possible  priority than ‘sunken eyes’. This will help to classify the 
value/range.                                          disease into very severe (requires urgent treatment & 
                                                      referral) or less severe (requires conservative treatment 
                β (qi, s, v) = (dk, tpk)   (2) 
β                                                     without referral) category.  The summary report is then sent 
   returns information regarding disease and its treatment back to UA for actions to be taken by the healthcare 
plan on the basis of following relations:             professional. 
              ×
        P :2{}sv →  D , (many-to-one relation)  
                                                      3.3 Architecture 
This governs the rule for assigning priority. 
       where D is a set containing treatable diseases The proposed MAS  requires delegation of task to various 
                                                      agents in the system. In the following section, we will 
                  D = {d1, d2,….dp} 
         T:D → TP (one-to-one relation), where        describe the organization of different agents of the system. 
                 TP={tp1,tp2,…..tpp}                  GUI for health care practitioner 
dk is the diagnosed disease and tpk is its corresponding The GUI for PHC practitioner has been designed for 
treatment plan.                                       providing an interface. It is being used for the following 
dk∈D and  tpk ∈TP.                                    purposes: 
             χ
The function    is used to generate a report, Rk, that    • Displaying the account identification issued by IPA,  
contains the diagnosed disease and its treatment plan. This • Feeding the main problem, sign–symptoms, and 
is sent back to UA.                                       observations of the ailing child,  
                  χ (dk, tpk) = Rk    (3)                 • Passing the information to the UA and; 
                                                          • 
The report, Rk, also contains the level of severity for the Displaying the diagnosed disease and treatment plans. 
diagnosed disease. 
                                                      User Agent 
3.2 Application Scenario                              The User Agent interacts with the GUI on the client side and 
                                                      the IPA on the server side. The UA uses the child disease 
The MAS provides    a clinical decision support to a  ontology for understanding the meanings of the messages 
healthcare professional dealing with the child diseases. For sent by GUI and the IPA. The ontology is based on 


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1398protocols provided by [WHO, 2003] for understanding   compliance with specifications laid by FIPA (Foundation 
neonatal and childhood illness. This agent exhibits the for Intelligent Physical Agents). Communication between 
reactive and autonomous attributes as UA reacts to a  different agent platforms that are executed as per system 
question supplied by GUI and forwards it to the IPA for an requirement is achieved through the FIPA-compliant HTTP 
appropriate decision-making without human intervention. It Protocol that JADE supports. [Bellifemine et al, 1999] 
is located at PHC along with its GUI.                 discussed the FIPA compliance of JADE.  
The Intelligent Pediatric Assistant 
The IPA, located at CHC, interacts with the UA to receive 
the main problem and asks some more related questions that 
help in deciding the disease and generating the treatment 
plan. IPA and UA share common child disease ontology and 
vocabulary for interactions. The vocabulary for diseases like: 
Jaundice, Dehydration, Diarrhea, Pneumonia, Malaria, 
Measles, Mastoiditis, and Anemia has been created. The 
IPA interacts with its GUI to display the PHC practitioners 
seeking help currently. This information can be useful in 
accessing the performance of a PHC. 
 IPA’s   behaviour is  reactive and autonomous .It                                                 
responds/reacts to questions asked by UA and decides about 
the disease and the appropriate treatment plan autonomously     Figure 4.1 Intelligent Pediatric Assistant. 
without the direct intervention of human being. The said In this section, we shall discuss some of the interfaces and 
behaviors have been implemented using JADE.           working of the system. The rural healthcare practitioner, 
GUI for Pediatrician                                  using interface of UA, registers himself with the IPA. 
The GUI of IPA has   been designed for providing an   Account identification is being allocated by IPA. Figure 4.1 
interface to the Pediatrician, situated at CHC. The purpose is depicts active PHC practitioners with IPA. 
to monitor the condition at the calling rural site. It also  The communicative act for registration to the IPA is a 
displays the total number of cases that have been tackled for ‘Request’ as shown below: 
a particular PHC.                                     (REQUEST 
                                                       :sender  ( agent-identifier :name 
                      Child                           Health_Prac2@vijay:6677/JADE ) 
                      Disease 
                      Ontology                         :receiver  (set ( agent-identifier :name 
                                                      Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE  :addresses (sequence 
  Primary Health Care Center  Community Health Care Center  IOR:0000000….00026000000020002 )) ) 
                                                       :content  "((action (agent-identifier :name 
    GUI                          GUI                  Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE :addresses (sequence 
    UA                                IPA 
                                                      IOR:0000000000....00026000000020002)) (\"Register 
                     Network                          Doctor\" :name \"Dr. Vijay\" :password max)))"  
                     Connection                        :language  fipa-sl  
                                                       :ontology  Disease_Ontology ) 

                                                  
         Figure 3 Basic Architecture of the system. 
  The Figure 3 shows  the location of different agents 
discussed so far. The GUI’s are meant to provide the 
interfaces while UA and IPA use a common vocabulary to 
diagnose the disease and generate treatment plans suitable 
for various severity levels. 
  In the following section, the development of these agents 
with their specification will be discussed.  
3.4 Implementation 
For construction and execution of the system, JADE (Java 
Agent DEvelopment Framework) is adopted. JADE is an 
open-source software framework, aiming to assist the                                              
development and execution of agent   applications in          Figure4.2a GUI at Primary Healthcare Center 


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1399Figure 4.2a shows the inputs being filled by the PHC    An agent communication act adopted by IPA to respond 
practitioner using the interface of UA. It also displays the back after diagnosis of the disease and deciding the 
diagnosed disease and its treatment plan as suggested by the treatment plan is shown below: 
IPA.                                                  ( INFORM 
                                                       :sender  ( agent-identifier :name 
                                                      Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE  :addresses (sequence 
                                                      IOR:0000000000000011…00000020002 )) 
                                                       :receiver  (set ( agent-identifier :name 
                                                      Health_Prac1@vijay:6677/JADE ) ) 
                                                       :content  "((result (action (agent-identifier :name 
                                                      Pediatrician@vijay:6677/JADE :addresses (sequence 
                                                      IOR:0000000000000011494...0000020002)) 
                                                      (Problem_4 :A_4_1 20 :A_4_2 65 :A_4_3 false :A_4_4 
                                                      true :A_4_5 true)) (solution :disease \"SEVERE 
                                                      PNEUMONIA OR VERY SEVERE DISEASE.\" :results 
    Figure 4.2b Values of the sign-symptoms asked by IPA \"Give pre-referral treatment. Give oxygen if present. Abort 
The PHC practitioner simply supplies the main problem for convulsion if present 
which the child has been brought to the dispensary/ health  Refer the client URGENTLY to hospital.\")))"  
facility. The UA sends this information to the IPA, who in  :reply-with  
turn sends some more questions before reaching to a   Health_Prac1@vijay:6677/JADE1140246218296   
conclusion, as shown in figure 4.2b.                  :language  fipa-sl   
  Figure 4.3a displays diagnosing of a critical case where a :ontology  Disease_Ontology ) 
patient, who is more than 2 months old but less than 5 year, 
arrives with a problem of ‘difficult breathing’. This 4   Discussion and Scope for Future Work 
information is passed to the UA which in turn sends it to The rural healthcare delivery system in India can be 
IPA. The IPA asks more question, as listed in Figure 4.3b, improved by integrating it with the advancements of 
to be answered by the PHC practitioner. The diagnosis is information technology. For that we need a system that 
being shown in the Figure 4.3a.                       demonstrates features such as, autonomy,  reasoning, 
                                                      knowledge-sharing and cooperation. A promising solution 
                                                      to this requirement is agent-based system. The system based 
                                                      on agent metaphor can be used to sense a particular situation, 
                                                      analyze it and make a search for the desired goals. 
                                                        The prototype system that has been discussed above is 
                                                      suitable to the prevailing situation of healthcare in rural 
                                                      India for tackling some diseases being handled by a 
                                                      pediatrician at CHC. This system can be enhanced to 
                                                      incorporate some more expert agents. There are situations 
                                                      where  a pediatrician seeks help from other domain 
                                                      specialists like Neonatologist, Cardiologist, Neurologist, 
                                                      and  Endocrinologist. The future work includes  the 
                                                      incorporation of such agents. To incorporate reasoning 
                                                      capabilities, Java Expert System Shell (JESS) that works 
                                                      well with JADE can also be considered.  
        Figure 4.3a GUI at Primary Healthcare Center    To make the system fault tolerant, a replication or cloning 
                                                      of IPA will also be considered in future. A higher level 
                                                      health care center, e.g. Civil Hospital at district level, can be 
                                                      kept in mind for replication and monitoring purposes. JADE 
                                                      supports cloning as well as mobility of agents. Porting the 
                                                      system to mobile devices is also an attractive option 

                                                      5   Conclusion  
                                                        The prototype MAS medical system will assist the PHC 
                                                      practitioner in tackling cases that are outside his/her 
                                                      expertise. It will also help the rural patients to reduce their 
         Figure 4.3b Sign-symptoms asked by IPA       traveling efforts to visit CHC at long distances.  


                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1400