             Sharing the Road: Autonomous Vehicles Meet Human Drivers
                                    Kurt Dresner    and Peter Stone
                                   Department of Computer Sciences
                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                       1 University Station C0500
                                       Austin, Texas 78712-0233
                             {kdresner,pstone}@cs.utexas.edu
                    http://www.cs.utexas.edu/∼{kdresner,pstone}

                    Abstract                          Schonberg et al., 1995], and autonomous steering [Pomer-
                                                      leau, 1993]. As more and more cars become autonomous, the
    In modern urban settings, automobile trafﬁc and   possibility of autonomous interactions among multiple vehi-
    collisions lead to endless frustration as well as sig- cles becomes a more realistic possibility.
    niﬁcant loss of life, property, and productivity. Re- Multiagent Systems (MAS) is the subﬁeld of AI that aims
    cent advances in artiﬁcial intelligence suggest that to provide both principles for construction of complex sys-
    autonomous vehicle navigation may soon be a real- tems involving multiple agents and mechanisms for coordi-
    ity. In previous work, we have demonstrated that  nation of independent agents’ behaviors [Wooldridge, 2002].
    a reservation-based approach can efﬁciently and   In previous work, we demonstrated a novel MAS-based ap-
    safely govern interactions of multiple autonomous proach to alleviating trafﬁc congestion and collisions, specif-
    vehicles at intersections. Such an approach allevi- ically at intersections cite2005aamas-dresner. However, the
    ates many traditional problems associated with in- system relied on all vehicles being equipped with the requi-
    tersections, in terms of both safety and efﬁciency. site technology — a restriction that would make implement-
    However, the system relies on all vehicles being  ing such a system in the real world extremely difﬁcult.
    equipped with the requisite technology — a restric- This paper makes two main contributions. First, we show
    tion that would make implementing such a sys-     how to augment this intersection control mechanism to al-
    tem in the real world extremely difﬁcult. In this low use by human drivers with minimal additional infrastruc-
    paper, we extend this system to allow for incre-  ture. Second, we show that this hybrid intersection control
    mental deployability. The modiﬁed system is able  mechanism offers performance and safety beneﬁts over tradi-
    to accommodate traditional human-operated vehi-   tional trafﬁc light systems. Thus, implementing our system
    cles using existing infrastructure. Furthermore, we over an extended time frame will not adversely affect over-
    show that as the number of autonomous vehicles on all trafﬁc conditions at any stage. Furthermore, we show that
    the road increases, trafﬁc delays decrease monoton- at each stage the mechanism offers an incentive for individ-
    ically toward the levels exhibited in our previous uals to use autonomous-driver-agent-equipped vehicles. Our
    work. Finally, we develop a method for switch-    work is fully implemented and tested in a custom simulator
    ing between various human-usable conﬁgurations    and detailed experimental results are presented.
    while the system is running, in order to facilitate an
    even smoother transition. The work is fully imple- 2  Reservation System
    mented and tested in our custom simulator, and we Previously, we proposed a reservation-based multi-agent
    present detailed experimental results attesting to its approach to alleviating trafﬁc, speciﬁcally at intersec-
    effectiveness.                                    tions [Dresner and Stone, 2005]. This system consists of two
                                                      types of agents: intersection managers and driver agents.For
1  Introduction                                       each intersection, there is a corresponding intersection man-
In modern urban settings, automobile trafﬁc and collisions ager, and for each vehicle, a driver agent. Intersection man-
lead to endless frustration aswellassigniﬁcantlossof  agers are responsible for directing the vehicles through the
life, property, and productivity. A recent study of 85 U.S. intersection, while the driver agents are responsible for con-
cities [Texas Transportation Institute, 2004] put the annual trolling the vehicles to which they are assigned.
time spent waiting in trafﬁc at 46 hours per capita, up from To improve the throughput and efﬁciency of the system,
16 hours in 1982. A recent report puts the annual soci- the driver agents “call ahead” to the intersection manager and
etal cost of automobile collisions in the U.S. at $230 bil- request space-time in the intersection. The intersection man-
lion [National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, 2002]. ager then determines whether or not these requests can be
Meanwhile, advances in artiﬁcial intelligence suggest that au- met based on an intersection control policy. Depending on
tonomous vehicle navigation may soon be a reality. Cars the decision (and subsequent response) the intersection man-
can now be equipped with features such as adaptive cruise ager makes, the driver agent either records the parameters of
control, GPS-based route planning [Rogers et al., 1999; the response message (the reservation) and attempts to meet

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1263them, or it receives a rejection message and makes another
request at a later time. If a vehicle has a reservation, it can re-
quest that its reservation be changed or can cancel the reserva-
tion. It also sends a special message when it ﬁnishes crossing
the intersection indicating to the intersection manager that it
has done so.
  The interaction among these agents is governed by a shared
protocol [Dresner and Stone, 2004a]. In addition to message      (a) Successful    (b) Rejected
types (e.g. REQUEST,CONFIRM,andCANCEL), this pro-
tocol includes some rules, the most important of which are Figure 1: A granularity-8 FCFS policy. In 1(a), vehicle A’s re-
(1) a vehicle may not enter the intersection unless it is within quest reserves tiles at time t. In 1(b), vehicle B’s request is rejected
the parameters of a reservation made by that vehicle’s driver because it requires a tile used by A at t.
agent, (2) if a vehicle follows its reservation parameters, the intersection control policy, there exists an amount of trafﬁc
intersection manager can guarantee a safe crossing for the ve- for which vehicles arrive at the intersection more frequently
hicle, and (3) a driver agent may have only one reservation at than they can leave the intersection. At this point, the average
a time. While some may argue that insisting a vehicle ad- delay experienced by vehicles travelling through the intersec-
here to the parameters of such a reservation is too strict a re- tion grows without bound — each subsequent vehicle will
quirement, it is useful to note that vehicles today are already have to wait longer than all the previous cars. The point for
governed by a similar (although much less precise) protocol; which this occurs in the FCFS policy is several times higher
if a driver goes through a red light at a busy intersection, a than for the trafﬁc light.
collision may be unavoidable. Aside from this protocol, no
agent needs to know how the other agents work — each ve- 2.2 Other Intersection Control Policies
hicle manufacturer (or third party) can program a separate While the reservation system as originally proposed [Dres-
driver agent, each city or state can create its own intersection ner and Stone, 2004b] uses only the FCFS policy, it can ac-
control policies (which can even change on the ﬂy), and as commodate any intersection control policy that can make a
long as each agent adheres to the protocol, the vehicles will decision based on the parameters in a request message. This
move safely through the intersection. This system is a true includes policies that represent familiar intersection control
multiagent system, integrating heterogeneous, complete, au- mechanisms like trafﬁc lights and stop signs. Because the
tonomous agents.                                      reservation system can behave exactly like the most common
                                                      modern-day control mechanisms, the reservation mechanism
2.1  First Come, First Served (FCFS)                  can perform as well as current systems, provided it uses a
To determine if a request can be met, the intersection man- reasonable control policy.
ager uses what we call the “ﬁrst come, ﬁrst served” (FCFS) Trafﬁc lights are a ubiquituous mechanism used to control
intersection control policy which works as follows:   high-trafﬁc intersections. In our previous work, we describe
  • The intersection is divided into a grid of n × n tiles,wheren a policy that emulates real-life trafﬁc lights by maintaining a
    is called the granularity.                        model of how the lights would be changed, were they to ex-
  • Upon receiving a request message, the policy uses the parame- ist. We name this policy TRAFFIC-LIGHT. Upon receiving a
    ters in the message to simulate the journey of the vehicle across request message, the policy determines whether the light cor-
    the intersection. At each time step of the simulation, it deter- responding to the requesting vehicle’s lane would be green. If
    mines which tiles the vehicle occupies.           so, it sends a conﬁrmation, otherwise, it sends a rejection. In
  • If throughout this simulation, no required tile is already re- this paper, we extend this work to include a new policy that
    served, the policy reserves the tiles for the vehicle and conﬁrms covers the area between TRAFFIC-LIGHT and FCFS, thereby
    the reservation. Otherwise, it rejects it.        enabling interoperability with human drivers as well as pro-
                                                      viding a smooth transition as autonomous vehicles become
  We name the policy based on the fact that it responds to ve-
                                                      more prevalent.
hicles immediately when they make a request, conﬁrming or
rejecting the request based on whether or not the space-time 3 Incorporating Human Users
required by the vehicle is already claimed. If two vehicles While an intersection control mechanism for autonomous ve-
require some tile at the same time, the vehicle which requests hicles will someday be very useful, there will always be peo-
the reservation ﬁrst is given the reservation (provided there ple who enjoy driving. Additionally, there will be a fairly
are no conﬂicts in the rest of the required space-time). Fig- long transitional period between the current situation (all
ure 1 shows a successful reservation (conﬁrmed) followed by human drivers) and one in which human drivers are a rar-
an unsuccessful reservation (rejected).               ity. Even if switching to a system comprised solely of au-
  Our previous work demonstrated that an intersection man- tonomous vehicles were possible, pedestrians and cyclists
ager using the FCFS policy enabled vehicles to cross the must also be able to traverse intersections in a controlled and
intersection while experiencing almost no delay (increase safe manner. For this reason, it is necessary to create inter-
in travel time over optimal) [Dresner and Stone, 2004b; section control policies that are aware of and able to accom-
2005]. When compared with a standard trafﬁc light, the modate humans, whether they are on a bicycle, walking to
FCFS policy not only decreased delay, but also tremendously the corner store, or driving a “classic” car for entertainment
increased the throughput of the intersection. For any realistic purposes. Allowing both humans and autonomous vehicles

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1264in the same intersection at the same time presents an inter- then the right turn. Next, the green light would go through
esting technical challenge. In this section we explain how we each lane of east trafﬁc, and so forth. The ﬁrst half of the
have extended the FCFS policy and reservation framework to model’s cycle can be seen in Figure 3. This light model does
allow for human drivers.                              not work very well if most of the vehicles are human-driven.
3.1  Using Existing Infrastructure                    However, we will show that it is very useful for intersections
                                                      which control mostly autonomous vehicles but also need to
To add human drivers, we ﬁrst need a reliable way to com-
                                                      handle an occasional human driver.
municate information to them. Fortunately, we can use a
system that drivers already know and understand — trafﬁc
lights. The required infrastructure is already present at many
intersections and the engineering and manufacturing of trafﬁc
light systems is well developed. For pedestrians and cyclists,
standard “push-button” crossing signals can be used that will
give enough time for a person to cross as well as alerting the Figure 3: The ﬁrst half-cycle of the SINGLE-LANE light model.
intersection manager to their presence.               Each lane is given a green light, and this process is repeated for each
                                                      direction. A small part of the intersection is used by turning vehicles
3.2  Light Models                                     at any given time.
If real trafﬁc lights are going to be used to communicate to hu-
                                                      3.3  The FCFS-LIGHT     Policy
man drivers, they will need to be controlled and understood
                                                      In order to obtain some of the beneﬁts of the FCFS policy
by the intersection manager. Thus, we add a new component
                                                      while still accommodating human drivers, a policy needs to
to each intersection control policy, called a light model.This
                                                      do two things. First, if a light is green, it must ensure that it is
model controls the actual physical lights as well as provid-
                                                      safe for any vehicle (autonomous or human-driven) to drive
ing information to the policy with which it can make deci-
                                                      through the intersection in the lane the light regulates. Sec-
sions. In more complicated scenarios, the light model can
                                                      ond, it should grant reservations to driver agents whenever
be modiﬁed by the control policy, for example, in order to
                                                      possible. This would allow autonomous vehicles to move
adapt to changing trafﬁc conditions. The lights are the same
                                                      through an intersection where a human driver couldn’t —
as modern-day lights: red (do not enter), yellow (if possible,
                                                      similar to a “right on red”, but extended much further to other
do not enter; light will soon be red), and green (enter). Each
                                                      safe situations.
control policy needs to have a light model so that human users
                                                        The policy we have created which does both of these is
will know what to do. For instance, the light model that would
                                                      called FCFS-LIGHT. As with FCFS, the intersection is di-
be used with ordinary FCFS would keep all the lights red at
                                                      vided into a grid. When it receives a request, FCFS-LIGHT
all times, informing humans that at no time is it safe to enter.
                                                      immediately grants a reservation if the corresponding light
The TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy, on the other hand, would have
                                                      will be green at that time. Otherwise, it simulates the vehi-
lights that corresponded exactly to the light system the policy
                                                      cle’s trajectory as in FCFS. If throughout the simulation, no
is emulating. Here, we describe a few light models used in
                                                      required tile is reserved by another vehicle or in use by a lane
our experiments.
                                                      with a green light the policy reserves the tiles and conﬁrms
ALL-LANES                                             the reservation. Otherwise, the request is rejected.
In this model, which is very similar to some current traf- Off-Limits Tiles
ﬁc light systems, each direction is successively given green Unfortunately, simply deferring to FCFS does not guaran-
lights in all lanes. Thus, all north trafﬁc (turning and going tee the safety of the vehicle. If the vehicle were granted a
straight) is given green lights while the east, west, and south reservation that conﬂicted with another vehicle following the
trafﬁc all have red lights. The green lights then cycle through physical lights, a collision could easily ensue. To determine
the directions. Figure 2 shows a graphical depiction of this which tiles are in use by the light system at any given time,
light model.                                          we associate a set of off-limits tiles with each light. For exam-
                                                      ple, if the light for the north left turn lane is green (or yellow),
                                                      all tiles that could be used by a vehicle turning left from that
                                                      lane are off-limits. While evaluating a reservation request,
                                                      FCFS also checks to see if any tiles needed by the requesting
                                                      vehicle are off limits at the time of the reservation. If so, the
                                                      reservation is rejected. The length of the yellow light is ad-
                                                      justed so that a vehicle entering the intersection has enough
Figure 2: The ALL-LANES light model. Each direction is given all
green lights in a cycle: north, east, west, south. During each phase, time to clear the intersection before those tiles are no longer
the only available paths for autonomous vehicles are right turns. off limits.
SINGLE-LANE                                           FCFS-LIGHT   Subsumes FCFS
In the SINGLE-LANE  light model, the green lane rotates Using a trafﬁc light-like light model (for example ALL-
through the lanes one at a time instead of all at once. For LANES), the FCFS-LIGHT can behave exactly like TRAFFIC-
example, the left turn lane of the north trafﬁc would have a LIGHT on all-human driver populations. With a light model
green light, while all other lanes would have a red light. Next, that keeps all lights constantly red, FCFS-LIGHT behaves ex-
the straight lane of the north trafﬁc would have a green light, actly like FCFS. If any human drivers are present it will leave

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1265                       Arrive before                  limit in all lanes is 25 meters per second. For each intersec-
                         last(P1) ?                   tion control policy with reservation tiles, the granularity is set
                                                      at 24. We also conﬁgured the simulator to spawn all vehi-
                       yes       no                   cles turning left in the left lane, all vehicles turning right in
                                                      the right lane, and all vehicles travelling straight in the center
          P1  approves?            P2  approves?      lane, in order to make the comparison between ALL-LANES
           yes       no             yes       no      and SINGLE-LANE  more straightforward. During each simu-
                                                      lated time step, the simulator spawns vehicles (with the given
    Ends after       Reject    Accept         Reject  probability), provides each vehicle with sensor data (simu-
                                                      lated laser range ﬁnder, velocity, position, etc.), moves all the
    last(P1) ?                                        vehicles, and then removes any vehicles that have completed
     yes       no                                     their journey. Unless otherwise speciﬁed, each data point rep-
                                                      resents 180000 time steps, or one hour of simulated time.
Reject        Accept                                    In previous work, we demonstrated that once all vehi-
                                                      cles are autonomous, intersection-associated delays can be
Figure 4: The decision mechanism during a switchover from reduced dramatically. By using the light models presented
policy P 1 to policy P 2.                             earlier, we can obtain a stronger result: delays can be reduced
them stuck at the intersection indeﬁnitely. However, in the at each stage of adoption. Furthermore, at each stage there
absence of human drivers, it will perform exceptionally well. are additional incentives for drivers to switch to autonomous
FCFS is, in fact, just a special case of FCFS-LIGHT. We can vehicles.
thus alter FCFS-LIGHT’s behavior from TRAFFIC-LIGHT at 4.1 Transition To Full Implementation
one extreme to FCFS at the other.                     The point of having a hybrid light/autonomous intersection
3.4  Policy Switching                                 control policy is to confer the beneﬁts of autonomy to passen-
Policies based on certain light models may be more effective gers with driver-agent controlled vehicles while still allowing
at governing particular driver populations. In order to further human users to participate in the system. Figure 5(a), which
reduce delay, we have developed a way in which the intersec- encompasses our main result, shows a smooth and monotoni-
tion manager can smoothly switch between different policies cally improving transition from modern day trafﬁc lights (rep-
—  the intersection need not bring all the vehicles to a halt resented by the TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy) to a completely or
and clear out the intersection. The switching mechanism re- mostly autonomous vehicle mechanism (FCFS-LIGHT with
quires every policy to keep track of the last time for which it the SINGLE-LANE light model). In early stages (100%-
has authorized a vehicle to be in the intersection. This could 10% human), the ALL-LANES light model is used. Later
be either the last moment of a reservation or the last moment on (less than 10% human), the SINGLE-LANE light model
that a vehicle passing through a green light can be in the in- is introduced. At each change (both in driver populations and
tersection. Once the intersection manager decides to make light models), delays are decreased. Notice the rather drastic
the switch, it freezes the current policy. When a policy is drop in delay from FCFS-LIGHT with the ALL-LANES light
frozen, it rejects all requests that would cause it to increase model to FCFS-LIGHT with the SINGLE-LANE light model.
the “last reserved” time. Once the current policy is frozen, Although none of the results is quite as close to the mini-
the intersection manager accesses the last reserved time and mum as pure FCFS, the SINGLE-LANE light model allows
henceforth delegates all reservation requests that begin after for greater use of the intersection by the FCFS portion of the
that time to the new policy. All requests that begin before that FCFS-LIGHT policy, which translates to more efﬁciency and
time are still processed by the current policy. Because all re- lower delay.
quests are handled entirely by one policy, if two policies P 1
and P 2 are safe (vehicles granted reservations by it are guar-  60
                                                                                    24 100%
anteed not to collide), the same will be true for the period  50     5%               50%
                                                                                    22 10%
during which the intersection manager is making the switch.  40
                                                                                    20
                                                           30
A diagram illustrating this compound decision mechanism is   100%
                                                         Delay  (s)  20 1%        Delay  (s)  18
shown in Figure 4.                                         10 10%                   16
                                                                       Autonomous
                                                            0                       14
4  Experimental Results                                      0  0.01  0.02  0.03  0.04  0.05  0  0.005  0.01  0.015
We test the efﬁcacy of the new control policies with a custom-    Traffic Load             Traffic Load
built, time-based simulator. Videos of the simulator in ac- (a) Delays decrease with decreasing pro- (b) A closeup of the ALL-LANES re-
tion can be viewed at http://www.cs.utexas.edu/        portions of human drivers. sults.
∼kdresner/aim/. The simulator models one intersection
and has a time step of .02 seconds. The trafﬁc level is con- Figure 5: Average delays for all vehicles as a function of trafﬁc
trolled by changing the spawn probability — the probabil- level for FCFS-LIGHT.ALL-LANES is well-suited to high percent-
ity that on any given time step, the simulator will attempt to ages of human drivers (100%-10%), while SINGLE-LANE works
spawn a new vehicle. For each experiment, the simulator sim- well with few humans (10%-0%).
ulates 3 lanes in each of the 4 cardinal directions. The total For systems with a signiﬁcant proportion of human drivers,
area modelled is a square with sides of 250 meters. The speed the ALL-LANES light model works well — human drivers

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1266                                                           35                       60
have the same experience they would with the TRAFFIC-          Humans                   Humans
                                                           30 Autonomous            50 Autonomous
LIGHT policy, but driver agents have extra opportunities to  25
                                                                                    40
make it through the intersection. A small amount of this ben-  20
                                                                                    30
                                                           15

eﬁt is passed on to the human drivers, who may ﬁnd them- Delay  (s)               Delay  (s)  20
                                                           10
selves closer to the front of the lane while waiting for a red  5                   10
light to turn green. To explore the effect on the average vehi-  0                  0
                                                             0  0.005  0.01  0.015  0.02  0  0.005  0.01  0.015  0.02
cle, we run our simulator with the FCFS-LIGHT policy, the         Traffic Load             Traffic Load
ALL-LANES  light model, and a 100%, 50%, and 10% rate             (a)                     (b)
of human drivers: when a vehicle is spawned, it receives a
human driver (instead of a driver agent) with probability 1, Figure 6: Average delay for humans and autonomous vehicles as a
.5, and .1 respectively. As seen in Figure 5(b), as the propor- function of trafﬁc level for FCFS-LIGHT with 5% human, SINGLE-
tion of human drivers decreases, the delay experienced by the LANE(a) and 50% human, ALL-LANES(b).
average driver also decreases. While these decreases are not
as large as those brought about by the SINGLE-LANE light the skyrocketing delay of Figure 5(a)), means this is actually
model, they are at least possible with signiﬁcant numbers of a win for the human drivers.
human drivers.                                          The SINGLE–LANE   light model effectively gives the hu-
4.2  Incentives For Individuals                       mans a high, but fairly constant delay. Because the green
Clearly there are incentives for cities to implement the FCFS- light for any one lane only comes around after each other lane
LIGHT policy — the roads will be able to accommodate more has had a green light, a human-driven vehicle may ﬁnd itself
trafﬁc and vehicles will experience lower delays. However, sitting at a red light for some time before the light changes.
we have also shown that these beneﬁts only materialize when Because this light model would only be put in operation once
a signiﬁcant portion of the vehicles are autonomous. Here we human drivers are fairly scarce, the huge beneﬁt to the other
demonstrate that the system creates incentives for individuals 95% or 99% of vehicles far outweighs this cost.
to adopt autonomous vehicles as well, in the form of lower These data suggest that there will be an incentive to both
delays for autonomous vehicles. Shown in Figure 6(a) are the early adopters (persons purchasing vehicles capable of inter-
average delays for human drivers as compared to autonomous acting with the reservation system) and to cities or towns.
driver agents for the FCFS-LIGHT policy using the ALL- Those with properly equipped vehicles will get where they
LANES  light model. In this experiment, half of the drivers are going faster (not to mention more safely). Cities and
are human. Humans experience slightly longer delays than towns that equip their intersections to utilize the reservation
autonomous vehicles, but not worse than with the TRAFFIC- paradigm will also experience fewer trafﬁc jams and more
LIGHT policy (compare with Figure 5(b)). Thus, by putting efﬁcient use of the roadways (along with fewer collisions,
some autonomous vehicles on the road, all drivers experience less wasted gasoline, etc.). Because there is no penalty to
equal or smaller delays as compared to the current situation. the human drivers (which would initially be a majority), there
This is expected because the autonomous driver can do ev- would be no reason for any party involved to oppose the intro-
erything the human driver does and more.              duction of such a system. Later, when most drivers have made
  Once the reservation system is in widespread use and au- the transition to autonomous vehicles, and the SINGLE-LANE
tonomous vehicles make up a vast majority of those on the light model is introduced, the incentive to move to the new
road, the door is opened to an even more efﬁcient light model technology is increased — both for cities and individuals. By
for the FCFS-LIGHT policy. With a very low concentration this time, autonomous vehicle owners will far outnumber hu-
of human drivers, the SINGLE-LANE light model can drasti- man drivers, who will still beneﬁt as trafﬁc volumes continue
cally reduce delays, even at levels of overall trafﬁc that the to increase.
TRAFFIC-LIGHT  policy can not handle. Using the this light
model, autonomous drivers can pass through red lights even 5 Related Work
more frequently because fewer tiles are off-limits at any given Rasche and Naumann have worked extensively on decen-
time. In Figure 6(b) we compare the delays experienced by tralized solutions to intersection collision avoidance prob-
autonomous drivers to those of human drivers when only 5% lems [Naumann and Rasche, 1997; Rasche et al., 1997].Oth-
of drivers are human and thus the SINGLE-LANE light model ers focus on improving current technology (systems of traf-
can be used. While the improvements using the ALL-LANES ﬁc lights). For example, Roozemond allows intersections
light model beneﬁt all drivers to some extent, the SINGLE- to act autonomously, sharing the data they gather [Rooze-
LANE  light model’s sharp decrease in average delays (Fig- mond, 1999]. The intersections then use this information to
ure 5(a)) appears to come at a high price to human drivers. make both short- and long-term predictions about the trafﬁc
  As shown in Figure 6(b), human drivers experience much and adjust accordingly. This approach still assumes human-
higher delays than average. For lower trafﬁc levels, the de- controlled vehicles. Bazzan has used an approach using both
lays are even higher than they would experience with the MAS and evolutionary game theory which involves multiple
TRAFFIC-LIGHT policy. However, ﬁgure 5(a) shows that de- intersection managers (agents) that must focus not only on
spite this, at high levels of trafﬁc, the humans get a perfor- local goals, but also on global goals [Bazzan, 2005].
mance beneﬁt. Because these intersections will be able to Hall´e and Chaib-draa have taken a MAS approach to col-
handle far more trafﬁc than TRAFFIC-LIGHT, the fact that the laborative driving by allowing vehicles to form platoons,
human delays are kept more or less constant (as opposed to groups of varying degrees of autonomy, that then coordi-

                                                IJCAI-07
                                                  1267