A Hybrid Ontology Directed Feedback Selection Algorithm for Supporting Creative 
                               Problem Solving Dialogues*

  Hao-Chuan Wang1, Rohit Kumar1, Carolyn Penstein Rosé1, Tsai-Yen Li2, Chun-Yen Chang3
              1Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh PA 15213
           2Computer Science Department, National Chengchi University, Taipei, Taiwan 
           3Science Education Center, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan 
          {haochuan,rohitk,cprose}@cs.cmu.edu, li@cs.nccu.edu.tw, changcy@ntnu.edu.tw 

                  Abstract                      VanLehn, 2005; Popescu, Aleven, & Koedinger, 2003], is
                                                emerging as a new focus area for the computational linguis-
   We evaluate a new hybrid language processing
                                                tics community.
   approach designed for interactive applications that 
                                                 A major thrust of research in the language technologies
   maintain an interaction with users over multiple
                                                community for the past decade has been the development of
   turns.  Specifically, we describe a method for us-
                                                shallow language processing approaches that require very
   ing a simple topic hierarchy in combination with a 
                                                little knowledge engineering and that can be applied effi-
   standard information retrieval measure of seman-
                                                ciently to very large corpora.  Typically text categorization 
   tic similarity to reason about the selection of ap-
                                                algorithms and text retrieval algorithms operate on large
   propriate feedback in response to extended lan-
                                                portions of text, such as whole news articles [Ko & Seo,
   guage inputs in the context of an interactive tuto-
                                                2004].  However, while this technology has frequently been
   rial system designed to support creative problem
                                                applied to dialogue applications where users contribute ex-
   solving. Our evaluation demonstrates the value of 
                                                tended contributions [e.g., Graesser et al., 2001; Malatesta et
   using a machine learning approach that takes 
                                                al., 2002], they have often been met with less success than
   feedback from experts into account for optimizing
                                                in more typical text retrieval applications.  The demands of
   the hierarchy based feedback selection strategy.
                                                interactive language processing systems are different from
                                                more typical text retrieval applications because texts are 
                                                much shorter, precision is more important, and domain spe-
1 Introduction                                  cific development data is in short supply. Nevertheless, the
 In this paper we describe and evaluate a new hybrid lan- performance of shallow language processing approaches can
guage processing approach designed for interactive lan- be enhanced by drawing upon the knowledge sources that
guage processing applications that maintain an extended must be part of the system for the purposes described above.
interaction with users over multiple turns.  Except in the We describe a method for using a simple topic hierarchy
case of complete user initiative, the system must have some in combination with a standard information retrieval meas-
explicit representation of the state-space of reasonable dia- ure of semantic similarity to reason about extended lan-
logues in the form of a hierarchy of dialogue recipes or tem- guage inputs in the context of an interactive tutorial system 
plates [Rosé et al., 2001], or an ontology of dialogue topics designed to support creative problem solving. Our evalua-
[Popescu, Aleven, and Koedinger, 2003] or discourse states tion demonstrates that while a common-sense approach to
[Tetreault & Litman, 2006] in order to ensure coherence at combining these two sources of information provides some 
the level of topic transitions and ultimately task success. It advantage over shallow language processing alone, that a
is also necessary to ensure robust understanding of user in- more substantial improvement can be achieved by tuning
put. While state-of-the-art systems typically achieve robust the integration algorithm using a machine learning approach
understanding by encouraging users to contribute concise that takes feedback from experts into account.
contributions in order to avoid recognition errors [Litman & 
Pan, 2002], recently a new emphasis on applications that 2 Motivation for Hierarchy Based Feedback 
require more sophisticated language from users, such as
                                                  Supporting creative problem solving of ill-structured
tutorial dialogue systems [Wang et al., 2006; Rosé & 
                                                problems is a new direction in the Intelligent Tutoring

*                                               Community [Aleven et al., 2006], which poses specific chal-
 This work was funded in part by NSF Grant SBE0354420 and the lenges for language processing technology that can be used
National Science Council [NSC] of Taiwan under contract no. 
                                                to facilitate this type of learning. In this paper we specifi-
NSC94-2524-S-003-014.


                                           IJCAI-07
                                            1750 cally address the problem of eliciting ideation.  While sup- A shallow semantic similarity measure is computed be-
 porting knowledge construction and reflection can be ac- tween texts by computing the cosine correlation between 
 complished using dialogue strategies where the system has their respective word vectors.  This semantic similarity 
 the initiative, supporting student ideation requires abdicating measure is used to select the best matching idea node in the 
control to the student.  Systems such as the Geometry Ex- hierarchy.  Each idea node in the hierarchy is associated 
planation Tutor [Popescu, Aleven, & Koedinger, 2003] and with a list of prototype texts.  The idea node associated with 
Auto-Tutor [Graesser et al., 2001] support this student di- the text that is rated as most similar to the student text is 
rected ideation using a reactive rather than a proactive dia- selected as the best matching node.  The magnitude of the 
logue management strategy.                       computed semantic similarity is used to estimate how good 
  Our baseline hierarchy based feedback approach [Wang et the match is.   
 al., 2006] is similar in spirit to that adopted in the Geometry We make use of two Finite State Machines (FSMs) to 
 Explanation Tutor and Auto-Tutor.  However, our approach guide the strategy for selecting feedback messages based on 
 differs from this prior work in several important respects.  the best matching node, the estimated goodness of the 
 First, similar to Popescu et al. [2003], we attach feedback match, and a record of which idea nodes have been uttered 
 messages to nodes in our hierarchy so that we can use a by the student in previous contributions.  In our FSM based 
 match between a student contribution and a node in the hi- approach to feedback selection, a finite set of states, Q, 
 erarchy as a basis for selecting a feedback message.  How- represents the range of possible system functional behavior, 
 ever, in contrast to Popescu et al. [2003], we do not utilize a including actions such as checking the coverage of idea 
 deep, symbolic approach to language understanding.  In- nodes attached to an abstract concept node or moving from 
 stead, we attach a number of prototype texts to each leaf one node to a higher node in the hierarchy representing a 
 node in the hierarchy and determine which node to match to more abstract idea.   The finite alphabet, , represents the 
 based on a shallow semantic similarity measure.  In our ap- set of events that can trigger a transition from one state to 
 proach, the value of the similarity score is a key component another, such as the condition that all idea nodes subsumed 
 in our strategy selection process.  If the match is deemed by the current node have been covered, which in this case 
 good based on our shallow similarity measure, we select the triggers a transition to a state requiring the system to select a 
 matched node as the basis for our feedback selection.  Oth- new conceptual node.  
 erwise, we move up a level of abstraction in the hierarchy in The feedback produced by the system consists of two 
 order to compensate for the partial match.  Thus, our ap- parts.  The first part is referred to as a Comment, which is 
 proach is much lighter weight in that it does not require meant to offer feedback specifically directed at the details of 
 heavy knowledge representation or inferencing technology.   what students have contributed.  The comment text associ-
  Similar to Graesser et al., [2001] we make use of a finite ated with the most closely matching idea node is selected, 
 state machine to determine how to use the hierarchy to se- unless the goodness of the match is rated as low, in which 
 lect feedback.  However, in contrast to the Auto-Tutor ap- case a more abstract node that subsumes that idea node is 
 proach, our strategy is motivated more by general principles selected instead.  The second portion of the feedback is re-
 of dialogue coherence rather than a specific knowledge ferred to as a Tutorial, the purpose of which is to direct the 
 elicitation strategy designed to elicit a specific idea from a student to a new idea, preferably which coherently follows 
 student with progressively more pointed hints.  from the current idea if such a subsequent focus exists in the 
                                                 hierarchy and has not yet been covered by the student. In 
 3  Technical Approach in Detail                 this way students have the opportunity to learn how to 
  Our system accepts student input in Chinese, although our evaluate their ideas, and they are encouraged to continue 
 approach can easily be applied to other languages.  As a contributing additional ideas.  Two separate FSMs are de-
 preprocessing step, the Chinese text must be segmented into signed for the selection of each of the two feedback por-
 individual lexical items using technology provided by the tions. In the current design, a Comment is selected based on 
 Chinese Knowledge and Information Processing (CKIP) a function only of the current student contribution, while a 
 group at Academia Sinica [Ma & Chen, 2003].  This pre- Tutorial is selected based on a function of the student con-
 processing step is not necessary except for languages like tribution and the context of students’ previous responses 
 Chinese and Japanese that have no spaces between words.  within the same session.  This is what we refer to as the Hi-
 A word vector is then assembled from the tokenized text, erarchy approach to feedback selection.   
 with each position in the vector corresponding to a single To further illustrate our Hierarchy approach to feedback 
 lexical item, and term weight equal to a function of term selection as well as to demonstrate where the value of using 
 frequency within and across instances, referred to as TF- a simple idea Hierarchy in feedback selection can be found, 
 IDF.  Note that text classification using simple word vectors we compare our Hierarchy approach to a baseline No Hier-
 such as this can be done effectively without any morpho- archy approach using the example in Table 1.  In the No 
 logical processing even for highly synthetic languages such Hierarchy approach, the Comment is selected based strictly 
 as German [Donmez et al., 2005].                on the best matching idea node, and the tutorial is selected  


                                            IJCAI-07
                                             1751 Table 1 Example of multi-turn interaction contrasting the With Hierarchy approach to feedback selection with the No 
 Hierarchy approach.
 Student Re-     Matched    Match   Hierarchy Response           No Hierarchy Response 
 sponse          Concept    Quality 
  Intense rainfall  Nature-1  Good   It’s good to think about the influ- It’s good to think about the influ-
                            match    ence of rainfall.  Is the fact that ence of rainfall.  What issues might 
                                     Taiwan is located in the conver- be related to shortcomings in public 
                                     gent plate-boundary region rele- education?
                                     vant to the occurrence of a debris 
                                     flow?
  Improper devel- Social-1  Bad     You seem to have some thoughts It’s a good idea to think about pol-
  opment of moun-           match,  about social policy and public ad- icy making.  What king of weather 
  tains                     creative ministration.  What issues might be conditions might increase the possi-
                            phras-  related to shortcomings in public bility of a debris flow hazard?
                            ing     education?
  The current poli- Social-1 Good   It’s a good idea to think about pol- It’s a good idea to think about pol-
  cies do not regu-         match   icy making.  What issues might be icy making.  Is the fact that Taiwan 
  late urban devel-                 related to shortcomings in public is located in the convergent plate-
  opment well                       education?                   boundary zone relevant to the oc-
                                                                 currence of a debris flow?
  Batman did not Social-1   Bad     You seem to have some thoughts It’s a good idea to think about pol-
  come to help              match,  about social policy and public ad- icy making.  Is it possible that the 
                            non-    ministration.  Is the public not location has a particular geological 
                            sense   aware enough about the severity of structure that makes it prone to de-
                            student debris flow hazards?         bris flow?
                            answer

 randomly.  We consider this a reasonable comparison condi- matching node.  As a result, in the No Hierarchy case, a 
 tion because without an idea hierarchy, it is not possible to slightly incoherent comment is produced.  In contrast, next 
 use a strategy such as described above to compensate for to that in the table we see that with the Hierarchy approach, 
 poor matches or to select a next tutorial focus that is close to a more abstract comment text that sounds less incoherent in 
 the current focus, since there is no organization of the inven- the context is selected.  Next, the student contributes a rea-
 tory of idea nodes.                             sonable idea that again matches well to a node in the hierar-
  The extended example in Table 1 illustrates how the is- chy, but it happens to be the same node that matched previ-
 a hierarchy is beneficial for the FSM-based feedback selec- ously.  Thus, we see in the last column of Table 1 that the 
tion over a multi-turn interaction. While this is a constructed No Hierarchy approach generates an identical comment to 
example, the evaluation presented later in the paper demon- that used previously.  While it is appropriate now and fol-
strates that the hierarchy can indeed be used strategically in lows coherently from what the student has most recently 
practice to yield higher quality feedback responses to real uttered, it sounds awkward because it is identical to what 
student inputs.  In the leftmost column of Table 1 we see a was produced in the previous exchange.  In contrast, if we 
sequence of student contributions.  To the right of that we now look in column 4 of Table 1 for the corresponding Hi-
see the selected best matching node from the hierarchy as erarchy based feedback, a different comment is produced 
well as an indication of match quality.  The two rightmost since this time the match is good, and thus the algorithm 
columns display the resulting comment and tutorial texts for does not select a more abstract feedback message.  The se-
the Hierarchy approach and the No Hierarchy approach re- lected tutorial text is the same since the student has still not 
spectively.  Note that the Comment texts are presented in responded to this suggestion from the previous turn.  In this 
plain text, and the Tutorial texts are presented in italics.   case, a repeated tutorial text sounds less awkward than a 
  In the first row, we see a typical student response.  Since repeated comment text because it is reminding the student of 
 it matches well to an idea node, and since it is the first con- what the student still has not done.  In the final student con-
 tribution in an extended interaction, both approaches gener- tribution, a nonsense student answer is given.  Again, the 
 ate an acceptable response.  Next, however, the student con- same best matching node is selected, but this time the match 
 tributes what is an acceptable idea, but with creative phras- is bad again. The No Hierarchy approach selects the same 
 ing that does not match well to any of the nodes in the hier- comment text for the third time.  In contrast, the Hierarchy 
 archy.  Because of this, a poor selection is made for the best approach reverts back to the more abstract comment and  


                                            IJCAI-07
                                             1752 Figure 1 Average ratings for the two human coders for each of the four approaches for Comment selection and Tuto-
 rial selection separately.
 selects a tutorial with the continued focus on social policy, below.  First, let us consider only the comparison between
 which has been a coherent theme across the last three ex- the two baseline approaches. Coder 1’s scores were signifi-
 changes.  In contrast, the focus of tutorial texts in the No cantly higher than those of Coder 2, as evaluated using a 
 Hierarchy approach does not follow a logical progression. binary logistic regression (p < .001).  Nevertheless, we also
                                                 see a trend for Coder 1 to prefer the Hierarchy method,
 4  Evaluation of Baseline Approaches            while with Coder 2 we see the opposite trend.  However,
                                                 neither of these differences were statistically significant.
  We first evaluated the two baseline approaches, namely
                                                 Thus, based on this initial evaluation, the simple version of
 the Hierarchy (H) approach and the No Hierarchy (NH) 
                                                 the hierarchy approach did not yield a significant improve-
 approach using a corpus containing 163 entries of ideas con-
                                                 ment in feedback generation over the no hierarchy approach.
 tributed from 25 Taiwanese high school students in response
                                                 A reliable improvement over the baseline approach is, how-
 to the question “What are the possible factors that may
                                                 ever, achieved using the optimizations discussed in the re-
 cause a debris flow hazard to happen?”, which was given to
                                                 mainder of the paper, and evaluated in Section 6.
 them as part of an inquiry learning unit in their earth sci-
 ences class. We refer to this as the debris flow hazard ques-
 tion.  For each input entry, the two comment/tutorial selec- 5  Learning Heuristics for Optimizing Feed-
tion methods, Hierarchy (H) and No Hierarchy (NH), were back Selection
executed in order to generate two feedback versions, each An error analysis from our initial evaluation revealed that
consisting of a Comment and a Tutorial. We recruited two the strategy for selecting a more abstract comment to com-
independent judges not directly involved in the research to pensate for a bad match was only effective about half the
rate the quality of the comment and tutorial offered by the time.  In fact, in some cases, the No Hierarchy response was
two different methods in response to each student idea. preferred.  Furthermore, we noticed that using the magni-
Each coder assigned a separate binary score (Accept- tude of semantic similarity as the only basis for determining
able/Not_Acceptable) to each comment and tutorial mes- whether it was better to select a feedback message at a 
sage produced by each of the two methods. In order to pre- higher level of abstraction was not an effective strategy 
vent biasing the judges in favor of one approach or the since the meaning of good versus bad match in terms of
other, the coders were kept blind to the method used in con- semantic similarity score was not stable across idea nodes
structing each message by presenting the feedback produced due to differing amounts of variance in possible phrasings of
by the two approaches as a pair, but in a randomized order. the concepts and variable coverage of alternative phrasings
Note that because of this randomization it was necessary for in the prototype lists. 
each student contribution/feedback pair to be treated as an To capture the regular patterns found in the acceptability 
independent exchange, divorced from its extended context, evaluation of the human raters, we used a decision tree
for the purpose of this evaluation, although this disadvan- learning approach. Note that this is similar in spirit to prior 
tages the evaluation of the context-oriented Hierarchy ap- work on dialogue strategy induction based on usability
proach.                                          questionnaires [Litman et al., 2000].  However, decision tree
  Figure 1 displays the results not only for the two baseline learning is a simpler machine learning approach to the rein-
approaches, but also for the heuristic approaches described forcement learning approach used in Litman’s work, and 


                                            IJCAI-07
                                             1753thus requires far less training data.  We achieved encourag- and 78% (.21 Kappa) for the Hierarchy approach. Despite 
ing results with a minimal amount of training data, specifi- the relatively low level of predictability of the acceptability 
cally 163 examples.  The amount of data required for our judgments, this noisy predictor of acceptability lead to an 
investigation was an amount that can be collected in a single overall increase in acceptability rating of generated feed-
classroom session and evaluated by human raters for the back in their use within the meta-heuristics described and 
acceptability of the generated feedback within 2 working evaluated in the next section. 
days.  The distribution of examples was consistent with the 
natural variation in frequency between the occurrence of the 6  Evaluating Heuristic Approaches to Feed-
alternative ideas represented in the hierarchy.  No attempt back Selection
was made to keep the distribution of ideas equal. 
 The features we selected for our machine learning ap- Because the heuristic methods work by choosing to select 
proach were extracted from the logs recorded by our feed- either the feedback produced with the Hierarchy or No Hi-
back generation algorithm discussed above in Section 3.  erarchy approach depending upon their prediction of which 
These features are based only on information that one would will optimize their score, we can estimate the human rater’s 
expect to have access to in a wide range of possible ap- assessment of their respective feedback quality by selecting 
proaches relying on a domain ontology to maintain coher- for each example the corresponding human rating, either 
ence in the dialogue.  Based on our error analysis of the two from the Hierarchy or No Hierarchy feedback, for each idea 
baseline approaches, we selected as features the idea_id of depending on which would be selected by the heuristic.   
the closest matching node in the hierarchy, the similarity We evaluated the average score for the two meta heuristics 
score based on lexical overlap between the student contribu- using a form of stratified cross-validation as follows:  On 
tion and the best matching prototype explanation in the best each iteration, using 90% of the data we trained a decision 
matching idea node, the feedback_message_id of the se- tree learner separately for the Hierarchy and No Hierarchy 
lected message from the Hierarchy approach, the feed- approaches just as in the evaluation described in the preced-
back_message_id of the selected message from the No Hi- ing section to predict whether the quality of the feedback 
erarchy approach, and a binary variable indicating whether produced with that approach will be rated as high or low.
the similarity score was above average or below average.   We used those trained classifiers to assign predictions to the 
 Because the human coders were not always consistent in feedback produced by the Hierarchy and No Hierarchy ap-
their evaluation of the alternative feedback approaches, we proaches in the 10% of the data set aside as testing data on 
trained the decision tree learner to predict whether the aver- that iteration.  We then evaluated the quality of the feedback 
age acceptability rating of the two judges would be high or produced by the heuristic approaches in the testing data by 
low.  We did this by averaging the acceptability ratings of applying the two meta heuristics to the predicted quality 
the two raters and then assigning instances with an above scores.  Thus, for Meta 1, if the quality prediction for the 
median average score to a target score of High, and all oth- Hierarchy approach was low, we would select the No Hier-
ers to a target score of Low.  We used the J48 implementa- archy feedback, otherwise we would select the hierarchy 
tion of decision tree learning found in the Weka toolkit feedback.  For Meta 2, we would select the No Hierarchy 
[Witten and Frank, 2005].  In order to compensate for the feedback only in the case where the Hierarchy feedback was 
high branch factor in several of the features, we set the bi- predicted to be of low quality and the No Hierarchy feed-
narySplits parameter to true.  Furthermore, we increased the back was predicted to be of high quality.  Because the qual-
minimum number of instances per leaf node to 3 in order to ity of the Hierarchy and No Hierarchy approaches was al-
avoid over-fitting.                             ready rated by the human coders, we could compute the 
 Overall, it was more difficult to predict the acceptability quality of the heuristic approaches based on the already as-
of the tutorial feedback than the comment feedback, partly signed scores.   
because the frequency of an unacceptable tutorial selection Figure 1 shows the success of the two heuristic approaches 
was relatively rare for both feedback generation approaches.  at increasing the overall quality of the generated feedback.  
Furthermore, the acceptability of the hierarchy approach Overall, both for Comment and Tutorial generation, the 
was less predictable than that of the no hierarchy approach, meta-heuristics were more successful than the baseline ap-
partly because the strategy for selecting a more abstract proaches.  We evaluated the statistical significance of this 
feedback message was sometimes counter-productive.  Us- difference separately for Comment and Tutorial generation 
ing cross validation, we were able to achieve a high average in each case using a binary logistic regression where the 
performance for Comment selection, and a somewhat lower outcome variable was the binary acceptability rating and the 
performance for Tutorial selection for both the Hierarchy two independent variables were the feedback generation 
and No Hierarchy approaches.  For Comment selection, we approach and the rater.  In this statistical model, the accept-
achieved a percent accuracy of 84% (.67 Kappa) for the No ability rating of each rater for each feedback approach on 
Hierarchy approach and 80% (.61 Kappa) for the Hierarchy each example student contribution was treated as a separate 
approach.  For Tutorial selection, we achieved a percent data point.  Specifically for Comment selection, the propor-
accuracy of 83% (.51 Kappa) for the No Hierarchy approach tion of acceptable to non-acceptable feedback messages was 


                                           IJCAI-07
                                            1754