                                          It’s About Time

                                    Neil Madden and Brian Logan
                                       University of Nottingham
                       School of Computer Science and Information Technology
                        Jubilee Campus, Triumph Road, Nottingham, NG8 1BB.
                                        {nem,bsl}@cs.nott.ac.uk

1  Introduction                                       rules that are used to spot patterns in input data, and draw
A number of experimental studies, e.g., [Geldard and Sher- conclusions based on these patterns. Conclusions are writ-
rick, 1972; Kolers and von Gr¨unau, 1976] have suggested tentoanoutput bus that transmits them to the input buffers
that interpretations of events can override direct sensory evi- of other processes. In this way, data can be abstracted as it
dence. For example, for some sequences of perceptual events progresses through the network of connected processes, with
of short duration, the interpretation of individual events in the different abstractions persisting for different lengths of time.
sequence depends on the characteristics of the sequence as We envisage that processes further up a chain (further from
a whole. This ‘backwards referral in time’, in which later the initial percepts) would have buffers spanning a larger du-
events inﬂuence the perception of earlier events, is difﬁcult to ration of time than the lower level processes, allowing the
account for within a serial model of cognition without incor- system as a whole to remember more abstract conclusions,
porating implausible delays (basically delaying sensory expe- while most of the details are forgotten.
rience “until all the data is in”).                     The bus connection architecture allows a single conclusion
  Dennett and Kinsbourne [1991; 1992] have proposed the from a low-level process to be delivered to multiple higher-
Multiple Drafts theory as a way of modelling such cognitive level processes, allowing for multiple drafts to be formed
processes. The Multiple Drafts theory is based on a paral- based on the same data, potentially producing different con-
lel, distributed view of cognition, in which large numbers of clusions or interpretations.
processes work independently on multiple interpretations of
data simultaneously. These are the multiple drafts. Eventu- 3 The Cutaneous “Rabbit” Model
ally a single draft may become dominant, but no draft is ever We have used the architecture outlined above to model a num-
entirely safe from revision.                          ber of perceptual phenomena. In this section we brieﬂy de-
                                                      scribe one such model: the cutaneous “rabbit”. Geldard and
2  The Temporal Abstraction Network                   Sherrick’s cutaneous “rabbit” experiments [1972; 1977] illus-
                                                      trate a perceptual phenomenon called sensory saltation.In
   Architecture                                       the experiments a series of short ‘taps’ (of about 2ms dura-
We present a cognitive architecture for perceptual processing tion) were delivered to different locations on the arm of a
which draws on aspects of the Multiple Drafts theory. Our subject — for instance, ﬁve taps at the wrist, followed by ﬁve
Temporal Abstraction Network (TAN) architecture consists between wrist and elbow, and then ﬁve more at the elbow.
of a set of processes, each with its own state, represented by a Subjects reported that the taps had been more or less evenly
time-limited buffer, along with a procedure for drawing infer- spaced along their arm — as if a little rabbit was hopping up
ences based on the current contents of the buffer. These pro- the arm. Variation in the interval between taps (inter-stimulus
cesses are connected together via a bus architecture, allowing interval, ISI) causes differences in the perceived effect. If
the conclusions drawn by one process to form the inputs to the ISI exceeds approximately 200 ms the taps are perceived
other processes (including themselves), see Figure 1. at their correct locations. With an ISI of 20 ms or less, some
  Each process has an input buffer with speciﬁed capacity taps ‘disappear’, with say 15 taps being perceived as just 6.
and duration. Duration is the maximum length of time ele- Our model aggregates information about individual taps
ments can remain in the buffer before they are forgotten. Ca- into information about a sequence of taps (see Figure 1), al-
pacity is the number of items that may be present in the buffer lowing the agent to reason about and predict the behaviour of
at any given time. The duration and capacity of a buffer are an object over time. At the lowest level, the model processes
independent of each other, e.g., a buffer may have large ca- sensory information to determine the presence of a single tap.
pacity but short duration or small capacity but longer dura- This process has a buffer duration of about 20 ms and a ca-
tion. New inputs are added to the buffer in ﬁrst in ﬁrst out pacity of just a single element (in this case, the ‘element’
fashion—items arriving at a full buffer cause the oldest items is actually a collection of low-level data). If more than one
in the buffer to be overwritten.                      tap occurs within this time-frame, then the newer tap simply
  Each inference process also contains a set of production overwrites any previous tap. This is consistent with the ex-              'Rabbit' run       Two taps at wrist    Drafts theory. However these models generally involve some
                                                      serial component where “everything comes together”. For
            Inference Engine     Inference Engine     instance, in CopyCat [Mitchell, 1993] multiple parallel pro-
                                                      cesses operate in a stochastic manner on a single workspace,
                                                                                               [
               Buffer               Buffer            creating a single solution to a problem; in EPIC Kieras and
                                                      Meyer, 1997] there is a single central executive which acts to
                                        Bus           coordinate the parallel processes.

                          Tap run from s   to   e    (n    taps) In contrast, our Temporal Abstraction Network architec-
                                                      ture has no global coordinating or integrating facility. How-

                    Inference Engine                  ever, abandoning a single central executive process does not
    Feedback
    Loop                                              mean that information cannot be brought together locally for
                                                      integration. The TAN architecture is capable of local (serial)
                       Buffer                         integration while maintaining multiple simultaneous drafts:

                                        Bus           information ﬂow can diverge as easily as converge. This
                                                      approach is in contrast to that of Dennett and Kinsbourne
                          Tap at position, p          who suggest that the only alternative to the Cartesian the-
                                                      atre is a strictly parallel architecture, where local integration
                     Inference Engine                 is replaced by a more chaotic Pandemonium approach (e.g.,
                                                      [Kinsbourne, 1994]).
                                                        In future work we plan to concentrate on extending the ar-
                        Buffer
                                                      chitecture to account for action selection, as well as expand-
                                                      ing on the details of how reports are generated. One interest-
           Low-level sensory data
                                                      ing area for future research will be to look at Libet’s contro-
   Figure 1: Network for cutaneous “rabbit” experiment. versial experimental results [Libet, 1985] on voluntary action.
                                                      References
perimental results which indicate that taps occurring within
                                                      [                         ]
about 20 ms of each other are merged with the location of the Dennett and Kinsbourne, 1992 Daniel C. Dennett and Mar-
newer tap dominating.                                    cel Kinsbourne. Time and the observer: The where and
  The intermediate level processing has a buffer of duration when of consciousness in the brain. Behavioral and Brain
of 200 ms and a capacity of 2 elements. When a tap arrives at Sciences, 15(2):183–247, 1992.
an empty buffer (which can happen at most once every 20 ms) [Dennett, 1991] Daniel C. Dennett. Consciousness Ex-
a new aggregate conclusion is generated, taking the position plained. Penguin, London, 1991.
of the tap as the start and end position of the ‘run’, and initial- [Geldard and Sherrick, 1972] F. A. Geldard and C. E. Sher-
ising the count of taps in this run. This conclusion is passed to rick. The cutaneous ‘rabbit’: A perceptual illusion. Sci-
the output bus, where it is transmitted to other processes, but ence, 178:178–179, 1972.
also, via a feedback loop, back to the input bus of the inter-
                                                      [            ]
mediate level process. If a subsequent tap arrives before this Geldard, 1977 F. A. Geldard. Cutaneous stimulis, vibra-
                                                                         Journal of Investigative Dermatology
aggregate fact expires from the buffer (i.e., within 200 ms) tory and saltatory.                        ,
then a new conclusion is formed which adjusts the end point 69:83–87, 1977.
of the run to the new tap position and increases the tap count [Kieras and Meyer, 1997] David E. Kieras and David E.
by 1. The buffer duration ensures that any gap of 200 ms or Meyer. An overview of the EPIC architecture for cognition
more causes the previous ‘run’ to be forgotten, and thus any and performance with application to human-computer in-
subsequent tap will be perceived as the start of a new run, teraction. Human-Computer Interaction, 12(4):391–438,
which is consistent with the experimental data.          1997.
  At the highest level of processing (top left in the Figure), a [Kinsbourne, 1994] Marcel Kinsbourne. Models of con-
process with a two element buffer detects the end of a tap run sciousness: Serial or parallel in the brain? In M. S. Gaz-
by comparing the start position of sequential tap-run inputs. zaniga, editor, The Cognitive Neurosciences, pages 1321–
It is the output from this process that is eventually used to 1330. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1994.
generate a report of the experience. It is important to note
                                                      [Kolers and von Gr¨unau, 1976] P. A. Kolers and M. von
that although the intermediate-level buffer has a duration of
                                                         Gr¨unau. Shape and color in apparent motion. Vision Re-
200 ms it is not necessary to delay conclusions for 200 ms.
                                                         search, 16:329–335, 1976.
Instead, the process produces a conclusion whenever a new
tap is felt (at most, once every 20 ms), and these conclusions [Libet, 1985] Benjamin Libet. Unconscious cerebral initia-
can be acted upon immediately.                           tive and the role of conscious will in voluntary action. Be-
                                                         havioral and Brain Sciences, 8:529–566, 1985.
4  Discussion                                         [Mitchell, 1993] Melanie Mitchell. Analogy-Making as Per-
There are a number of parallel models of cognition (e.g. ception: a computer model. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
CopyCat, EPIC) which have some similarities to the Multiple 1993.