             Using AI and simulations to design and control space habitats
                                  David Kortenkamp      and  Scott Bell
                                      NASA Johnson Space Center
                                       Metrica Inc. and SKT Inc.
                                  1101 NASA Road 1 Mail Stop ER2
                                           Houston TX 77058
                       kortenkamp@jsc.nasa.gov and scott.e.bell1@jsc.nasa.gov

                    Abstract

    This paper describes a dynamic simulation of a
    space habitat. The simulation is conﬁgurable and
    controllable via external programs. Several groups
    have been using the simulation to study the impact
    of artiﬁcial intelligence tools on space habitat de-
    sign and control. We outline some of the AI chal-
    lenges and invite the AI community to use our sim-
    ulation to further NASA’s exploration goals.

1  Introduction
NASA has embarked on a new exploration strategy that will
return people to the moon and eventually to Mars [National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2004]. Two key as-
pects of this strategy are sustainability and autonomy. The
former means that these will not be single-shot missions, but
a continued, evolving presence by humans outside of low- Figure 1: The various modules that comprise a habitat life
earth orbit. The latter means that the missions will be more support system
self-reliant and less dependent on a standing army of earth-
based controllers. Achieving both of these aspects requires
signiﬁcant advances in intelligent software systems. In this 2 BioSim
paper we present an integrated simulation of a space habitat BioSim is a discrete-event simulation of a space habitat [Ko-
that allows for testing of artiﬁcial intelligence approaches. rtenkamp and Bell, 2003]. Each of the life support com-
                                                      ponents of a habitat are modeled as processes that consume
1.1  Space habitats                                   certain resources and produce other resources. For example,
The function of a space habitat is to provide a livable envi- the water recovery system model consumes dirty water and
ronment to the crew. A typical space habitat will have sub- power and produces potable water. Crew members are also
systems that provide oxygen and remove carbon dioxide; that modeled – they consume and produce resources just as other
provide potable water; that provide food; that remove solid life support components. All of the components, including
waste; and that provide power. In addition, a biomass subsys- crew members and crops, if any, exist in one or several envi-
tem may supply crops that can be turned into food and also ronments that consists of a volume of mixed gases. Figure 1
help with other life support functions. Figure 1 shows such shows the different models that compose our simulation and
a habitat conﬁguration. Many of the subsystems impact each the resources that pass between the models. BioSim is imple-
other creating complex interactions and dependencies. Since mented in Java.
the cost of placing materials on a lunar or planetary surface
is so high, minimizing the consumables required to provide 2.1 Conﬁguring BioSim
life support functions is important. Recycling or regenerating BioSim can be conﬁgured to simulate a wide variety of dif-
resources, often achieved by using biological-based subsys- ferent habitats. This includes the number, genders and ages
tems, adds additional complexity but reduces overall habitat of crew members, the size of the habitat environments, atmo-
mass. In the next section we present a dynamic simulation of spheric pressure, capacities of tanks, initial levels of consum-
such an integrated, closed habitat system.            ables, processing capacity of life support modules and manyother variables. Initial setup is conﬁgured via an XML ﬁle faults in the habitat and devising a recovery strategy. Gautam
that is read in when BioSim is started.               Biswas at Vanderbilt has been using BioSim to test model-
                                                      based approaches to fault diagnosis [Biswas et al., 2004]. An-
2.2  Controlling BioSim                               other research area is distributed control, for example, deter-
BioSim has sensors and actuators that connect to various con- mining whether market-based approaches are valid for habitat
trollable elements and allow for real-time control. Sensors control and ﬁnding what advantages they provide. Distributed
read simulation values, such as oxygen levels in the environ- control architecture will need to look at integration of control
ment. Actuators set ﬂow-rates of resources between compo- across the various subsystems of the habitat and integration
nents. Higher level actuators control more abstract variables of different artiﬁcial intelligence techniques.
such as the crew schedule, extravehicular activities (EVAs),
crop harvesting, crop planting and equipment maintenance. 5 Conclusion
Crop management is a particular focus in BioSim and up to With a renewed mission to head back to the moon and then
nine different crops can be planted and harvested. Each has to Mars, NASA needs the artiﬁcial intelligence community’s
their own model for oxygen production, carbon dioxide con- help in achieving its exploration mission objectives in a cost
sumption, water consumption and food production. Sensors effective and safe manner. BioSim provides a portable testbed
and actuators are accessible via CORBA method calls so that for researchers to test their ideas and demonstrate relevance to
control programs can be created in most programming lan- NASA. BioSim also provides a baseline in which a standard-
guages and connected as clients to the BioSim server. We ized set of conﬁgurations, malfunctions and metrics can be
have deﬁned BioSim control methods that let you advance established and used to compare control approaches. BioSim
BioSim in one hour increments or advance BioSim until the can be obtained from http://www.traclabs.com/biosim.
mission has ended. Malfunctions can be injected into any of
the components of BioSim at any time.                 References
                                                      [Biswas et al., 2004] Gautam Biswas, Eric Jan Manders,
3  Habitat design                                        John Ramirez, Nagabhusan Mahadevan, and Sherif Able-
One use of artiﬁcial intelligence tools is in the design of an wahed. Online model-based diagnosis to support au-
optimal habitat for a speciﬁc exploration mission. As an ex- tonomous operation of an advanced life support system.
ample, let’s take a 90 day lunar mission with a crew of four Habitation: International Journal for Human Support Re-
and one eight hour EVA per day. The goal is to ﬁnd an opti- search, 10(1), 2004.
mal habitat conﬁguration that meets those mission objectives, [Bonasso et al., 2003] R. Peter Bonasso, David Kortenkamp,
i.e., provides sufﬁcient life support to the crew. A habitat and Carroll Thronesbery. Intelligent control of a water re-
conﬁguration includes sizing each of the life support com- covery system. AI Magazine, 24(1), 2003.
ponents (e.g., water processing, air processing, crops, power,
etc.), sizing tank capacities, deciding on initial levels of con- [Klein et al., 2004] Theresa Klein, Devika Subramanian,
sumables, sizing the air volume of the crew habitat, etc. An David Kortenkamp, and Scott Bell. Using reinforcement
optimal conﬁguration is deﬁned as one that meets the mission learning to control life support systems. In Proceedings In-
goals with minimum mass. We have deﬁned mass values for  ternational Conference on Environmental Systems, 2004.
all of the variables in a habitat conﬁguration. Essentially, this [Kortenkamp and Bell, 2003] David Kortenkamp and Scott
is a search through a large space of possible habitat designs Bell. Simulating advanced life support systems for in-
to ﬁnd an optimal solution. Many artiﬁcial intelligence search tegrated controls research. In Proceedings International
techniques would be applicable, including genetic algorithms Conference on Environmental Systems, 2003.
and reinforcement learning. Several groups are already using [Kortenkamp et al., 2005] David Kortenkamp, Scott Bell,
BioSim to experiment in this area [Kortenkamp et al., 2005; and Luis Rodriguez. Simulating lunar habitats and activ-
Wu and Garibay, 2004].                                   ities to derive system requirements. In Proceedings 1st
                                                         AIAA Space Exploration Conference, 2005.
4  Habitat control                                    [Muscettola et al., 2005] Nicola Muscettola, Charles Fry,
A second use of artiﬁcial intelligence tools is the control David Kortenkamp, and Scott Bell. Planner-based control
of the habitat. That is, given a predeﬁned habitat conﬁgu- of advanced life support systems. In to appear in Proceed-
ration develop a control policy that optimizes resource uti- ings International Conference on Environmental Systems,
lization and reduces buffer sizes. The control policy adjusts 2005.
resource ﬂow rates, crew schedules, crop planting and har- [National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2004]
vesting schedules and EVA schedules to meet mission ob-  National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Ex-
jectives with minimum resource utilization. Habitat con- ploration systems interim strategy. Technical Report
trol will involve dealing with real-time control issues such NP-2004-07-362-HQ, NASA Headquarters, 2004.
as water production, air production, etc. as well as plan-
                                                      [                   ]
ning and scheduling around time and resource constraints. Wu and Garibay, 2004 Annie S. Wu and Ivan I Garibay.
Several groups are looking at different approaches to this Genetic algorithm optimization of life support system con-
problem [Bonasso et al., 2003; Muscettola et al., 2005;  trol. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernet-
Klein et al., 2004]. Habitat control also involves diagnosing ics, 34(3), 2004.