            CONDITIONAL VISUOMOTOR LEARNING AND VIABILITY THEORY 
             Fadila Hadj-Bouziane1*, Hélène Frankowska2, Martine Meunier1 and Driss Boussaoud1 
         
               1. INCM-CNRS, 31 Chemin Jospeh Aiguier, 13402 Marseille, France. Email: boussaoud@incm.cnrs-mrs.fr, 
                                                meunier@incm.cnrs-mrs.fr 
             2. CNRS, CREA, Ecole Polytechnique, 1 rue Descartes, 75005 Paris, France. Email:franko@shs.polytechnique.fr 
             * Present address: NIMH, Laboratory of Brain and Cognition, Bethesda, MD, USA. Email: hadjf@mail.nih.gov 
         
        Key words: Basal ganglia, striatum, visuomotor learning, viability theory, electrophysiology, monkey, learning strategy 
        Content areas: rule learning, reinforcement learning  
         
        Address for correspondence: boussaoud@incm.cnrs-mrs.fr 
         
         
         
                            Abstract                        Conditional associative learning: behavioral 
         
        In conditional visuomotor learning, several arbitrary and neuronal data 
                                                             
        associations between visual cues and motor responses have The striatum, the larger structure composing the basal 
        to be learned by trial and error at the same time. Monkeys, ganglia, constitutes a key neural substrate for arbitrary 
        as humans, do not achieve this task by randomly trying each visuo-motor learning (see e.g. Hadj-Bouziane et al., 2003 
        possible association. Rather, they use a strategy that for review).  Hence, in a recent study, we recorded single 
        organizes sequentially the acquisition of individual cell activity in the striatum of two rhesus monkeys during 
        stimulus-response associations. Accordingly, neuronal learning of a conditional visuomotor task that required to 
        recordings in the monkey striatum, the main basal ganglia associate complex visual cues with joystick movements 
        structure, reveals two forms of plasticity during learning, a (Hadj-Bouziane & Boussaoud, 2003). The animals searched, 
        transient one that could constitute the neuronal correlate of by trial and error, for the correct joystick movement 
        the strategy, and a long-lasting one that could reflect the associated with each of four visual cues. The four 
        slow neuronal implementation of individual associations.  associations comprising a set were presented concurrently, 
        Existing models of basal ganglia function based on  that is, each appeared once, in randomized order, within 
        reinforcement learning cannot account for this dual process. each block of four consecutive trials. 
        Hence, we developed a mathematical model of conditional  
        visuomotor learning, inspired from viability theory, which Behavior. Although the four associations were presented 
        implements both the formation of individual associations concurrently within each block of 4 trials, monkeys learned 
        and the use of strategies to organize learning.     them sequentially, focusing on one association at a time in 
                                                            order to decrease the memory load. The use of strategies to 
        Introduction                                        organize learning was also observed in humans in a separate 
         
        Studies of arbitrary visuomotor learning in laboratory study (Hadj-Bouziane et al., 2004).  
        situations generally use several stimuli taken from the same  
        category (colors, pictures, positions etc.) and an equivalent Neuronal activity: Neuronal activity in the striatum showed 
        number of motor responses (hand postures, lever     two main types of modulations during learning. One was 
        displacements, etc.). Subjects are required to learn by trial transient, consisting in a time-limited increase in activity 
        and error, conditional rules such as 'if green go right, if red during early learning stages. The other was long-lasting, 
        go left, if blue, go up', etc. This requires on-line monitoring consisting in a gradual increment of activity over the entire 
        of the associations already tried and of their outcome course of the learning session. The former could underlie 
        (correct or incorrect). With large sets of items and actions to the development and use of learning strategies, whereas the 
        associate, this monitoring represents a high memory load, latter could be responsible for long term storage of the 
        which can be decreased by using specific learning strategies.  individual associations. 
                                                             
                                                             


PDF créé avec la version d'essai pdfFactory www.gs2i.fr/fineprint/pdffactory.htm        Mathematical model: the striatum and viability      changes in the striatum, and 3) viability theory. This model 
        theory                                              complements existing ones, by taking into account the 
                                                            strategies, viewed as a way to determine the boundaries of 
        Several not mutually exclusive computational models of the learning space. In our model the learning strategies 
        basal ganglia have been proposed in the literature (e.g. Houk artificially reduce the dimension of learning space (number 
        et al., 1995; Barto, 1995). Many of these models use the of actions or number of images), a process that simplifies 
        reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm. For learning the task. At the neuronal level, we suggest that the strategy 
        associations by RL algorithms one would need to build a choice may be carried out by the transient activities, 
        cost function adapted to this particular learning task and whereas the boundary encodings may be accomplished 
        then to find a way to maximize this function.  However, as using the rules proposed in Bar-Gad et al. (2003), and local 
        described above, learning arbitrary visuomotor associations analysis done using the reinforcement signal. We thus 
        is not based on random selection of a behavioral response, propose an additional role of the basal ganglia, that of 
        but rather implies strategies. Mathematically the learning of reducing the dimension of learning space. 
        associations leads to the so called target problem of control  
        theory and there are different tools (cf. viability theory and Acknowledgements  
                                                             
        capture basin algorithms, time optimal control, adaptive This work was supported by the French Ministry of 
        control) that allow to find policies theoretically and Research (ACI Cognition et traitement de l’information), 
        construct solutions numerically. The learning of policies and by the CNRS (PI TCAN), and a Bettencourt-Schuller 
        leading to a target can be derived from viability theory foundation fellowship for FHB. 
        (Aubin 1991). Instead of a repetitive improvement of the  
        cumulative reward to make it as close as possible to a References 
        maximum (as it is done in RL algorithms), the viability   
        kernel algorithms are based on the systematic exploration of Aubin JP. Viability Theory, Birkhauser, Boston, Basel, 
        boundaries of sets. Indeed when we investigate the  Berlin, 1991. 
        boundary of a set, instead of the set itself, we reduce the Barto A. Adaptive critics and the basal ganglia. In Models of 
        dimension of the problem (Cardaliaguet et al., 1999). We Information Processing in the Basal Ganglia, Eds. Houk 
        propose that the use of strategies such as the sequential J.C., Davis J.L., and Beiser D.G., MIT Press, Cambridge, 
        strategy evoked above correspond to investigation of MA, pages 215-232, 1995. 
        boundaries. From the mathematical view point the viability Bar-Gad I, Morris G., and Bergman H. Information 
        and capture basin algorithms are based on elimination: processing, dimensionality reduction and reinforcement 
        taking out points from which it is impossible to get to a learning in the basal gangla. Progress in Neurobiology, 71: 
        target and in the same time constructing the winning 439-473, 2003. 
        strategies for Capture Basin (e.g. Frankowska &    Cardaliaguet P, Quincampoix M and Saint-Pierre P. Set-
        Quincampoix, 1991). This elimination is based on a local valued numerical methods for optimal control and differential 
        analysis of constraints. Instead of applying exploration type games, in Stochastic and differential games. Theory and 
        arguments and trying different controls from the same initial numerical methods, In Annals of the International Society of 
        condition, the viability kernel algorithms consider only Dynamical Games, Birkhauser, pages 177-247, 1999. 
        critical points, that is the boundary of the set of constraints Frankowska H and Quincampoix M. Viability kernels of 
        and check which points of the boundary are not viable.  differential inclusions with constraints: algorithm and 
                                                            applications. J. Math. Systems, Estimation and Control, 
        Summary and conclusions                             1:371-388, 1991. 
                                                           Hadj-Bouziane F and Boussaoud D. Activity of neurons in the 
        Learning arbitrary visuo-motor associations implies to learn striatum during learning of arbitrary visuo-motor 
        the correct stimulus-movement associations and then to associations. Exp Brain Res, 18:269-277, 2003. 
        store them in long term memory. One has to learn by trial Hadj-Bouziane F, Meunier M and Boussaoud D. Conditional 
        and error to select the appropriate movement according to visuo-motor learning in primates: a key role for the basal 
        the stimulus presented. During early stages of learning, ganglia. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 97:567-579, 2003. 
        processes such as discrimination, recognition and  Hadj-Bouziane F, Benatru I, Klinger H, Brousolle E, 
        memorization of the stimuli are required, but also  Boussaoud D and Meunier M. Conditional associative 
        monitoring of events and behavioral outcome.  Learning learning in advanced Parkinson’s disease. Soc. Neurosci. 
        time can be reduced by the use of particular strategies such Abstr. 710.4, 2004. 
        as focusing on a single cue at a time or repeating a motor Houk JC, Adams JL and Barto AG. A model of how the basal 
        response until correct.                             ganglia generate and use reward signals that predict 
        We propose a computational model based on 1) these  reinforcement. In JC Houk, JL Davis and DG Beiser (Eds.), 
        behavioral data showing the use learning strategies, 2) the Cambridge: MIT Press Models of information processing in 
        possible correlates found in the dynamics of neuronal the basal ganglia, pages 249-270, 1995. 


PDF créé avec la version d'essai pdfFactory www.gs2i.fr/fineprint/pdffactory.htm