                      Measuring the Cost of Robotic Communication

                            Avi Rosenfeld, Gal A Kaminka, Sarit Kraus∗
                                    Department of Computer Science
                                       Bar Ilan University, Israel
                                   {rosenfa, galk, sarit}@cs.biu.ac.il


1  Introduction                                         We also are able to create adaptive coordination methods
Groups of robots are likely to accomplish certain tasks more that switch between different communication methods based
quickly and robustly than single robots, [Jager and Nebel, on each robot’s estimate of its coordination cost. When ro-
2001]. Many robotic domains such as robotic search and bots detect no resource conﬂicts, it decreases an estimate of
                                                              V                  W
rescue, vacuuming, and waste cleanup are characterized by this cost, , by a certain amount down. When a robot senses
                                                                                   V
limited operating spaces where robots are likely to collide. a conﬂict is occurring, the value of is increased by a certain
                                                             W                 V
In order to maintain group cohesion under such conditions, amount up. Thus, the value is constantly in ﬂux based on
                                                                                                       V
some type of information transfer is likely to be useful be- the robot’s perception of its environment. The values for
tween members of the team. This is especially true as ro- are used to switch between a set of communication schemes
botic domains are typically fraught with dynamics and un- methods ranging from those with little cost overhead such as
certainty such as hardware failures, changing environmental those with no communication, to more robust methods with
conditions, and noisy sensors.                        higher overheads such as the localized and centralized meth-
  Questions such as what to communicate and to whom have ods. This approach is novel in that robots individually mea-
been the subject of recent study [Sen et al., 1994], [Jager and sure these values online during task execution and can thus
Nebel, 2001], [Tews, July 2001]. At times, forms of implicit adapt their communication method as needed in response to
coordination have been shown to allow agents better adapt- unforseen changes such as group or environment changes.
ability, robustness and scalability qualities [Sen et al., 1994]. We proceeded to implement variations of three types of
In theory, the lack of communication allows such methods to communication schemes – implicit, localized, and centralized
be implemented on simpler robots. A second series of ap- methods. In our implementation, all communication types are
proaches attempt to improve group performance by having similar in that they resolve collisions by mutually repelling
robots locally communicate information [Jager and Nebel, once they sensed a teammate within a certain safe distance ε,
2001]. A third type of approach involves the use of some which we set to one robot diameter. Once robots came within
type of central planner [Tews, July 2001]. We believe that this distance, they acted as they were in danger of colliding
each type of communication framework is best suited for dif- and used one of the resolution behaviors involving various
ferent environmental conditions. A mechanism is needed to types of communication schemes. Different types of commu-
match the proper system to the given environment. This pa- nication were used to determine the length of time a robot
per attempts to provide such a framework with its use of a would repel after this point.
coordination cost measure.                              We used the Teambots [Balch, 2000] simulator to imple-
  We measure all coordination costs including the time and ment these types of communication within groups of Nomad
energy spent on coordination. We use this measure to eval- N150 robots. We measured how many pucks (out of 60) were
uate the cost of communication. This result also allows us delivered to the goal region within 9 minutes by groups of 2 –
to create robots that alter their communication scheme when 25 robots using each communication type. We repeated each
faced with dynamic domain conditions.                 trial 100 times for statistical signiﬁcance.
2  Talking the Right Amount                             Within the implicit method, no time or energy was lost due
                                                      to communication. This method assumed that robots were
We model every robot’s coordination cost Ci, as a factor that able to autonomously compute their distance from the home
impacts the entire group’s productivity. This cost includes the base. Once robots detected an impending collision, they used
time and energy used during communication and also proac- a function of this distance (scalar distance * 5) as the time to
tive and / or reactive collision resolution behaviors. We found repel from its teammate(s). For these robots, the coordination
that the use of communication, or lack thereof, can impact the cost was equal to the time or the energy spent in these repul-
time or energy used in the second type of behaviors.  sion behaviors. In our ﬁrst set of experiments we measured
  ∗This material is based upon work supported in part by NSF grant the time spent in these behaviors. In our second set of ex-
#IIS-0222914, BSF grant #2002401, and the Israeli Ministry of Sci- periments, we allocated each robot 500 units of fuel. We as-
ence and Technology. Sarit Kraus is also afﬁliated with UMIACS. sumed most of the fuel was used by the robots to move, with asmaller amount (1 unit per 100 seconds) used to maintain ba-
sic sensors and processing capabilities. Our coordination cost
involved the amount of fuel used for resolving coordination
issues while robots engaged in repulsion behaviors.
  Our localized method initiated communication only be-
tween the robots within the ε distance. After this event, these
group members would exchange information above their rel-
ative distances from their typical target, their home base. The
closer robot then moved forward, while the other robot re-
pelled for a ﬁxed period of 20 seconds. In our ﬁrst set of
experiments, we measured the time these robots engaged in
communication and repulsion behaviors. We assumed that
1/5 of a second was needed for this localized information
transfer. In our second group of experiments, we measured
our coordination cost as a function of energy spent on co-  Figure 1: Adaptation Using Coordination Costs
ordination. We again calculated this amount as a function of
the distance traveled during repulsion activities with a smaller V exceeded a certain threshold. After this point, that robot
amount on sensors. In addition, we assumed each robot spent broadcasted which method it was switching to and all group
0.3 units of fuel per localized communication exchange. members would change in kind and reinitialize their cost es-
  Our ﬁnal method, Latency, used a centralized server with timates V to this new value. Figure 1 shows the results from
a database of the location of all robots. Within this method, our time based adaptive method. We conducted the two tailed
one of two events triggered communication. First, as with t-test to conﬁrm the statistical signiﬁcance of for our adaptive
                                          ε
the localized method, robots dropping within the distance time and energy methods (not shown). In both cases we found
initiated communication by reporting its position, only in this p-values well below the 0.05 conﬁdence interval. We believe
case with a centralized server. The server then reported back the success of these approaches was based on the ability of
a repel value based on its relative position to other teammates. these method to switch their basic communication strategy
However, in order for the server to store a good estimate of as the probability of collisions vacillated. This enabled these
the positions of all robots, a second, often more frequent type robots to improve their productivity in a signiﬁcant fashion
of communication was needed where each robot reported its regardless of the group size.
position to the server. We used the same time and energy
usage parameters from the localized experiment to measure 4 Conclusion and Future Work
the cost of coordination.                             This work demonstrates how coordination costs can model
3  Analyzing the Cost of Communication                the relative effective of robotic communication methods. Our
                                                      measure focuses on the time and fuel spent communicating
Our results support our claim that the best method of commu- and resolving collisions. It facilitates effective comparison
nication does change with domain conditions. Figure 1 con- between implicit, localized and centralized communication
tains the results from the time based coordination cost trials. methods. Using this information we are able to select the
The X-axis represents the group size, and the Y-axis the num- most effective communication scheme for a given domain for
ber of pucks successfully retrieved within each group. The a group of robots. We are even able to dynamically switch
implicit approach worked best in small groups where colli- between these methods in a quick, online fashion. For future
sions were less likely. In medium sized groups, the localized work, we believe that additional expansions to our measure
approach worked better. As collisions became frequent, the will facilitate comparison and adaptation even within hetero-
large amount of communication inherent in the centralized geneous groups of robots with diverse qualities.
method became justiﬁed, and this group performed signiﬁ-
cantly better. In these experiments, we found that a latency References
time of 1 second yield the highest productivity from various [Balch, 2000] Tucker Balch. www.teambots.org, 2000.
latency variations we studied.                        [Jager and Nebel, 2001] Markus Jager and Bernhard Nebel.
  When comparing equally sized groups, the team’s produc- Decentralized collision avoidance, deadlock detection, and
tivity strongly negatively correlated to its time and energy co- deadlock resolution for multiple mobile robots. In IROS,
ordination costs. On average over groups of 2 – 25 robots, pages 1213–1219, 2001.
we found a high statistical correlation of -0.96 between these
groups’ productivity and their total coordination cost. In our [Sen et al., 1994] Sandip Sen, Mahendra Sekaran, and John
equivalent energy experiment, we found a correlation value Hale. Learning to coordinate without sharing information.
of -0.95. This supports our hypothesis that coordination costs In Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on Ar-
measure based on time or energy can effectively model the tiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 426–431, Seattle, WA, 1994.
most effective communication method in groups.        [Tews, July 2001] A. Tews. Adaptive multi-robot coordina-
  Our measure was useful for communication adaptation as tion for highly dynamic environments. In CIMCA 2001,
well. In our implementation, adaptation was triggered once a July 2001.
robot’s autonomously measured coordination cost threshold,