                     Explaining    preferences     with  argument     positions    ∗
                          Sylvie Doutre  Trevor Bench-Capon     Paul E. Dunne
                                    Department  of Computer  Science
                                         University of Liverpool
                                           Liverpool L69  7ZF
                                            United Kingdom
                                       {sd,tbc,ped}@csc.liv.ac.uk

                    Abstract                          arguments will have different audiences, and what is accept-
                                                      able to one audience may be unacceptable to another. Dis-
    When  deciding what to do agents must choose      agreements are represented in [Dung, 1995] by the presence
    among alternative actions and different agents may of multiple acceptable positions. In [Bench-Capon, 2003],
    make different choices according to what they wish the disagreements are explained within an extended argumen-
    to achieve in the light of their preferences and val- tation framework which explicitly relates arguments to values
    ues. It cannot be assumed, however, that agents   and explicitly represents audiences in terms of their prefer-
    have a conscious understanding of their value pref- ences over values.
    erences independent of the reasoning situations in  While a framework such as that of [Bench-Capon, 2003]
    which they engage. In this paper we consider an ex- can be used to explain disagreements between different au-
    tension to a generic framework for reasoning about diences in terms of their different ranking of values, it does
    arguments justifying actions in terms of values in not explain how these value rankings are formed. A third
    which the preferences amongst values emerge from  feature of practical reasoning (as indicated in [Searle, 2001])
    the reasoning process.                            is that we cannot presuppose that people bring to a debate a
                                                      knowledge of their value preferences. It means that the value
1  Introduction                                       preferences should emerge from the construction of a position
                                                      instead of being taken as an input.
We are concerned with practical reasoning - reasoning about Finally, practical reasoners may not be equally open to all
what to do in a given situation. Such reasoning is quite differ- arguments: they may have certain arguments that they wish
ent from reasoning about beliefs, and has a number of char- to include in their position (some desired arguments), certain
acteristic features which any account must respect.   arguments that they wish to exclude (rejected arguments),
  First, arguments justifying actions must be considered in and they may be indifferent to the status of the remainder
the context of other related arguments: arguments can only (the optional arguments). For example, a politician form-
be accepted if due consideration to arguments attacking and ing a political programme may recognise that raising taxation
defending them is given. In a set of arguments relating to an is electorally inexpedient and so must reject any arguments
issue - which we call a debate - the acceptability of an argu- with the conclusion that taxes should be raised from the man-
ment relies on it forming part of a coherent subset of such ar- ifesto, while desiring that arguments justifying actions bring-
guments able to defend itself against all attacking arguments. ing about core objectives are present: other arguments are
We call such a coherent subset a position. The construction optional, and acceptable if they enable this. Such a distinc-
of a position and related problems of acceptability have been tion between arguments has been taken into account in the
explored in AI through the use of argumentation frameworks, construction of positions for Dung’s framework by [Cayrol et
e.g. [Dung, 1995; Bench-Capon, 2003]. Such reasoning can al., 2002], but not for that of [Bench-Capon, 2003].
be naturally explored through the use of a dialogue in which It is an account of these two last phenomena in the [Bench-
an argument is attacked and defended [Cayrol et al., 2003; Capon, 2003] framework which is the objective of our work.
Dunne and Bench-Capon, 2003].
  Second, debates about which action is best to perform must 2 Deﬁnition of a position
permit rational disagreement. Whereas the truth of facts may To accommodate the last feature of practical reasoning iden-
be demonstrated and compel rational acceptance, with regard tiﬁed above, we deﬁne an extension of the [Bench-Capon,
to actions there is an element of choice: we cannot choose 2003] framework, called a DOR-partitioned value-based
what is the case, but we can choose what we attempt to bring
                                                      argument framework  (DOR-VAF), as a tuple hX , A, V, ηi,
about, and different people may rationally make different
                                                      where: X =  D ∪ O  ∪ R for three disjoint sets D (the de-
choices. Such differences in values and interests mean that
                                                      sired arguments), O (the optional arguments) and R (the re-
  ∗Sylvie Doutre is supported by the Aspic project of the European jected arguments); A ⊆ X × X is an attack relation between
Commission (IST-FP6-002307).                          arguments; V = {v1, v2, . . . , vk} is a set of k values, andη : X →  V is a mapping that associates a value η(x) ∈ V frameworks for argumentation, is introduced and instantiated
with each argument x ∈ X .                            in order to capture the construction above. The instantiation
  As in [Bench-Capon, 2003], preferences between values takes into account some heuristics aiming at keeping the ex-
are considered through the notion of an audience, which is tensions of the set under development to a minimum. The
a transitive, irreﬂexive relation ϑ ⊂ V × V. A pair hvi, vj i idea is that the proponent will wish to meet an attack in a
is referred to as ‘vi is preferred to vj’ w.r.t. ϑ. Given an way which retains as much room for subsequent manoeuvre
audience ϑ, an argument x defeats an argument y if x attacks as possible. There are four ways of meeting an attack from
y and hη(y), η(x)i ∈/ ϑ; an argument x is a defender of an an argument x. In ascending order of commitment they are:
argument y if and only if there is a ﬁnite sequence a0, . . . , a2n include an optional argument requiring no new value prefer-
such that y = a0, x = a2n, and ∀i, 0 ≤ i ≤ (2n − 1), ai+1 ence; add a new value preference; include an optional argu-
defeats ai w.r.t. ϑ.                                  ment requiring an additional value preference, but does not
  A position in a DOR-VAF is deﬁned as a set of arguments conﬂict with any existing position argument; and add an op-
P =  D  ∪ Y with Y ⊆  O, such that there exists at least tional argument which does conﬂict with some existing posi-
one audience ϑ with respect to which: (i) no argument in tion argument so requiring additional value preferences to be
P defeats w.r.t. ϑ another argument in P ; (ii) any defeated imposed to resolve the conﬂict. The ﬁrst three responses are
argument in P w.r.t. ϑ has a defender w.r.t. ϑ in P ; (iii) each computationally cheap: the complexity in constructing posi-
optional argument of Y is a defender w.r.t. ϑ of a desired tions arises when the need to use the fourth response arises.
argument of D. An audience for which P is a position is said
to be a corresponding audience of P .                 4   Conclusion
  This new notion of a position accomodates the third fea- We believe that this approach will have signiﬁcant practical
ture of practical reasoning: the preferences between values application in the analysis and modelling of argumentation
are not given as an input on the basis of which the position is about which action should be chosen, for instance in areas
constructed, but are a result of constructing the position. such as case law and political debate, both of which are re-
                                                      ceiving increasing attention as the notion of e-democracy be-
3  Development    of a position                       comes widespread. Interesting possibilities also arise if we
                                                      consider extending a debate in which a position has already
In order to build a position in a DOR-VAF, one may start by been constructed. Some additions should radically change
considering the set of desired arguments. This set must be the best position, giving insight into phenomena such as
ﬁrst tested to demonstrate that there is at least one audience paradigm shift in science, and landmark cases which require
w.r.t. which no desired argument defeats another desired ar- extensive theory revision in the development of case law.
gument. It may be that this condition can only be satisﬁed by
imposing some value preferences. If we can satisfy this test References
we must next ensure that any defeated argument in the set has
a defender in the set w.r.t. at least one audience. To this end, [Bench-Capon, 2003] T. J. M. Bench-Capon. Persuasion
some optional arguments may be added to the set as defend- in Practical Argument Using Value-based Argumenta-
ers of defeated arguments and/or some additional constraints tion Frameworks. Journal of Logic and Computation,
on the ordering of values may be imposed. If the process 13(3):429–448, 2003.
succeeds, then the set developed is a position and the set of [Cayrol et al., 2002] C. Cayrol, S. Doutre, M.-Ch.
constraints determined by the construction can be extended Lagasquie-Shiex, and J. Mengin. “Minimal defence”: a
into a corresponding audience of this position, by taking its reﬁnement of the preferred semantics for argumentation
transitive closure. Otherwise, the user has to reconsider the frameworks. In Proc. NMR’2002, pages 408–415, 2002.
partition of the set of arguments.                    [Cayrol et al., 2003] C. Cayrol, S. Doutre, and J. Mengin.
  This construction can be presented in the form of a dia- On Decision Problems related to the preferred semantics
logue between two players. One, the opponent, outlines why for argumentation frameworks. Journal of Logic and Com-
the set under development is not yet a position, by identify- putation, 13(3):377–403, 2003.
ing arguments which defeat members of the set. The other,
the proponent, tries to make the set under development a po- [Doutre et al., 2005] S. Doutre, T. J. M. Bench-Capon, and
sition by extending it with some optional arguments and/or P. E. Dunne. On the development of argument positions.
some constraints between values. If the proponent terminates Technical Report ULCS-05-002, Univ. of Liverpool, 2005.
the dialogue, then the set of arguments played is a position, [Dung, 1995] P. M. Dung. On the acceptability of arguments
and the set of constraints advanced can be extended into a cor- and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic reasoning, logic
responding audience. Otherwise, the set of desired arguments programming and n-person games. Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
cannot be extended into a position.                      77:321–357, 1995.
  This presentation in a dialogue form has the main advan- [Dunne and Bench-Capon, 2003] P. E. Dunne and T. J. M.
tage of making clear why some constraints between values Bench-Capon. Two  party immediate response disputes:
must be imposed, and why some optional arguments must be- properties and efﬁciency. Artif. Intell., 149:221–250, 2003.
long to the position. Moreover, it captures well the ﬁrst fea-
                                                      [          ]
ture of practical reasoning. In [Doutre et al., 2005], an origi- Searle, 2001 J. R. Searle. Rationality in Action. MIT Press,
nal formal dialogue framework, extending previous dialogue 2001.