                    Mixed-Initiative Activity Planning for Mars Rovers

                       John Bresina, Ari Jónsson*, Paul Morris, Kanna Rajan
                                     NASA Ames Research Center
                                             Mailstop 269-2
                                        Moffett Field, CA 94035
                         {bresina,jonsson,pmorris,kanna}@email.arc.nasa.gov

                    Abstract                          While mixed-initiative planning  [Burstein and McDermott,
                                                      1996] is a fairly established field, the MAPGEN application
    One of the ground tools used to operate the Mars
                                                      provided new challenges, both in terms of interactions with
    Exploration Rovers is a mixed-initiative planning
                                                      the user and in terms of how to apply automated reasoning.
    system called MAPGEN.  The role of the system is  In this paper, we outline these challenges and describe the
    to assist operators building daily plans for each of
                                                      solutions developed.
    the rovers, maximizing science return, while
    maintaining rover safety and abiding by science
    and engineering constraints.                      2   Challenges and requirements
    In this paper, we describe the MAPGEN system,     The primary challenge in the deployment of MAPGEN for
    focusing on the mixed-initiative planning aspect. the MER mission was to overcome skepticism about the use
    We note important challenges, both in terms of    of automated planning.  In particular, there were concerns
    human interaction and in terms of automated rea-  that users would not understand what the automation was
    soning requirements.   We then describe the ap-   doing and that the automation would limit human input.  To
    proaches taken in MAPGEN, focusing on the novel   address this, the tool had to allow the user a broad range of
    methods developed by our team.                    operations, sufficient to arrive at any desired legal plan.  At
                                                      the same time, the automated reasoning behavior had to
1   Introduction                                      “feel natural” to the user.
                                                      Other specific challenges arose from user requirements.
Many complex systems are operated with operations plans
                                                      These included adjustable control over planning and sched-
that are generated offline at different intervals.  Spacecraft,
                                                      uling decisions, as well as easy placement of activities in
in particular planetary rovers, provide some of the most ex-
                                                      time.  The key motivation was to allow users to choose
treme examples of such operations.  In the case of the Mars
                                                      ways to adapt plans to complex limitations such as onboard
Exploration Rovers, a new plan was generated for each
                                                      energy.  These decisions required human-level judgment.
rover, every Martian day (which is slightly longer than an
Earth day).  Each plan had to satisfy complex safety rules,
while achieving as much science as possible.          3   Mixed-initiative planning in MAPGEN
A  mixed-initiative activity planning system called   Like most mixed-initiative planning systems, MAPGEN
MAPGEN   was  one of the key tools used to generate the combines a user interface with a planning services frame-
daily plans for the Mars rovers.  The complete set of con- work.  In MAPGEN, the user interface is an established
straints and operations preferences, which varied signifi- spacecraft operations tool called APGEN [Maldague et.al.,
cantly over time and between days, was impossible to for- 1998], and the planning and automated reasoning services
mally specify.   This made a fully automatic plan generation are provided by a constraint-based planning framework
approach inapplicable to the problem at hand.  However, the called EUROPA  [Frank and Jónsson, 2003].
limited time available for plan generation and the complex- Through the interface, users can edit the plans, with over-
ity of the task at hand also made it infeasible to generate sight and active constraint enforcement supplied by the
highly effective plans manually.  Consequently, a mixed- automated reasoning component.  The core notion is that
initiative planning approach was adopted, where humans users can modify a plan by adding, editing, moving, and
could control the construction of a plan, while automated deleting high-level activities.  The automated reasoning
planning and reasoning capabilities were used to assist the component handles management of low-level and support
human  user in making decisions, actively enforce con- activities, such as ensuring resources like CPU are turned on
straints, and handle mundane task management issues.  when required.  The automated reasoning also enforces con-
                                                      straints stemming from flight rules and specific daily con-
                                                      straints that define the coordination of science activities.
   * Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS)3.1 Interactive plan modification                     For an automated planning operation, which involves a cas-
                                                      cading decision process, MAPGEN relaxes completeness in
One of the core issues in mixed-initiative planning is the
                                                      favor of responsiveness.  This has to be done carefully to
introduction of external decision-making and plan editing
into a carefully designed automated search engine.  The maximize chances of finding near-optimal solutions within
                                                      limited time.  We developed a backtracking algorithm that
intrusion of user choices complicates commonly used ap-
                                                      noted the difficulty of planning activities, and when the ef-
proaches such as backtracking search and propagation-based
                                                      fort to plan an activity exceeded an allowance determined
forward checking of consistency.  The EUROPA planning
                                                      by its priority, the activity was rejected from the plan.
framework used in MAPGEN   supports non-chronological
backtracking, but it cannot propagate information in plans
that have constraint violations.  To support arbitrary changes 4 Open issues and future work
by users, MAPGEN  included a plan modification strategy A number of issues that arose in the development and use of
that would adjust plans to eliminate inconsistencies. MAPGEN could not be resolved in time for the Mars Rover
                                                      application; among those are the following.
3.2 Interactive temporal reasoning
                                                      Explanations for user
The most common   way for users to modify plans is to
                                                      When  activities could not be moved or planned, due to a
change the placement of activities in time.  The EUROPA
                                                      combination of prior decisions and applicable constraints,
planning framework tracks a family of temporal instantia-
tions, represented as a simple temporal network.  This made users had a hard time understanding why.  This made it dif-
                                                      ficult for them to resolve the problems.  To address this, an
it possible for users to quickly modify the temporal place-
                                                      explanation facility is needed that can provide understand-
ment of activities while staying within a solution family.  In
                                                      able reasons to the user and respond to questions.
MAPGEN, this idea was extended further to allow users to
quickly move to a nearby family that differed only in the Improved reasoning and planning
ordering of a small set of activities, using the previous solu- While the planning approach used in MAPGEN was quite
tion as a heuristic to guide the search.              effective, it left certain aspects of decision-making to the
                                                      user—in particular, the user was tasked with handling vague
3.3 Interactive planning and scheduling               preferences and very complex resource availability limita-
As noted above, MAPGEN  users wanted a range of auto- tions.  Future work should move towards incorporating
mated planning services.  The system offers a fully auto- complex preferences and automatically planning against
mated “plan everything” operation, a selective “plan this complex resource limits.
and everything related to it” operation, and a fine-grained
“plan this and try to put it here” operation.  Users can also 5 Conclusions
un-plan activities and store them in a “hopper,” which holds
                                                      The use of MAPGEN as a critical tool in the ground opera-
requested activities that are not yet in the plan.
                                                      tions for the Mars Exploration Rovers is a major milestone
3.4 Minimizing perturbation                           in the application of automated planning in space explora-
                                                      tion and other complex domains. Mission operations staff
The key to making the automated services feel natural and successfully used the tool in an intense, time-pressured envi-
unobtrusive is for them to respect the existing plan as much ronment, leading to an estimated 10 and 40 percent increase
as possible. This is accomplished by combining an effective in science return, compared to operating without AI assis-
form of temporal placement preference with a heuristic bias. tance.  The deployment of MAPGEN has also identified key
For changes in the temporal placement of activities, the challenges for the mixed-initiative planning community and
system exploits the underlying temporal flexibility of for the automated planning community as a whole.
EUROPA plans.  As each plan represents a family, the sys-
tem chooses an instance to display that is as close as possi-
ble to what the user had prior to the changes being made. References
For more significant changes, such as those involving auto-  [Burstein and McDermott, 1996] Burstein, M., and
mated planning, the heuristic bias guides the search to op- McDermott, D., Issues in the development of human-
tions that restrict changes in temporal placement to those computer mixed-initiative planning. In Cognitive Tech-
needed to satisfy constraints; thus the plan changes only in nology, B. Gorayska, and  J. L. Mey, editors, pages 285-
accordance with achieving the user’s desires.            303. Elsevier, 1996.
                                                      [Frank and Jónsson, 2003] Frank, J., and Jonsson, A., Con-
3.5 Responsiveness issues                                straint-Based Interval and Attribute Planning, Journal of
Mixed-initiative planning systems must respond and return Constraints Special Issue on Constraints and Planning,
control quickly to the user.  For simple temporal placement, 2003.
this is not a difficult issue, since the core operation is propa-
                                                       [Maldague et.al., 1998] Maldague, P., Ko, A., Page, D., and
gation in a simple temporal network, which can be done in
                                                         Starbird, T.,  APGEN: A multi-mission semi-automated
low-order polynomial time.
                                                         planning tool.  First International NASA Workshop on
                                                         Planning and Scheduling, Oxnard, CA, 1998.