                MDL-based Acquisition of Substitutability Relationships
                                between Discourse Connectives
                                            Ben Hutchinson
                                        University of Edinburgh
                                         School of Informatics
                             2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK
                                      B.Hutchinson@sms.ed.ac.uk

                    Abstract                            • X  is a SYNONYM of Y if X can always be substituted
                                                          for Y , and vice versa.
    Knowledge of which lexical items convey the same
    meaning in a given context is important for many    • X  and Y are EXCLUSIVE if neither can ever be substi-
    Natural Language Processing tasks. This paper         tuted for the other.
    concerns the substitutability of discourse connec-  • X  is a HYPONYM of Y if Y can always be substituted
    tives in particular. This paper proposes a data-      for X, but not vice versa.
    driven method based on a Minimum Description
                                                        • X  is a HYPERNYM of Y if X can always be substituted
    Length (MDL) criterion for automatically learn-       for Y , but not vice versa.
    ing substitutability of connectives. The method is
    shown to outperform two baseline classiﬁers.        • X  and Y are CONTINGENTLY SUBSTITUTABLE  if each
                                                          can sometimes, but not always, be substituted for the
                                                          other.
1  Introduction
                                                        We would like to automatically predict which of these re-
Discourse connectives are words or phrases which explicitly lationships holds, for any given pair of connectives.
signal coherence relations in texts, e.g. however, even though
and whereas. Studies of connectives have provided insights 3 An MDL-based model of substitutability
into natural language discourse, however formal semantic
analysis of connectives is a difﬁcult task, and most connec- We will refer to a consistent set of relationships between con-
tives have not been the subject of much study. The empiri- nectives as a taxonomy. Our model of taxonomies exploits
cal study of the substitutability of discourse connectives can the following two observations. Firstly, it is unlikely that ev-
inform and complement theoretical analyses [Knott, 1996]. ery connective should be EXCLUSIVE with every other one.
The substitutability of discourse connectives is also important Secondly, there are logical constraints on substitutability. For
for Natural Language Processing applications such as Natu- example, if A is a HYPONYM of B and B is EXCLUSIVE with
ral Language Generation and text simpliﬁcation [Moser and C, then A must also be EXCLUSIVE with C.
Moore, 1995; Siddharthan, 2003].                        Our modelling of substitutability is within the Minimum
  This paper investigates acquiring substitutability relation- Description Length (MDL) framework. In our case, we wish
ships between connectives automatically. Previous attempts to evaluate models representing substitutability relationships
                                                                                       T
to do so have been hindered by the relatively low prior like- between connectives. For a taxonomy and data data, the
lihood of two connectives being substitutable [Hutchinson, total description length is given by:
2005]. We introduce an MDL-based approach that addresses         L(T, data) = L(T) + L(data|T)        (2)
this.
                                                      We will exploit the fact that description lengths L can be re-
2  Substitutability of discourse connectives          lated to probabilities P via the equation L = − log2 P .
Example (1) contains the connective seeing as. However, be- Calculating the prior: We will use the notation
                                                                     T                                 T
cause can also be used to achieve the same discourse aims, hrel, X, Y i ∈ to indicate that in the taxonomy
i.e. it is substitutable [Knott, 1996].               connectives X and Y are in relationship rel. We calculate
                                                      P (T) using the following multinomial model:
(1) Seeing as/because we’ve got nothing but circumstantial
                                                                                Y
    evidence, it’s going to be difﬁcult to get a conviction.       P (T) = M          P (rel)         (3)
However, because it is not always substitutable for seeing as,               hrel,X,Y i∈T
and the converse does not hold either. In general, there are
                                                      where (i) P (rel) is the prior probability of two connectives
ﬁve possibilities for a connective X’s relationship to another
                                                      being in the relationship rel, which will be estimated empir-
connective Y :
                                                      ically, and (ii) M is a multinomial coefﬁent which ensuresthat the most likely taxonomy contains numbers of each pair- Baselines: Two baseline classiﬁers were constructed for
wise substitutability relationship in proportion to their prior comparison with the MDL-based model. The ﬁrst assigned
probabilities.                                        all pairs to the most frequent relationship, namely EXCLU-
  The multinomial model (3) is deﬁned over all sets of pair- SIVE. The second baseline classiﬁer assumed that the new
wise substitutability relationships, but we are only interested connective would be a SYNONYM of one other connective X
in calculating the probabilities of consistent sets. However already in the taxonomy. All other relationships involving
this does not affect the relative likelihoods of taxonomies with the new connective were thus identical to X’s. When evalu-
the same number of connectives, so for the purposes of the ated on all of connectives, these classiﬁers had accuracies of
experiments below this effect can be ignored.         69.9% and 70.7%, and correctly learnt 2280 and 3333 bits of
Estimating the posterior probability: Previous work has information, respectively.
found a correlation between substitutability and distributional
similarity [Hutchinson, 2005]. Therefore, the data that our Results: On the 50% of pairs of connectives not in the
model of taxonomies aims to explain are the Kullback-Leibler validation set, the MDL-based classiﬁer had an accuracy of
(KL) divergences, D(p||q), between pairs of connectives. 73.8%, which is signiﬁcantly greater than both baselines. The
That is, we assume that the data to be explained is:  improvement is even greater on the information theoretic met-
                                                      ric: correct classiﬁcations had 1928 bits of information, from
         data ≡ {D(X||Y ) : hrel, X, Y i ∈ T}
                                                      which we can extrapolate a performance of about 3856 bits
To estimate the probability of the data, we assume that on the set of all pairs of connectives.
the likelihood of observing a given distributional divergence
D(X||Y ) between X and Y is dependent only on the substi- 5 Discussion and conclusions
tutability of X and Y .
                                                      We have introduced a statistical model of the lexicon based
                  Y
  P (data|T) ≈          P (D(X||Y )|hrel, X, Y i) (4) on the Minimum Description Length principle. A multino-
              hrel,X,Y i∈T                            mial prior assigns the greatest probability when the frequen-
                                                      cies of pairwise relationships are in proportion to the prior
To estimate each of the multiplicands in (4), we use Gaus- likelihoods of those relationships. The model is applied to
sian models of the distributional divergences corresponding extending a taxonomy representing substitutability relation-
to each substitutability relationship, i.e.           ships between discourse connectives, and gives better perfor-
 P (D(X||Y )|hrel, X, Y i) ∝ n(D(X||Y ); µrel, σrel) (5) mance than two classiﬁers that do not take into account global
                                                      properties of the lexicon. The model aims to explain the dis-
where µrel and σrel and the mean and standard deviation of
KL divergences of all pairs of connectives in relationship rel. tributional similarity of pairs of connectives, as measured by
                                                      the Kullback-Leibler divergence function. In future, we will
4  Experiment                                         explore the use other distributional similarity functions, as
                                                      these provide other perspectives of the data that may prove
Task:  Our task is to predict the substitutability relationships useful for learning substitutability. The utility of including
                                T
in a manually constructed taxonomy of connectives. We other types of co-occurrence data in our distributional repre-
                                    T
iteratively remove a single connective from and attempt to sentations also remains to be explored.
re-insert it in its original position. To do this, we insert it in
the position that minimises the description length.   References
                                                      [Hutchinson, 2005] Ben Hutchinson. Modelling the substi-
Methodology:  An existing taxonomy containing 80 dis-    tutability of discourse connectives. In Proceedings of the
course connectives was used as a gold standard [Hutchin- 43rd Annual Meeting of The Association for Computa-
son, 2005]. Fixed width beam search (width=1000) is used tional Linguistics, Ann Arbor, USA, 2005.
to search for the taxonomy with minimum description length.
Co-occurrences with other discourse connectives were used [Knott, 1996] Alistair Knott. A data-driven methodology for
as the distributional representations.                   motivating a set of coherence relations. PhD thesis, Uni-
                                                         versity of Edinburgh, 1996.
Parameter tuning:  Due to unrealistic independence as- [Kononenko and Bratko, 1991] Igor Kononenko and Ivan
sumptions in Equation (4), our model underestimates the  Bratko. Information-based evaluation criterion for clas-
value of P (data|T). As a result, it overestimates L(data|T). siﬁer’s performance. Machine Learning, 6:67–80, 1991.
To counterbalance this effect, we weight L(data|T) by a pa- [Moser and Moore, 1995] M. Moser and J. Moore. Using
rameter λ ∈ (0, 1]. Using half the pairs of connectives as a discourse analysis and automatic text generation to study
validation set, the setting λ = 0.1 was found to give good discourse cue usage. In Proceedings of the AAAI 1995
results.                                                 Spring Symposium on Empirical Methods in Discourse In-
                                                         terpretation and Generation, pages 92–98, 1995.
Evaluation metrics: Two evaluation metrics were used: [Siddharthan, 2003] Advaith Siddharthan. Preserving dis-
overall accuracy in predicting substitutability relationships, course structure when simplifying text. In Proceedings of
and the amount of information (measured in bits) of the cor- the 2003 European Natural Language Generation Work-
rectly classiﬁed instances [Kononenko and Bratko, 1991]. shop, pages 103–110, 2003.