         Automated Adaptive Support for Task and Information Prioritizing 

                        Tjerk de Greef †  and Peter-Paul van Maanen † ‡ 
                   † Department of Information Processing, TNO Human Factors 
                        PO BOX 32, 3769 ZG Soesterberg, the Netherlands 
                ‡ Department of Artificial Intelligence, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 
                    De Boelelaan 1081a, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
                      Email: degreef@tm.tno.nl, peter-paul.vanmaanen@tno.nl 

                   Abstract                      Competitive Task Model (CTM). After this a first 
                                                 description of an algorithm based on CTM is shown. 
    This paper discusses a means for automatically 
    supporting humans in information and task 
    prioritizing. A new generic method based on the 2  The Competitive Task Model 
    Competitive Task Model is described. Its 
    implementation is able to calculate priorities of In the CTM information entities (IEs) are prioritized by 
    competing information entities, which provides a means of estimating their relevance, urgency, and 
    way of allocating tasks to the process operator. Due importance, in the context of the goal profile, user, and task 
    to a combination of dynamic states and information knowledge (Figure 1). Relevance describes which user tasks 
    entities, it is usable as an adaptive control have a relation with an offered IE and urgency describes the 
    mechanism for attention and task allocation. temporal (response) aspect of the IE for a particular task. 
                                                 Relevance and urgency estimation is done by means of two 
                                                 interpreters that require knowledge of the user and its tasks. 
 1 Introduction                                  User and task knowledge is used to determine if the offered 
                                                 IE reduces uncertainty [Shannon et al., 1946] and to provide 
 The objective of an intelligent information system is to an indication of the relation between an IE and a specific 
 support the operator with the decision making process by task, respectively. The act of combining these 
 means of offering the right information at the right time and 
                                                 interpretations per specific task yields a delta score, 
 place. This appears not an easy job as experience and 
                                                 indicating the priority of the IE with respect to a certain user  
 research in the field of adaptive decision support learns 
 [e.g., Weiland et al., 1998]. Information with a high 

 interruption level is intended to focus the attention of the User   Task         Goal profile 
                                                       knowledge    knowledge        
 operator on important information. A popular scenario in                          

 literature describes a process operator facing an emergency                         Importance 

 situation where the operator is overwhelmed by a huge                        δSA, 1       
                                                                              δSA, 2 Task 
                                                                              δSA, 3  
 amount of information, which increases the operator I    Relevance                  Goal task scoreA
                                                  n
                                                                              δSA,3 score  


                                                  f                                A

                                                  ormation entit ormation interpreter Relevance 
 workload and is making it almost impossible to deal with                     δSA,4 

 the emergency [Sheridan, 1981]. The mentioned scenario                 Delta δSB, 0 Task 
                                                                              δSB, 1 Goal task scoreB
 typically occurs when time is limited. It is therefore crucial         score δSB, 2 scoreB 
                                                          Urgency 
 to use valuable time carefully and it seems obvious to y interpreter Urgency δSC, 0 
                                                                             δSC, 1 Task 
                                                                             δSC, 2  Goal task scoreC
 support the operator in managing information flow after (or                     scoreC 
                                                                             δSC, 3 
 before) a problematic event.                                                                 
 A reduction of information seems to be a logical first 
                                                          Figure 1 – The Competitive Task Model 
 approach, but unfortunately several studies show that the 
 reduction of information not necessarily results in task. For each user task the delta scores are combined for all 
 improvement of efficiency [e.g., Baker et al., 1985]. The offered IEs. This results in a task score, indicating the 
removed information apparently is relevant for the operator. priority of a certain task given a set of IEs. Finally, the task 
This may be because this information provides insight into scores are related to the specific goals using a two-layered 
 the state of the process [Stanton, 2000]. In the present goal profile (GP). The first layer describes the goals and 
 research a combination of research suggested by Freed every goal implies one or more tasks. These tasks populate 
 [1998], Nugent et al. [2000] and Covery [1990] is further the second layer. The GP yields an indication of the 
 explored and used for a description of a model called the importance of a specific task with respect to the user’s  higher goals. The combination of importance of a certain strategies, that are crucial in (automating) adaptive decision 
user task and its related task score results in a goal task support. This is different from traditional models of 
score, indicating the eventual prioritization of user tasks. preference choice from game theory, where preferences are 
                                                 given a priori. Though, further research is needed to 
As an example of applying the CTM, imagine a navy officer optimize the theoretical framework. For instance, Freed 
on a frigate. The task profile consists of three high level [1998] mentions that switching between hierarchies can be 
goals, i.e. to fight, to sail and to float. Suppose that an IE an efficient approach when information is applicable for a 
concerning a fire in the engine room reaches the officer. number of subtasks. The CTM does not elaborate on this. 
This IE is highly urgent and relevant for the sailing task, but Furthermore, the automatic relevance and urgency 
to a lesser extent for the floating task. Hence the delta score interpreters, and the combining operators in de basic 
of the sailing task is higher than that of the floating task. But algorithm need further experimentation and specification. 
according to the GP (domain knowledge) floating is more 
important than sailing if the floating capability is in danger, 
and therefore the CTM indicates that the floating task Acknowledgments 
should receive attention instead of the sailing task. This research is funded by the Dutch Ministry of Defense 
                                                 under programme numbers V055 and V206.  
 3  The Basic Algorithm 
 According to the CTM there are three terms needed to References 
 prioritize IEs: relevance (R), urgency (U) and importance [Baker et al., 1985] S Baker, David Gertman, Erik 
 (I). The first two terms describe task τ and state σ dependent Hollnagel, C. Holstrom, E Marshall and F Øwre. An 
 information for which Ri (τ ,σ )  and Ui (τ ,σ )  are experimental comparison of three computer-based alarm 
 numbers in the interval [0,1], where i is an IE. These two systems: results and conclusions. Halden Reactor Project 
terms are quantified via relevance and urgency interpreters (HWR-142), Norway.  
(Figure 1) and are combined as a quantitative expression of [Covery, 1990] Stephen R. Covery. The 7 habits of highly 
the priority of the IE on the task and state using a function effective people. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
called the delta score (δS): 
                                                 [Freed, 1998] Michael Freed. Managing Multiple Tasks in 
          δSi (τ ,σ ) = Ri (τ ,σ ) ⊕Ui (τ ,σ )     (1) Complex, Dynamic Environments. In Proceedings of 
                                                   National Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Tenth 
where ⊕  is an operator combining R and U. In order to Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence 
calculate the priorities of the competing tasks, a task score Conference, pages 921-927, Madison, Winsconsin. 
(TS) is calculated by means of the summation of all δS’s per 
task, given a state:                              [Nugent et al., 2000] William A. Nugent and Richard W. 
                                                   Obermayer, Human Computer Interaction Design 
                                                   Guidelines for an Alert Warning and Attention 
           TS(τ ,σ )= ∑δS i (τ ,σ )                    (2) Allocation System. I. Literature Review. San Diego, CA: 
                     i∈IEs                         Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center, Code 
                                                   D44209, 17 February 2000. 
 The above task score is not taking into account the related 
 higher level importance. Therefore TS and I are combined: [Shannon et al, 1946] C Shannon & W Weaver, The 
                                                   mathematical theory of communications. Urbana: 
          TSimp (τ ,σ ) = I(τ ,σ ) ⊗TS(τ ,σ )         (3) University of Illinois Press. 
                                                 [Sheridan, 1981] Thomas B. Sheridan. Understanding 
where ⊗  is a operator combining TS and I. The combining human error and aiding human diagnostic behavior in 
 operators ⊗  and ⊕  can be for instance normalized linear nuclear power plants. In J. Rasmussen and William B. 
 functions with its form possibly dependent on the given task Rouse (Eds), Human detection and diagnosis of system 
                                                   failures. New York: Plenum Press. 
 τ, state σ, and IE i.  
                                                 [Stanton et al., 2000] N Stanton, David Harrison, Karin 
                                                   Taylor- Burge, L. Porter, Sorting the Wheat from the 
 4  Discussion                                     Chaff, A study on the detection of alarms. Cognition, 
 The CTM model described in this paper is able to calculate Technology and Work, 2(3):134-141, August 2000. 
 the priorities of competing tasks based on a set of IEs. The [Weiland et al., 1998] Monica Weiland, Gwendolyn E. 
 IEs are analysed in the context of the current activities of the Campbell, Wayne Zachary and Janis A. Cannon-Bowers. 
 operator, the importance of the IE regarding the main goals, Applications of cognitive models in a combat 
 and the urgency and relevance of the IE regarding the information center. Paper presented at the 1998 
 operator’s tasks. Because of the combined input of IEs and Command and Control Research and Technology 
 dynamic states it can be used as an adaptive control Symposium. Monterey, CA. 
 mechanism for operator attention or as task allocation 