  Automatic learning of domain model for personalized hypermedia applications 
                                               

   Hermine Njike, Thierry Artières, Patrick Gallinari, Julien Blanchard, Guillaume Letellier 

                                   LIP6, Université Paris 6 
                         8 rue du capitaine Scott, 75015, Paris, France 
                                {Firstname.Lastname}@lip6.fr 

                                                
                   Abstract                      personalized hypermedia lies in the automatic learning of a 
    This paper deals with the automatic building of relevant domain model. We focus on this task here. This is 
    personalized hypermedia. We build upon ideas not an easy task since this model involves high level 
    developed for educational hypermedia; the    concepts that cannot be easily inferred automatically.  
    definition of a domain model and the use of 
    overlay user models. Since much work has been 2  Discovering concepts from a corpus  
    done on learning user models and adapting    Some approaches were developed in the information 
    hypermedia based on such models, we tackle the retrieval field for generating documents hierarchies 
    core problem: the automatic definition of a domain according to specialization/ generalization relations between 
    model for a static hypermedia.               concepts but these fail to infer semantic relations between 
                                                 concepts and are thus useless regarding our goal. Recently 
1 Introduction                                   hierarchies have been proposed [Krishna et al, 2001, 
In adaptive hypermedia one aims at developing user centric Sanderson et al, 1999] which are automatically built from 
help strategies. One has to characterize the user in order to corpora. They are term hierarchies built from generalization 
infer relevant help action for him all along his situation. A / specialization relations automatically discovered between 
domain model may be used that characterizes the whole terms in a corpus. Once this hierarchy is built, documents 
knowledge accessible in the hypermedia; it is used to infer may be “projected” on it, thus producing a document 
information in the user model [De Bra et al, 2003]. Based on hierarchy. We propose to extend these approaches to the 
a user model, an adaptation model personalizes the construction of concept hierarchies where concepts are 
hypermedia in order to offer to the user the most interesting discovered from the corpus and are identified by sets of 
and relevant information [Brusilovsky 2001]. An interesting keywords and not only by single terms. Such a richer 
task in adaptive hypermedia concerns educational representation allows discovering relations that single term 
hypermedia [Henze et al, 1999]. Although building such concept cannot.  Our method takes as input a corpus, i.e. a 
systems is still difficult, the task is well identified; in such collection of documents (e.g. pages of a website) that are 
systems domain models are often manually designed and preprocessed as usual in information retrieval tasks; non 
defined as a graph of the concepts being discussed in the informative words are removed, all remaining words are 
hypermedia [Herder et al, 2002]. Popular user models are lemmatized. The main steps of the procedure are as follows. 
overlay user models; these share the same representation as Documents are first segmented into homogeneous 
domain models and are used to represent a user knowledge / paragraphs. The segmentation task consists in identifying, in 
interest in a concept space. These models are vectors of each document, homogeneous text regions [Hearst, 1997]. 
attributes (measures of interest or knowledge), one for each Next, we cluster all these parts of documents in order to 
concept in the domain model. These are updated from user determine groups of paragraphs related to a similar topic. 
navigation logs according to the domain model with Each cluster is then considered to be a set of part of texts 
standard techniques such as Bayesian Networks. However, dealing with a concept of the collection. Each concept is 
the definition of domain models, hence user models, is done represented as the set of most significant words (e.g. with 
manually. We are interested in learning automatically such highest tfidf values) in the texts of the cluster. Finally, we 
models, allowing the automatic building of personalized discover generalization links between concepts using a 
hypermedia from its content. This would allow for instance subsumption measure that we have extended to concepts. At 
the automatic building of an adaptive website from any last, applying transitivity leads to a concept hierarchy. 
document collection. To do this, one can take advantage of 
works done in the educational hypermedia field concerning 3  Application to user modeling 
the learning of overlay user models and the personalization We applied our method to the discovery of a domain model, 
of hypermedia based on overlay user models. In this i.e. a concept hierarchy, on a collection of documents which 
context, the core problem for the automatic conception of a is a part of the www.looksmart.com site hierarchies. The main interest of this corpus is that we can compare, after 
learning, the discovered hierarchy and the manually 
designed one. The corpus consists in about 100 documents 
and 7k terms about artificial intelligence. It has been 
manually organized in hierarchies of themes. We ran the 
method on the flat corpus, without any use of the 
hierarchical information. Compared to the initial Looksmart 
hierarchy with five categories, our discovered hierarchy is 
larger and deeper. Most of the original categories are 
refined. For example, many sub-categories do emerge from 
the original “Knowledge Representation” category:  
ontologies, building ontologies, KDD (papers about data 
representation for KDD)… It is clear that such a hierarchy 
could not have been obtained using single keyword 
concepts. An interesting feature of this discovered                                         
                                                  Fig. 2. Part of the treemap for the website of a French museum 
hierarchical organization is that it allows using efficient 
                                                  where a navigation path has been drawn.  
visualization tools such as Treemaps [Schneiderman, 1992]. 
Treemaps allow displaying a tree-like structure in a 2D grid 
where each node is represented by a rectangle whose size or 4 Conclusion 
color determined by a node specific value. Fig. 1 shows a We described an approach to automatically learn a domain 
Treemap representing the discovered Looksmart domain model from a corpus of hypermedia documents. This model 
model. Each concept is shown as a rectangle with different consists of concepts organized into a specialization / 
colour; the hierarchy is shown through inclusion of generalization Based on such a domain model, one can 
rectangles. Smaller rectangles represent documents. Set of define user models as overlay models, and use existing 
keywords associated to concepts only are shown for techniques for learning and personalization. Our procedure 
readability reasons.                             may be thought as a core step for developing automatically 
                                                 an adaptive hypermedia from any document collection. 

                                                 Acknowledgments 
                                                 The authors would like to thank J.D. Fekete from Université 
                                                 Paris Sud (France) for helpful discussion about treemaps. 

                                                 References 
                                                 [Brusilovsky, 2001] Brusilovsky P., Adaptive Hypermedia, User 
                                                 Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 2001. 
                                                 [De Bra et al., 2003] De Bra P., Aerts A., Berden B., De Lange B., 
                                                 Rousseau B., Aha! The adaptive hypermedia architecture, HT’03, 
                                                 United Kingdom. 
 Fig. 1. Part of the treemap of the concept hierarchy discovered [Hearst, 1997] Hearst M., 1997, TextTitling : Segmenting Text into 
 on the Looksmart corpus. Each rectangle stands for a concept.  multi-paragraph Subtopic Passages. Computational Linguistics. pp. 
                                                 33-64. 
  We realized a second experiment by running the method [Henze et al., 1999] Henze N., Nedjl W., Student modeling in an 
on the pages of the website of a French museum. Fig. 2 active learning environment using bayesian networks, User 
shows the resulting domain model with french keywords. As Modeling 1999. 
an illustration, we have shown a navigation path of a [Herder et al., 2002] Herder E., Van Dijlk B., Personalized 
particular user on this treemap, where the colour of a adaptation to device characteristics, International Conference on 
concept is a function of its thematic similarity with the three Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web-Based Systems, 2002. 
last pages visited by the user. As may be seen, concepts [Krishna et al., 2001] Krishna K., Krishnapuram R., A Clustering 
close to these pages lie close to the current concept. Other Algorithm for Asymmetrically Related Data with Applications to 
information could be visualized. Hence, one can browse and Text Mining. International Conference on Information and 
investigate a user model by assigning for instance Knowledge Management, 2001, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. pp.571-
knowledge or interest information about concepts to the size 573. 
or colour of rectangles.                         [Sanderson et al., 1999] Sanderson M., Croft B., 1999, Deriving 
                                                 concept hierarchies from text. SIGIR Conference '99. pp.206-213. 
                                                 [Schneiderman, 1992] Schneiderman B., Tree visualization with 
                                                 tree-maps: 2-d space-filling approach, ACM Transactions on 
                                                 Graphics, Vol. 11, No. 1, January 1992. 