                Growth of Motor Coordination in Early Robot Learning

                                        M.H. Lee and Q. Meng
                                    Department of Computer Science
                                   University of Wales, Aberystwyth
                                   Ceredigion, SY23 3DB, Wales, UK
                                        {mhl, qqm}@aber.ac.uk

                    Abstract
    We present an implementation of a model of very
    early sensory-motor development, guided by re-
    sults from developmental psychology. Behavioral
    acquisition and growth is demonstrated through
    constraint-lifting mechanisms initiated by global
    state variables. The results show how staged
    competence can be shaped by qualitative behav-
    ior changes produced by anatomical, computational  Figure 1: The laboratory robot system used in experiments
    and maturational constraints.

                                                      seems to be a foundation stone for development, and occurs
1  Introduction: developmental learning               at many levels [Pfeifer and Scheier, 1997]. Sensory-motor
In this paper we describe an approach to sensory-motor learn- growth in the limbs appears to precede visual development
ing and coordination that draws from psychology rather than (it may begin in the womb) and even when it can continue
neuroscience. There have been many models of sensory- concurrently with visual development. For this reason, in the
motor coordination but most of these have been based on spe- experiments reported here we do not involve the eye system.
ciﬁc, usually connectionist, architectures and tend to focus A two-section limb requires a motor system that can drive
on a single behavioral task. We are interested in exploring each section independently. The actual biological mecha-
mechanisms that can support not only the growth of behavior nisms of proprioceptive feedback are not entirely known, and
but also the transitions that are observed as behavior moves there are several encoding schemes: joints encoding, shoulder
through distinct stages of competence.                encoding, body-centered encoding, and Cartesian frame.
  Inspired by developmental psychology, we are investigat-
ing mechanisms for development in terms of stages (periods 2.1 Mappings as a Computational Substrate
of similar behavior) and transitions (phases where new behav-
                                                      We have developed a computational framework for investi-
ior patterns emerge) in very early development, in particular,
                                                      gating sensory-motor coordination problem based on a two-
the control of the limbs during the ﬁrst three months of life.
                                                      dimensional mapping scheme. Each element in the map is
  Figure 1 shows our experimental robot system with two
                                                      represented by a patch of receptive area known as a ﬁeld.
manipulator arms and a camera which is mounted on a
                                                      The ﬁelds are circular, regularly spaced, and are overlapping.
computer-controlled pan and tilt head. In the present experi-
                                                      We assume that basic uniform map structures are produced
ments only two joints of the arms are used, the others being
                                                      by prior growth processes but they are not pre-wired for any
held ﬁxed. We ﬁtted one arm with a simple probe consisting
                                                      spatial system. Our arm system has to learn the correlations
of a 10mm rod containing a small proximity sensor to detect
                                                      between its sensory and motor signals and the mapping struc-
any objects passed underneath.
                                                      ture is the mechanism that supports this.
                                                        Every ﬁeld in a map has a set of associated variables
2  The Motor Coordination Problem                     that can record state and other properties during operation:
Even before any cross-modal spatial integration can begin it F {s, e, f, m}. These variables represent the value experi-
is necessary to ﬁrst discover the structure of the local spaces enced, the current degree of stimulation of a ﬁeld as a result
within each modality. Various stages in behavior can be dis- of excitation or inhibition, the frequency the ﬁeld has been ac-
cerned and during these stages the local egocentric limb space cessed or visited, and the motor parameters that were in force
becomes assimilated into the infant’s awareness and forms a when this ﬁeld was stimulated, respectively.
substrate for future cross-modal skilled behaviors. The essen- The excitation level held in a map’s ﬁelds is set to 1.0 for
tial correlation between proprioceptive space and motor space the ﬁrst stimulation, but repeated stimulations are reduced by                                                         30                       30                  15
a habituation function that recovers when stimulation ceases.                          smallest field size
                                                         25                       25

                                                         20                       20            middle field size 10
Also a very slow decay function causes all excitation levels to internal fields boundary
                                                         15               mouth   15
                                                                                                largest field size Scale
fall over time. Global variable Global excitation, is a mea- 10                   10                  5


                                                                         rest     fields  of  number
sure of total excitation of all ﬁeld excitations above a nominal 5                 5           mapping scale 
                                                        number of fields visited  fields  of  number 0 0 0
lower threshold; Global familiarity, is a normalized sum of 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 0 20 40 60 80 100 120
ﬁeld access frequency. Such global indicators can be used to     Number of trials         number of trials
signal when changes have effectively ceased and the map has      (a)                       (b)
become saturated.
                                                      Figure 3: (a): Growth of S-M map. (b): Transitions between three
2.2  Constraint lifting and reﬂexes                   maps of different scale. Repeated visits are ignored.
Distinct stages of competence development can be achieved
by lifting constraints when high competence at a level has
                                                      observed behavior is seen as series of stages: ﬁrst a “blind
been reached [Rutkowska, 1994]. We have several possible
                                                      groping” mainly directed at the mouth area, then more grop-
constraints: the availability of contact sensing, the resolution
                                                      ing but at the boundary, these are accompanied with unaware
of the proprioception sense, and the parameters of the motor
                                                      pushing of objects, then follows more directed and repeated
system. Of course, another constraint could be not having a
                                                      “touching” of detected objects. All these behaviors, including
visual sense but this very early stage of infant growth does
                                                      motor babbling and the rather ballistic approach to motor ac-
not rely on vision. We use global state indicators to lift con-
                                                      tion, are widely reported in young infants [Piek and Carman,
straints in two ways: ﬁner resolution sensory maps are used
                                                      1994].
when global familiarity is high, and the degree of motor ran-
                                                        Regarding proprioception, we did not observe any clear ad-
domness increases with very low global excitation.
                                                      vantage in any one encoding scheme. It is likely that the en-
  Novelty is the motivational driver and the motor system
                                                      coding scheme will matter much more when hand/eye coor-
attempts to repeat actions that cause stimulation. We provide
                                                      dination is to be learned.
two basic reﬂexes to initiate the system: go to “mouth” and
                                                        From the ﬁeld size experiments we see a trade off: speed
return to “rest”(arm being in the lateral position).
                                                      of exploration versus accuracy. Figure 3(b) shows how the
                                                      system started on a coarse map and progressively transitioned
3  Experiments and results                            to a ﬁner scale map as the global familiarity variable reached
                                                      a steady plateau.
                                                        Regarding the excitation parameters, the main effects are to
                                                      vary the persistent actions or number of repetitions performed
                                                      on a stimulus and to alter the order in which attention is given
                                                      to different objects.
                                                      4   Discussion and conclusions
                                                      Very few of sensory-motor coordination studies follow the
                                                      psychological literature on development and even less deal
                                                      with transitions between more than one behavioral skill pat-
           (a)                     (b)                tern.
                                                        The system described here records sensory-motor schemas
                                                      in topological mappings of sensory-motor events, pays atten-
Figure 2: (a): Arm movements with no contact sensing. (b): Arm
                                                      tion to novel or recent stimuli, repeats successful behavior,
movements with active contact sensing.
                                                      and detects when reasonable competence at a level has been
                                                      achieved. The behavior observed from the experiments dis-
  The ﬁrst trials used no contact sensing and objects on the plays initially spontaneous movements of the limbs, followed
table were either ignored or pushed out of range. Figure 2(a) by more “exploratory” movements, and then directed action
illustrates behavior as traces of movements. As the stim- towards contact with objects.
ulation levels of the mouth area fall due to the habituation
function so random motor signals are introduced, which pro- References
duce hand sweeps to points on the extreme boundary. When [Pfeifer and Scheier, 1997] R. Pfeifer and C. Scheier.
contact sensing is active, ﬁgure 2(b) then shows rest/mouth Sensory-motor coordination: the metaphor and beyond.
moves being interrupted by contact with an object on the path. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 20(2):157–178, 1997.
  From these ﬁgures we see that the arm moved between
mouth and rest areas ﬁrst, but as these became less stimulated [Piek and Carman, 1994] J.P. Piek and R. Carman. Devel-
so random moves were introduced and ﬁelds on the boundary opmental proﬁles of spontaneous movements in infants.
for the local body space were explored. Then, when con-  Early Human Development, 39:109–126, 1994.
tact sensing was allowed (a constraint lifted), internal ﬁelds [Rutkowska, 1994] J. C. Rutkowska. Scaling up sensorimo-
and their neighbors were stimulated by object contact. Figure tor systems: Constraints from human infancy. Adaptive
3(a) shows map growth in terms of four “types” of ﬁelds. The Behaviour, 2:349–373, 1994.