                         Fast convergence to satisfying distributions

                                   Teddy Candale    and  Sandip Sen
                           Mathematical and Computer Sciences Deparment
                                           University of Tulsa
                                  {teddy-candale,sandip}@utulsa.edu


                    Abstract                          source selection strategies that guarantees convergence to sta-
                                                      ble system states, and (b) providing guidelines for designing
    We   investigate an environment where  self-      such systems with fast convergence to stable states. Our pro-
    interested agents have to ﬁnd high-quality service posed, distributed coordination scheme ensures convergence
    resources. Agents have common knowledge about     to a satisfactory system state. We experimentally highlight
    resources which are able to provide these services. the effect of different protocol and system parameters that in-
    The performance of resources is measured by the   ﬂuence the coordination process and expedites convergence
    satisfaction obtained by agents using them. The   to equilibrium states
    performance of a resource depends on its intrinsic
    capability and its current load. We use a satisfying
    rather than an optimizing framework, where agents 2   Framework
    are content to receive service quality above a    Let E  =<   A, R, perf , L, S, Γ > where: (i) A  =
    threshold. We introduce a formal framework to     {ak}k=1..K is the set of agents, (ii) R = {rn}n=1..N is the
    characterize the convergence of agents to a state set of resources, (iii) f : R × R → [0, 1], intrinsic per-
    where each agent is satisﬁed with the performance formance function of a provider, (iv) L = A → R+, daily
    of the service it is currently using. We analyzed load assigned to agents, (v) S : A × [0, 1] → [0, 1], sat-
    the convergence behavior of such a system and     isfaction function for agents, (vi) Γ = {γ1, . . . , γK }, set
                                                                                               d
    identiﬁed a mechanism to speed up convergence.    of satisfaction thresholds of agents. If a set An of agents
                                                      use the resource rn on day d then the feedback received
                                                                        d
1  Introduction                                       by every agent in An at the end of the day d is perf =
                                                           P                           d
                                                      f  rn,  a∈Ad L(a)  . An agent ak ∈ An evaluates the per-
Agents searching for high-quality services can use either their   n
own interaction experience or referrals from peer agents. We formance of rn by the the satisfaction it obtained and is given
assume that agents are interested in ﬁnding a quality of ser- by s = S(ak, perf ). An agent is satisﬁed if this performance
vice which exceeds an acceptable performance threshold. s is above a threshold γk. Consequently, two agents may have
The performance of a resource depends on its intrinsic char- different satisfactions for the same resource performance.
acteristics and is inversely correlated to the current workload Agents are interested in obtaining satisfactions above a
it is handling. Individual agent satisfaction depends both on threshold. Our aim is to design an environment where every
the resource selected and choices made by the other agents. agent will have the opportunity to ﬁnd satisfying resources.
Two agents may have different satisfactions for the same per- The following deﬁnitions formalize this idea.
formance level of a resource. Efﬁcient decentralized proto- Deﬁnition 1 (Distribution of agents over providers)
cols for ﬁnding satisfying resources are necessary. Reach- We call distribution of agents over resources the set
ing a suitable global state where all agents are satisﬁed with D = {An}n=1..N where An is the set of agents using
the resources they are using can be viewed as a coordination resource rn. The set of distributions is denoted by D.
problem. Resource choice decisions that appear to be most
                                                                  Γ                                    D
appropriate for an individual may prove to be damaging for a Deﬁnition 2 ( -acceptable distribution) A distribution
                                                                  Γ
part or the whole agent group. Selecting the locally optimal is said to be -acceptable if each agent is satisﬁed by the
                                                                       D           Γ
action can then increase the number of conﬂicts of interests resource they use in . The set of -acceptable distributions
                                                                  D
where resources are shared. Besides, knowledge about the is denoted by Γ.
global state is likely to be inaccurate in dynamic, partially A Γ-acceptable distribution is an equilibrium concept and
known, open environments.                             our goal is to develop mechanisms that enable a group of
  Coordination in such environments is a challenging prob- agents to converge to such a distribution. We now present
lem which, however, needs reasonably good solutions. There two properties needed by any resource-selection algorithm to
are two primary motivations for the current work: (a) char- ensure convergence to satisfying distributions. In the follow-
acterize the properties of agent satisfaction functions and re- ing, Alg = {Algk}k=1..K is the set of algorithms used byagents to choose a resource and Hd denotes the set of pos- the convergence speed. A high value for Kmove leads to
                               S+∞                    system oscillations and hence is undesirable. A low value
sible histories after d days and H = d=1 Hd the set of all
possible histories.                                   for Kmove guides the system toward a Γ-acceptable distribu-
                                                      tion but the convergence process slows down progressively
Deﬁnition 3 (Weighted directed distribution graph) : A
                                                      when approaching a perfectly coordinated distribution. The
directed graph G = (V, E, ω) is called a weighted di-
                                                      decrease in entropy is almost monotonic. With an intermedi-
rected distribution graph associated with Alg if and only
                                                      ate value of K  , entropy decreases at a faster rate, but has
if (i) V ⊂ D, (ii) E ∈ V × V , (iii) (D , D ) ∈ E =⇒              move
                                   1   2              more ﬂuctuations.
∃d ∈  N, ∃Hd    ∈ Hd  s.t (ω(D1, D2, Hd) 6= 0) where
ω : Hd →  [0 1]. ω(Hd) is the probability to reach the dis-
tribution D2 given agents are in distribution D1 and they use 4 Related work
algorithms in Alg.                                    Coordinated search of resources is a challenging problem in
                                                                                [ ]
In weighted directed distribution graphs, an arrow from D1 multiagent systems. Sen et al 2 show that information can
to D2 is present if it is possible to reach D2 from D1 with a negatively impact agent coordination to ﬁnd balanced distri-
non-zero probability using algorithm Alg.             bution among resources. Rustogi & Singh [1] prove that high
                                                      inertia hasten convergence when knowledge increases but low
Property 1 A distributed algorithm Alg stops when a Γ- inertia performs better with little knowledge.
acceptable distribution is reached.                     We believe that a more comprehensive understanding of
Property 2 Let G = (V, E, ω) be the graph associated to system behavior can be obtained by studying system entropy
Alg. G is such that at least one node of G is a Γ-acceptable and controlling the number of simultaneously moving agents,
distribution. A Γ-acceptable distribution is reachable from Kmove. Our approach provides a more detailed characteri-
any distribution with a non-zero probability.         zation of such systems while conﬁrming the general conclu-
                                                                              [ ]
Theorem 1 Every algorithm Alg which respect Properties 1 sions from Rustogi & Singh 1 .
and 2 converge to a Γ-acceptable distribution.
                                                      5   Conclusion
Theorem 2 Let ∀k =  1..K, αk : H →  [0, 1]. Alg con-
verges to a Γ-acceptable distributionif the following condi- We studied the properties of agent decision functions and
tions are satisﬁed: (i) Alg respects Property 1, (ii) a Γ- their interaction with the distribution of agents over resources
acceptable distribution exists, (iii) agents are identical, (iv) so that stable distributions, with no incentive for any agent to
agents explore with probability αk(H) if they are unsatisﬁed, move, are produced. We characterized the behavior of such
(v) ∀k = 1..K, ∃δk > 0 s.t ∀H ∈ H αk(H) ≥ δk.         a system of agents in terms of the entropy of the system. We
                                                      showed that that the entropy of a system can be steadily re-
We omit the proof of the above theorems due to space lim- duced, and hence convergence accelerated, by increasing the
itations. Theorem 2 concludes that exploration ensures con- inertia or reducing the number of agents that can move simul-
vergence. The nature of the agents, e.g., self-interested, co- taneously. A distributed implementation of controlling iner-
operative, deceptive does not inﬂuence the existence of con- tia is proposed in the form of an exploration parameter. We
vergence as long as minimum exploration is guaranteed. An- are evaluating the scale-up property of such a system. Our
other strength of the theorem is that it does not require the work provides guidance to selection of system protocols and
probability of exploration to be constant. An agent may adapt parameters, including satisfaction functions, exploration atti-
this probability based on whether it believes it should explore tude, etc.
more or less.
                                                      References
3  Speed of convergence
                                                      [1]  Sudhir K. Rustogi and Munindar P. Singh. Be Patient
In this paper, we will reason using two axes: a measurement and Tolerate Imprecision: How Autonomous Agents
of goodness of a state that we will call entropy, the number of can Coordinate Effectively. In Proceedings of the Six-
agents who can move at the same time.                      teenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intel-
Deﬁnition 4 (Entropy) Given an   environment where         ligence, pages 512–519, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers
agents  are  identical and  resource  rn  has   ca-        Inc. 1999 ISBN: 1-55860-613-0
pacity Cn,  we  call  entropy of a  distribution D:   [2]  Sandip Sen and Neeraj Arora and Shounak Roychowd-
       PN
E(D) =   n=1 max (0, |An| − Cn).                           hury. Using limited information to enhance group sta-
Each Γ-acceptable distribution has zero entropy. The lower bility. In the journal Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., Vol-
the entropy the better the distribution since less agents are ume 48, Number 1, Year 1998, Pages 69–82 ISSN 1071-
unsatisﬁed.                                                5819, Academic Press, Inc.,
  We claim that when agents choose their actions based on
local perspective only, the system is likely to move from a
distribution with a low entropy to one with a higher entropy
and vice and versa.Such oscillations can be controlled by lim-
iting the number of agents moving simultaneously, Kmove.
We experimentally show Kmove has a critical inﬂuence on