                          Automatic Hypertext Keyphrase Detection 

                                    Daniel Kelleher, Saturnino Luz 
                                  University of Dublin, Trinity College 
         Department of Computer Science, O’Reilly Institute, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland 
                                       {dkellehe, luzs}@cs.tcd.ie 

                    Abstract 
                                                      1.2  Hypertext 
   This paper describes initial experiments in apply-
   ing knowledge derived from hypertext structure to  The concept behind hypertext is that text content (or other 
   domain-specific automatic keyphrase extraction. It media, in fact) is connected by associations or ‘links’ from 
   is found that hyperlink information can improve    document to document, forming a directed graph structure. 
   the effectiveness of automatic keyphrase extraction The associations will usually (although not always) be based 
   by 50%. However, the primary goal of this project  on  some  semantic similarity or relevance (of varying 
   is to apply similar techniques to information re-  strength) between two documents. 
   trieval tasks such as web searching. These initial 
   results show promise for the applicability of these 2  Method 
   techniques to more far-reaching tasks.             The link structure of web documents is included in KEA by 
                                                      introducing the “Semantic Ratio” (SR) feature. SR is similar 
1  Introduction                                       to the TFxIDF feature, in that it is a frequency ratio. How-
The associative nature of the Web has been under-exploited ever, the SR of a phrase is calculated by dividing the num-
so far. This paper describes the initial steps taken towards ber of occurrences of that phrase in the current document by 
developing a framework that will take advantage of the as- the number of times it occurs in all documents directly 
sociative hyperlink structure of the web to improve informa- linked to that document (i.e. those that are the targets of 
tion retrieval and document classification. In this project, hyperlinks in the document). 
the automatic keyphrase extraction program, KEA, was 
                                                                           Frequency of P in D
adapted for use on web corpora and an extra feature was  SR(P, D) =
added that takes advantage of any semantic similarity that        Frequency of P in documents linked to D
may exist between linked web documents.                
                                                      The reasoning behind including this feature in KEA is based 
1.1 KEA                                               on the intuition that the content of a web document is fre-
KEA [Witten et al., 1999] is an automatic keyphrase extrac- quently semantically related to its neighbours (in the context 
tion algorithm for documents based on a domain-specific of a graph structure, in other words, the documents linked to 
machine-learning model [Frank et al., 1999]. It compiles a it) and that the subject matter (identified by the keyphrases) 
list of phrases from a training set of documents with anno- of the document is therefore in some way relative to their 
tated keyphrases and generates a naïve Bayes classifier contents. The inclusion of the SR feature is a first step in 
based on two default features of these phrases:       testing, and subsequently, modelling this intuition. 
•  TFxIDF  [Salton, 1988], which is a value based on the  
   ratio of probability of a phrase appearing in the current A low SR value (< 1) indicates that a potential keyphrase 
   document  and the probability that it appears in any occurs more frequently in the document’s neighbours than 
   document, and is given by:                         in the document itself. The higher the SR value, therefore, 
                        No.  of  occur.  of  P in D   the more specific the phrase to this document, relative to its 
     TF  × IDF (P, D ) =                      ×       immediate surroundings. Note that this is different to the 
                         No.  of  phrases  in D       TFxIDF score as only a subset of the documents are used to 
           total  number of  documents                compute it, namely those documents that form a localised 
     log(                              )
         number  of  docs  that contain P             subgraph with paths of length 1 from the original document. 
•  Distance - the ratio of the number of words before the 
   first appearance of the phrase in the document and the 3 Testing 
   total number of words in the document.             The new version of KEA with the SR feature included was 
                                                      tested on four web corpora taken from the WWW. These 
The classifier is then used to extract potential keyphrases corpora were chosen because a sufficient number of docu-
from a test set of documents. ments in each site contained annotated keyphrases in the  
form of the Meta Keyword HTML tag and were therefore • Further analysis of the distribution of SR in keyphrases 
suitable for empirical tests on the accuracy of automatic and adapting the KEA algorithm to use a more suitable 
keyphrase extraction.                               classifier than the naïve Bayes. It is clear that the SR 
                                                    and TFxIDF features are not independent, as the naïve 
The corpus was then split into a training set and a test set of Bayes classifier requires. Furthermore, while phrases 
roughly equal size, with the restriction that no document in with low TFxIDF are generally less likely to be key-
the test set should be linked to a document in the training phrases, this is not typically the case with SR. There-
set. The new KEA algorithm (called KEAWeb) was then fore, the independence assumption will, in some cases 
trained on the training set and then performed automatic result in a less accurate classification. Also, the normal 
keyphrase extraction on the test set, and the average number density function assumed by KEA may be suboptimal 
of correct keyphrases found in each corpus was recorded for the continuous features used in this project. Current 
and is presented below.                             work therefore involves testing variations on the naïve 
                                                    Bayes classifier (such as the ‘flexible’ naïve Bayes de-
                                                    scribed in [John et al., 1995]). 
                                                 •  Experimentation with the SR feature is required in or-
                                                    der to determine if a more suitable feature or number of 
                                                    features exist. In addition, the SR feature will be more 
                                                    generalised to take into account more distant documents 
                                                    than those directly related to the document in question, 
                                                    perhaps including a link-weighting or spreading-
                                                    activation mechanism for retrieving the documents. 
                                                 •  The SR distribution will be further analysed and used to 
                                                    adapt a term-frequency-based document retrieval pro-
                                                    gram to the Web and to improve existing web search 
                                                    engines by assigning scores to documents according to 
    Figure 1: Comparison of KEA and KEA Web         the probability that a given search term is a keyphrase 
                                                    of that document. These projects will be applied ini-
4   Results                                         tially in a domain-specific, supervised learning envi-
                                                    ronment, and ultimately in a more general and universal 
Figure 1 shows that the inclusion of the SR feature in the environment. 
naïve Bayes classifier improves the success of the KEA  
algorithm by between 45% and 52% in three out of four of The initial results mentioned in this paper lend encourage-
the test corpora. KEA performs badly on the Britannica cor- ment to the hope that a system based on hyperlink analysis 
pus whether the SR feature is included or not. This is due to can make significant improvements to existing Web search 
a number of factors based on the fact that the license-free technology. 
version of the site severely restricts both the size and the 
number of links in a document. It can therefore be safely References 
assumed that the corpus is an atypical example of a web site  [Frank et al., 1999] Frank E., Paynter G.W., Witten I.H., 
and that the three other corpora are more representative ex- Gutwin C. and Nevill-Manning C.G. (1999) Domain-
amples.                                            specific keyphrase extraction Proc. Sixteenth Interna-
                                                   tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Mor-
Initial analysis of the SR distribution in keyphrases suggests gan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, pp. 668-
that phrases with extremal SR values are more likely to be 673. 
keyphrases. In other words, phrases that appear frequently 
in surrounding documents (low SR) have high relevance for [John et al., 1999] John, G.H., Langley, P., (1995) Estimat-
the document in question. Also, phrases that occur very ing Continuous Distributions in Bayesian Classifiers. 
rarely in surrounding documents (high SR) will also have Proc. Eleventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial 
high relevance, suggesting that they indicate a topic that is Intellience, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo. 
specific to the current document.                [Salton, 1988] Salton, Gerard. Automatic text processing: 
                                                   the transformation, analysis, and retrieval of information 
5   Conclusions & Future Work                      by computer, Reading, Mass.Wokingham : Addison-
                                                   Wesley, 1988. 
The SR feature shows initial promise as an indicator of se-
mantic relations between linked pages. The latent semantic [Witten et al., 1999] Witten I.H., Paynter G.W., Frank E., 
information that causes the improvement in KEA is ex- Gutwin C. and Nevill-Manning C.G. (1999) KEA: Prac-
pected to be transferable to other domains, particularly Web tical automatic keyphrase extraction. Proc. DL '99, pp. 
searching. Future work therefore involves (in order of im- 254-256. (Poster presentation) 
mediacy): 