         Value-Centric Trust Model with Improved Familiarity Measurement

                                   Jie Zhang and Ali. A. Ghorbani
                                      Faculty of Computer Science
                                     University of New Brunswick
                                   Fredericton, NB, E3B 5A3, Canada
                                 Email:  {jie.zhang, ghorbani}@unb.ca

                    Abstract                          Repeated exposure is represented by how many transactions
                                                      are established between the two agents. Level of processing
    Formalization of familiarity contributes to formal- is determined by the quantity of widgets in each transaction.
    ization of trust through a value-centric trust model. Forgetting rate is calculated by the interval between the last
    However, familiarity was assumed to be the similar- transaction and the current transaction, and the factor of the
    ity of values (ﬁxed for two agents), and stability of agent society.
    the trust model was relatively low. To increase the
    stability, we propose an improved familiarity mea-
    surement. Experiments are carried out to compare  3   Familiarity Measurement
    the stability of the trust model with the improved For an agent society A with n agents, A = {a1, a2, ..., an},
    familiarity measurement and with the ﬁxed famil-  let F (ai, aj) and S(ai, aj) represent the familiarity and sim-
    iarity value. It is observed that the stability is in- ilarity between agents ai and aj, respectively. The initial fa-
    creased by 33.47% through the improved familiar-  miliarity value that the agent ai has with the agent aj can be
    ity measurement.                                  calculated through the formula as follows:

                                                                     n
1  Introduction                                         F0(ai, aj) = max F (aj, ak)S(ai, ak) (k 6= i 6= j) (1)
                                                                    k=1
Trust has always been bundled with familiarity to become a
popular topic in the ﬁelds of psychology, sociology, and com- The value of familiarity can be calculated from the knowl-
puter science. The relationship between trust and familiar- edge that the agent ai has about the agent aj as follows:
ity has been further clariﬁed through the value-centric trust                     2
model proposed by Carter and Ghorbani [Carter and Ghor-          F (a , a ) =             − 1,
                                                                  c  i  j        −K (a ,a )           (2)
bani, 2004]. The new model proposes that trust is a combina-                1 + e   c i j
tion of self-esteem, reputation, and familiarity within a multi-
                                                      where Fc(ai, aj) and Kc(ai, aj) represent the familiarity
agent system (MAS) context. Trust is also multidimensional
                                                      value and the knowledge value that the agent ai has from the
in that it can be facilitated through familiarity. Familiarity
                                                      perspective of the agent aj before the current, c, transaction,
was assumed to be the similarity of values. In consequence, respectively.
stability of the trust model is relatively low. However, peo- Since the familiarity value is affected by the previous level
ple in nature prefer relatively stable societies. To increase of processing and the forgetting rate, and it is determined
stability of the trust model, we propose an improved familiar- by the agent’s knowledge, a simple formula for updating the
ity measurement by exploring a variety of human factors that agent’s knowledge may be as follows:
may affect the feeling of familiarity.
  The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 Kc(ai, aj) = Kp(ai, aj) + Lp(ai, aj) − Rp(ai, aj), (3)
describes the four major factors affecting familiarity in agent
societies. The way of measuring familiarity is proposed in where Kp(ai, aj) represents the knowledge value that agent
Section 3. Experimental results are presented and discussed ai had about agent aj before the previous transaction,
in Section 4. Finally, the conclusions of the present study are Lp(ai, aj) is the level of processing of agents ai and aj dur-
presented in Section 5.                               ing the previous transaction, and Rp(ai, aj) represents the
                                                      forgetting value since the previous transaction. The initial
                                                      knowledge value of agent ai, K0(ai, aj) can be determined
2  Factors Affecting Familiarity                      by Equations 1 and 2.
Familiarity is affected by four major factors: prior experi- The formula to calculate the previous level of processing
ence, repeated exposure, level of processing, and forgetting of the agents ai and aj may be calculated by:
rate [Zhang and Ghorbani, 2004]. Prior experience is deter-
                                                                                         −Qp/l
mined by knowledge of similar agents in the agent society.     Lp(ai, aj) = Kp(ai, aj)(1 − e  ),      (4)where Qp represents the quantity of widgets in the previ-
ous transaction and l represents the learning coefﬁcient. The
value of l may differ for different agent societies.
  The forgetting value of agent ai and agent aj can be calcu-
lated as follows:

                           −Qp/l      −4tp/m
 Rp(ai, aj) = Kp(ai, aj)(2 − e  )(1 − e      ), (5)

where m represents the memory coefﬁcient. 4tp represents
the time difference between the current transaction and the
previous transaction of agents ai and aj.

4  Analysis of Stability
The stability of the model is considered with respect to trust-
worthiness ranking. Both the two kinds of familiarity mea-
surements, improved familiarity measurement and ﬁxed fa-
miliarity value calculated by the similarity of two agents, are
implemented and embedded in the trust model. For later use, Figure 1: Change of Rank of Any Given Agent
TMIFM is deﬁned as the trust model with improved familiar-
ity measurement, and TMFFV is deﬁned as the trust model spot. Another phenomenon is that once agents have been
with ﬁxed familiarity value. Within this work, stability is given a spot, they remain close to that spot. This phenomenon
connected to the idea of ranking. The stability refers to the can also be seen in Figure 1. From day 25 on, the rank of
degree of change of rankings of sellers. Thus, Stability is the agent in TMIFM stays close to the average line, whereas
measured through an examination of the average variance of the rank of the agent in TMFFV keeps changing. This hap-
the selling agents’ ranks on a daily basis.           pens because the selling agents with higher/lower rank have
                                                      more/less possibility of being selected to establish transac-
                                                      tions with buying agents in both TMIFM and TMFFV.
 Table 1: Comparison of Stability of TMIFM and TMFFV
   Test #  TMIFM    TMFFV     Percentage Difference
     1       3.92     5.77          32.06%            5   Conclusions
     2       5.61     7.91          29.08%            We proposed the improved familiarity measurement by ex-
     3       6.11     10.12         39.62%            ploring the factors mainly affecting familiarity. The four fac-
     4       5.36     8.62          37.82%            tors include prior experience, repeated exposure, level of pro-
     5       4.00     4.96          19.35%            cessing, and forgetting rate. We then devised a convenient
     6       3.94     5.61          29.77%            way to measure and update familiarity value. The improved
     7       4.39     7.75          43.35%            familiarity measurement has been integrated into the value-
     8       5.11     9.51          46.27%            centric model. Experiments were carried out to compare the
     9       4.47     6.10          26.72%            stability of the trust model with the improved familiarity mea-
    10       6.35     7.00          9.29%             surement and with the ﬁxed familiarity value. Experimental
  Average    4.73     7.11          33.47%            results shew that the stability has been increased by 33.47%
                                                      through the improved familiarity measurement.
  The comparative stability of TMIFM and TMFFV is pre-
sented in Table 1. On average, the average variance of 6  Acknowledgments
TMIFM is 33.47% lower than that of TMFFV, which means This work was funded by the National Science and Engi-
that the former is more stable than the latter. The result can neering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) to Dr. Ali A.
be further illustrated by analyzing the change of rank of any Ghorbani through grant RGPIN 227441.
given agent as shown in Figure 1. From this ﬁgure, it is ob-
vious that the variance of the rank produced by TMIFM is References
lower than that produced by TMFFV. Therefore, TMIFM is
more stable than TMFFV.                               [Carter and Ghorbani, 2004] Jonathan Carter and Ali A.
  The reason that TMIFM has higher stability can be ex-  Ghorbani. Towards a formalization of value-centric trust
plained by analyzing two phenomena in both of the two trust in agent societies. Journal of Web Intelligence and Agent
models. One phenomenon is that agents are pushed faster  Systems, 2(3):167–184, 2004.
to the right spot that they should be on in TMIFM than [Zhang and Ghorbani, 2004] Jie Zhang and Ali A. Ghorbani.
in TMFFV, which can be seen from Figure 1. The agent     Familiarity and trust: Measuring familiarity with a web
in TMIFM  nearly reaches the average line earlier (approx- site. In Proceedings of the 2nd Annual Conference on Pri-
imately on day 15) than in TMFFV (approximately on day   vacy, Trust and Security (PST 2004), pages 23–28, Octo-
40). This happens because that the improved familiarity mea- ber 2004.
surement increases the speed of pushing the agent to the right