            A Framework for Communication Planning on Mobile Devices

                               Joseph B. Kopena    and  William C. Regli
                                    {tjkopena, regli}@cs.drexel.edu
                                           Drexel University
                                        Philadelphia, PA, USA.

                    Abstract                          2   Example: Calendar Agent
    In mobile computing, communicative acts are not   Consider a calendar on a PDA with cellular and wireless ca-
    free. Costs such as power and bandwidth con-      pabilities. As events are posted it synchronizes with a base
    sumption are prominent issues. In addition, re-   computer, which in turn notiﬁes family and friends. Wireless
    sources vary widely across hardware and operating ethernet can only connect to the base computer when in range
    context. Agents in these settings must account for of an access point. The cellular module can always make an
    these costs and adapt to available capabilities. This Internet connection to the base computer via a satellite, but
    poster presents a planning optimization formaliza- consumes substantial amounts of power and charges a fee.
    tion of this problem, enabling service-based agents To post updates in all situations, the calendar must discover
    to reason about and conduct communication using   and utilize both interfaces. However, cellular connections
    local and network accessible resources.           should be minimized: they should not be used if wireless is
                                                      available, or to post minor or far-off events. These should be
                                                      collected until several may be transmitted or ethernet can be
1  Introduction                                       used. However, cellular connections should be used to post
                                                      imminent changes so that the base computer may begin syn-
Mobile computing is increasingly common in urban settings.
                                                      chronizing affected friends, family, or co-workers.
Laptops, PDAs, and other small, network-capable computing
devices pervade society. These devices along with the many
and varied applications of mobile computing highlight an im- 3 Formalization
portant observation: communicative actions are not free. In Utilizing available network services and intelligently, effec-
fact, there are a variety of associated costs, including: tively conducting communications may be achieved by re-
 ◦  Power.   On  many  devices, networking hardware   leasing agents and applications from ﬁxed application-layer
    consumes more power than all other systems com-   protocols and messages. Communicative actions are not
    bined [Vahdat et al., 2000]. Transmissions consume sub- static. An agent may plan, schedule, alter, and parameterize
    stantial amounts of limited battery supplies. Frequent them, adapting and responding to conditions and events.
    communication signiﬁcantly reduces operational lifes- Even a simple agent may deliberate on when to deliver a
    pan, a critical obstacle against many applications. ﬁxed message in order to minimize communication costs. It
 ◦  Bandwidth. Wireless link capacities are typically much may also plan on which network services to use based on ad-
    lower. Throughput in 802.11b MANETs is often less vertised descriptions. More sophisticated agents may alter
    than 50% the theoretical maximum of 11 Mbps [Xy-  and plan on the propositional content of messages to maxi-
    lomenos et al., 2001]. In contrast, traditional wired net- mize their utility: power-conscious agents may aggregate low
    works can reach upward of 100 Mbps. Communication priority messages into one burst, economizing ﬁxed costs.
    must be sparing to conserve such limited bandwidth. In this work, such reasoning is accomplished through
  Communication resources also vary between hosts and op- utility-based planning. Services such as network interfaces
erating context. Hardware such as 802.11 cards, Bluetooth are advertised and treated as plan actions with attached costs.
chips, and CDMA modules possess different properties and Communication goals are modeled as utilities of doxastic
capabilities. Routing algorithms and other software present states. These elements are represented within a formal situa-
dissimilar interfaces and sensing abilities an agent may uti- tion calculus, enabling exchange of well-deﬁned service de-
lize [Kopena et al., 2005]. However, it cannot necessarily scriptions and limited commitment to reasoning mechanisms.
know a priori which communication services will be avail- Planning Framework. This work deﬁnes the above plan-
able on its host, and must instead autonomously discover and ning problem using the Process Speciﬁcation Language
utilize them. In addition, this set may change over time, (PSL) [Gruninger¨ and Menzel, 2003], an ISO standard (ISO
through user actions such as undocking the host or natural 18629) for process modeling. At its core, PSL is an exten-
events, e.g. network cards failing as power dwindles. sive ﬁrst-order situation calculus axiomatization. A deductiveplanning problem (A,I,ψ,C) → ρ is deﬁned on top of the
PSL Core, Occurrence Trees, and Discrete States theories: With the addition of an episode delimiter deﬁned as occur-
 ◦ A are the activity axioms, preconditions and effects. rences of defer or message-activity, supporting axioms
 ◦ I deﬁnes initial ﬂuent state: ∀δi · initial(δi) ⊃ δi |= I. not listed above such as the deﬁnition of update, and closure
 ◦ A  chain δ is a sequence of successive legal occurrences axioms, a plan based on these deﬁnitions will:
   such that initial(δ1) ∧ δn |= the episode delimiter ψ. ◦ Deliver any update if a wireless connection exists.
 ◦ C  deﬁnes utility summands µ over occurrences, related ◦ Use the satellite interface if warranted by an update or
   by occ-util-summ(δi, µ).                               some collection of updates. For example, any update
 ◦ Occurrence utility, occ-util(δi), is deﬁned as ∑ µ over concerning the next 3.5 days will be posted immediately.
   {µ|occ-util-summ(δi, µ)}.                           ◦  Otherwise defer until new updates are posted or condi-
 ◦ Utility of a chain, utility(δ), equals ∑occ-util(δi).  tions change, e.g. wireless contact is made.
 ◦ A  rational chain δ is a chain such that there does not
   exist a δ 0 such that utility(δ 0) > utility(δ).   5   Summary and Future Work
 ◦  A rational plan ρ is then the sequence of activities asso-
                                                      This poster presents an approach to efﬁciently performing
    ciated with the occurrences in a rational chain.
                                                      communication tasks by planning on the costs and capabil-
Agents, Hosts, and Message Actions.  A small theory   ities of advertised resources. In contrast with power-aware
weakly deﬁning agents, hosts, messages, and message activi- networking, this work supports application-layer preferences
ties is also incorporated on top of PSL. This provides a shared and mixed-infrastructure settings. Although similar to re-
ontology deﬁning a base by which an agent may communi- search on communication planning via epistemic goals, this
cate about, recognize, and utilize communication resources. work acknowledges that communicative acts have costs. In
Agent Beliefs. A ﬁrst order theory of belief based on k- addition, this framework is oriented toward a service-based
accessibility between occurrences is also included in the the- system, enabling agents to reason on internal as well as ex-
ory. It deﬁnes KD (see e.g. [Fagin et al., 1995]), the logic ternal capabilities. This work also introduces an application
of consistent belief, within the ﬂuent space of PSL. This en- area of web services, along with a formalization in the situa-
ables the expression of agent interfaces in the form of doxas- tion calculus and a principled, practical representational dif-
tic activity effects, as well as an agent’s communication goals. ferentiation between mental and world activity effects.
Belief, and speciﬁcally KD, was chosen due to its relatively Future work includes algorithms and protocols for ex-
weak commitments on agent reasoning abilities and trust. changing descriptions; accounting for the unpredictable na-
                                                      ture of mobile networks in composing a plan; deﬁning sub-
4  Example: Calendar Agent Axiomatized                classes of the planning problem amenable to pragmatically
Agents and communication resources may then describe their feasible computation; techniques for integrating heteroge-
interfaces and abilities, e.g. the base computer of Section 2: nous and untrusted costs; and the knowledge acquisition task
        ∀o,a,s,m · occurrence of(o,a) ∧ legal(o)      of evaluating preconditions involving unknown terminology.
                                                        More information, details, and citations to related work are
         ∧ message-activity(a,s,SYNC,m) ⊃
                                                      available at http://edge.cs.drexel.edu/services/.
          [∀c · holds(contents(m,c),o) ⊃
           holds(believes(SYNC,c),o)].                References
                                                      [              ]
The cellular and wireless interfaces may be described as: Fagin et al., 1995 Ronald Fagin, Joseph Y. Halpern, Yoram
                                                         Moses, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Reasoning About Knowledge.
  ∀o,a,s,d,m · occurrence of(o,a) ∧ legal(o)∧            MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1995.
  sat-msg(a,s,d,m) ⊃ message-activity(a,s,d,m)∧
                                                      [Gruninger¨ and Menzel, 2003] M. Gruninger¨ and C. Menzel.
   occ-util-summ(o,−0.5).                                The Process Speciﬁcation Language: Theory and applica-
  ∀o,a,s,d,m · occurrence of(o,a) ∧ legal(o)∧            tions. AAAI AI Magazine, 24(3):63–74, 2003.
  radio-msg(a,s,d,m) ⊃ prior(in-range(s,d),o)∧        [Kopena et al., 2005] J. Kopena, V. Cicirello, M. Peysakhov,
   message-activity(a,s,d,m) ∧ occ-util-summ(o,−0.1).    K. Malfettone, A. Mroczkowski, G. Naik, E. Sultanik,
                                                         M. Kam, and W. Regli.  Network awareness and the
The agent’s internal communication activities would be:  Philadelphia-Area Urban Wireless Network Testbed. In
   activity(defer).                                      AAAI Spring Symp. on AI for Homeland Security, 2005.
   ∀o,m,d,n · occurrence of(o,attach(m,update(d,n)))∧ [Vahdat et al., 2000] Amin Vahdat, Alvin Lebeck, and
    legal(o) ⊃ ∧holds(contents(m,update(d,n)),o).        Carla Schlatter Ellis. Every joule is precious: The case for
                                                         revisiting operating system design for energy efﬁciency. In
The agent’s behavior may then be captured as the time-   9th ACM SIGOPS European Workshop, September 2000.
dependent utility of delivering updates to the base computer: [Xylomenos et al., 2001] G. Xylomenos, G.C. Polyzos,
        ∀o,c,d,n · holds(current-day(c),o)∧              P. Mahonen, and M. Saaranen. TCP performance issues
         holds(believes(SYNC,update(d,n)),o) ⊃           over wireless links. IEEE Comm., 39(4):52–58, 2001.
         occ-util-summ(o,1 − ((d − c)/7)).