     Knowledge Based Approach for Mechanically Verifying Security Protocols 

                      Xiaoqi Ma, Xiaochun Cheng and Rachel McCrindle 
                               Department of Computer Science 
                                  The University of Reading 
                             Whiteknights, Reading RG6 6AY, UK 
                                   xiaoqi.ma@reading.ac.uk 

                  Abstract                      can know and can never know. It takes protocols concerning 
                                                multiple interleaving sessions into consideration and can find 
   A new knowledge-based security protocol verifica-
                                                flaws which are often overlooked by many rule based meth-
   tion approach is proposed in this paper. A number of ods. Unlike state based method, our method avoids searching 
   predicates, functions, assumptions and rules are large state space. By implementing the method in a me-
   used to infer the knowledge of participating prin-
                                                chanical reasoning platform, Isabelle [Nipkow et al., 2003], 
   cipals. These items are implemented with Isabelle, it can be used to mechanically verify cryptographic protocols 
   which enables mechanical proving. This approach and can converge very quickly. The Needham-Schroeder 
   can prove protocols concerning interleaving proto-
                                                public key authentication protocol [Needham and Schroeder, 
   col sessions and can prove the correctness of a me- 1978] with Lowe’s fix [Lowe, 1995] is analysed in this paper 
   dium-sized security protocol in a couple of seconds. as an example to show the effectiveness and efficiency of our 
   The mechanical proofs of a number of important 
                                                method. 
   secure properties and then of the correctness of the 
   Needham-Schroeder-Lowe protocol are given as 
   examples to show the effectiveness of this method. 2 The Knowledge Based Method 
                                                Our method focuses on the knowledge of all participators in 
1 Introduction                                  the protocol. We describe their initial knowledge and infer 
                                                what they can and cannot know with the progress of the 
To evaluate and verify security protocols in a systematic way, protocol. In other words, it concerns the knowledge analysis 
significant research work has been conducted in the area of 
                                                of all participators. This method can be implemented in 
designing formal methods for analysis of cryptographic Isabelle to enable mechanical verification. 
protocols, and many good models have been proposed. All principals taking part in network communications can 
Generally speaking, all these methods can be broadly divided 
                                                be divided into three categories: the server, the friends, and 
into two categories, namely state based methods and rule the spy. 
based methods.                                    Random numbers chosen by principals serve as nonces to 
 State based methods model security protocols using finite 
                                                identify protocol runs uniquely and to avoid replay attack. 
state machines. They search the state space exhaustively to Every principal has some keys. All the nonces and keys are 
see whether all the reachable states are safe [Paulson, 1997]. represented by natural numbers. 
If some reachable state in a security protocol is proved to be 
                                                  A message is a piece of information sent from one prin-
unsafe, a flaw may be reported; otherwise, the protocol will cipal to another. A message consists of principals’ names, 
be reported correct and safe. State based methods are usually nonces, keys, encrypted messages, signed messages, hashed 
complete and can find most flaws in protocols.  
                                                messages, or a combination of these. It can be recursively 
 Rule based methods formally express what principals can defined in Isabelle. 
infer from messages received [Paulson, 1997]. In these ap-  We define a number of functions and predicates. Key 
proaches, the protocols, the necessary assumptions and the 
                                                functions map principals to their certain keys. Function 
goals of the protocols are formulated in formal logic. Some Nonce_of maps principals to their nonces. To determine 
specific properties of the protocols can be proved by using whether a message is a part of another one, we introduce the 
the axioms and rules of the logic. Since rule based methods 
                                                function msg_part. 
do not have to search large state space, they can normally  The predicate Know describes a principal’s knowledge 
converge quickly.                               about a certain message. Similarly, the predicate Auth de-
 To gain effectiveness from state based methods and effi-
                                                scribes one principal’s authentication state about another 
ciency from rule based methods, we propose in this paper a principal on a certain message, i.e., whether the message is 
new security protocol verification method, which is based on sent by the expected principal and is unmodified. 
a knowledge-based framework. The method analyses the 
knowledge of participating principals and infers what they    To describe cryptographic protocols, two action functions The correctness of the Needham-Schroeder-Lowe protocol 
 need to be introduced. One is Send, representing that one relies greatly on the secrecy of the nonces used, and therefore 
 principal sends a message to another principal. Correspond- the key point for proving the Needham-Schroeder-Lowe 
 ingly, the other function is Rcv, meaning that a principal protocol is to prove the secrecy of nonces. We have two 
receives a certain message from others.          lemmas, one stating that the spy will never see B’s nonce, and 
   Our method is based on a number of assumptions, which the other describing that the spy will never see the content of 
 are widely accepted by most researchers in this field. the second protocol message, which is a compound message 
   We introduce a group of inference rules into the method to consisting of A and B’s nonces and B’s name. 
 infer new knowledge from the old. All these rules can be We have to point out that the spy may intercept and know 
 divided into four categories: encryption/decryption rules, A’s nonce. But it does not affect the secrecy of the second 
 message combination/separation rules, sending/receiving protocol message sent from B to A. 
 rules and authentication rules.                   We now can prove the guarantees. The guarantee for B 
                                                 after step 3 is that B authenticates that A has sent B’s nonce 
 3  Verifying Needham-Schroeder-Lowe Pro-        (encrypted by B’s public key) to B and this message has not 
                                                 been modified by the spy. The first authentication rule is 
    tocol Mechanically                           applied and three subgoals are produced. With above lemmas, 
 To verify the Needham-Schroeder-Lowe protocol, we first these subgoals can be easily solved by Isabelle. The guaran-
 model it in our framework, then prove a number of important tee for A can be similarly proved. 
 properties, and finally prove the security guarantees. 
   Normally, the protocol can be formalised into three steps 4 Conclusions 
 for all honest principals. The first step is an application of the 
 Send action function for sending A’s nonce and name to B. In this paper, we have presented a new framework to prove 
 The second step states that if the first step has been suc- the correctness of security protocols. We model the protocols 
 cessfully carried out, principal B will correspondingly send a and infer them by analysing principals’ knowledge.  
 compound message consisting of A’s nonce, its own nonce   To improve the efficiency of security protocol verification, 
 and name to principal A. Similarly, the third step describes we implement our framework using Isabelle. We have im-
that if the second step has been successfully carried out, plemented all the data structures, functions, predicates, as-
principal A will correspondingly send B’s nonce back to sumptions and inference rules in Isabelle. With this imple-
principal B.                                     mentation, we are able to prove the correctness of protocols 
  These steps are sufficient for honest principals, but not for mechanically. All the proving details are generated by Isa-
the spy who does not necessarily obey the rules. Therefore, belle, thereby saving users a significant amount of time. In 
we introduce four extra formulae. The first one is Fake, addition, our framework also takes the cases concerning 
 stating that the spy may send messages it knows to others. multiple interleaving sessions into consideration, making the 
 Another two formulae describe how honest principals re- method more powerful. 
 spond to faked messages. The honest principals take the To show the effectiveness of our framework, we have used 
 forged messages as protocol steps, and then respond them the Needham-Schroeder-Lowe public key authentication 
 according to the protocol, as if they are legal messages. protocol as an example. The example shows how to use the 
  To avoid interleaving attack, Lowe introduced the re- framework and its implementation. Our implementation can 
 ceiving principal’s name into step 2 of the protocol [Lowe, prove the correctness of this protocol in a couple of seconds. 
 1995]. Accordingly, we introduce the decline rule: if the Additionally, most of the codes can be reused for similar 
name in the message is not the name of the sender, the re- applications. 
ceiving principal should decline the message and terminate 
the communicating session.                       References 
  With above modelling, we first prove some properties [Lowe, 1995] Gavin Lowe. An attack on the 
before we prove the final guarantees for the two participating Needham-Schroeder public-key authentication protocol. 
principals.                                        Information Processing Letters, 56(3):131–133, 1995. 
  One of these properties is that if a principal knows a mes-
sage M, and M  is a part of M, then it should know the mes- [Needham and Schroeder, 1978] Roger Needham and Mi-
            1                                      chael Schroeder. Using encryption for authentication in 
sage M1 as well. Due to the inductive definition of the data 
type message, we need to prove this lemma by induction. large networks of computers. Communications of the 
Several subgoals have been produced after we apply the ACM, 21(12):993–999, 1978. 
induction command. The subgoals concerning principal, [Nipkow et al., 2003] Tobias Nipkow, Lawrence C. Paulson, 
nonce, key and encrypted, signed and hashed massages can and Markus Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL: A Proof Assistant for 
be proved by using the implication introduction, conjunction Higher-Order Logic. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 2003. 
elimination and conjunction introduction rules of higher [Paulson, 1997] Lawrence C. Paulson. Proving properties of 
order logic. For subgoals concerning compound messages, security protocols by induction. In Proceedings of the 
we design a rule to decompose and resolve them automati- 10th Computer Security Foundations Workshop, pages 
cally.                                             70–83, Rockport, Massachusetts, June 1997. 