Structural Representation and Matching of Articulatory Speech Structures based
               on the Evolving Transformation System (ETS) Formalism
                    Alexander Gutkin                                 David Gay
          Centre for Speech Technology Research             Faculty of Computer Science
                  University of Edinburgh                   University of New Brunswick
                 Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, UK                  Fredericton, NB, E3B 5A3, Canada
                alexander.gutkin@ed.ac.uk                         dave.gay@unb.ca

                    Abstract                           Organ  Semantics      Group            Organs  G
                                                       UL     upper lip      bilabial closure UL, LL  6
    A formal structural representation of speech is pre- LL   lower lip      tongue dorsum height TD  4
    sented in this paper. The representation is de-    UI     upper incisor  tongue tip height TT     4
    veloped within the Evolving Transformation Sys-    TD     tongue dorsum  labiodental contact UI, LL 4
    tem (ETS) formalism and encapsulates speech pro-   TT     tongue tip     velic aperture   VL      4
    cesses at the articulatory level. We show how the  VL     velum          velar contact    TD, VL  2
    class structure of several consonantal phonemes of HP     hard palate    alveolar contact TT, AR  2
    English can be expressed via articulatory gestures. AR    alveolar ridge palatal contact  TT, HP  2
    Elements of these classes can be detected in a cor- VF    vocal folds    voicing          VF      2
    responding structural representation of continuous Table 1: Articulatory organs (left) involved in the production
    speech. Our experimental results on the MOCHA     of various groups of primitive gestures (right).
    articulatory corpus support the hypothesis that the
    proposed articulatory representation captures sufﬁ- work for the structural representation of “natural” processes.
    cient information for the accurate structural identi- ETS suggests that the representation of each such process
    ﬁcation of phonemic classes.                      should include its “formative history”, which is a series of
                                                      “operations” (primitives) acting on the constituent elements
1  Introduction                                       (sites) of the process. Such formative histories (structs)
                                                      should contain some regular “chunks” (transforms). A class
Despite the evident success of numerical approaches to mod- representation in ETS is a ﬁnite set of closely related trans-
elling of speech, they are often criticised for having little rela- forms, out of which the corresponding class elements—
tion to actual human speech production/recognition [Jelinek, processes—can be constructed. In our ETS representation of
1997, p. 10]. The alternative, structural, means of pattern gestural speech structure, the natural process we model is the
representation have, however, received little attention. In our physiological process of articulation.
view, one of the main reasons for this situation is the appar-
ent lack of suitable structural frameworks possessing the nec-
essary formal power to accommodate the representation of 2 Articulatory Structure according to ETS
classes of complex linguistic phenomena (e.g. phonemes and The units of representation corresponding to articulatory or-
syllables). It is hypothesised that the appearance of such a gans and primitive articulatory gestures are ETS sites and
systematic analytical framework and the development of ap- primitives, respectively. Informally, an ETS primitive is a unit
propriate representations within it may help to bridge the gap of temporal structure of a process, describing the structural
between speech recognition and linguistic research.   transformation of its set of “initial” sites into its set of “ter-
  On the linguistic side, the motivation for this work minal” sites, where an ETS site is the smallest/unstructured
comes from the theory of articulatory phonology [Brow- representational unit within a process. In the articulatory rep-
man and Goldstein, 1992], in which vocal tract action resentation, a primitive is identiﬁed with a change in the in-
during speech production is decomposed into discrete, re- teraction of one or more of the associated articulatory organs,
combinable atomic units known as gestures. Compared to which are expressed as sites.
traditional approaches—such as distinctive phonological fea- The left-hand side of Table 1 lists all of the ETS sites used
tures [Jakobson and Halle, 1971]—the gestural approach is in the representation, along with the corresponding interpreta-
more physiologically concrete and offers a compact means of tion. The right-hand side of Table 1 shows the groups of prim-
representing the truly asynchronous nature of speech, allow- itive gestures used in this study. For each group, the relevant
ing for better interpretations of complex phonological phe- sites (articulators) and the number of distinct constituent ges-
nomena (such as co-articulation).                     tures (primitives) G are shown. Informally, a group consists
  The Evolving Transformation System (ETS), outlined  of semantically and syntactically related primitive gestures
in [Goldfarb et al., 2004], is a radically new formal frame- involving similar articulators. Pictorially, it is convenient toFigure 1: Several of the ETS primitives used in this represen-
tation, grouped by articulatory category.

represent primitives as convex shapes, with initial sites de-
picted as points on the upper half, and terminal sites depicted
as points on the lower half. Some of the 30 primitives used
in the articulatory representation are given in Figure 1. Three
groups are shown: two articulatory gestures of the vocal folds
resulting in voiced or unvoiced sounds, the two gestures par-
ticipating in velar closure, and three of the six gestures mod-
elling the aperture of the lips (bilabial closure).   Figure 2: Partial ETS struct describing the gestural structure
                                                      of the word “get”, constructed using primitive gestures de-
          struct
  An ETS       is a temporally-ordered sequence of con- tected on-the-ﬂy in sample data. The transform correspond-
nected primitives capturing the “history” of the correspond- ing to phoneme /g/ is identiﬁed with a dotted line.
ing process. Within our articulatory representation, a struct is
identiﬁed with a sequence of primitive gestures, which are hy- 3 Experiments and Discussion
pothesised to encapsulate the gestural structure of any given
utterance (note that any utterance can itself be interpreted as Our goal was to assess the performance of the 14 ETS su-
a highly non-trivial gesture). Figure 2 depicts the gestural pertransforms via the structural matching algorithm against
structure of the word “get” in our representation. The articu- structures derived following [Gutkin and King, 2005] from
lation of /g/, for instance, has a simple interpretation: a velar real data (920 MOCHA utterances, 32169 ETS primitives).
constriction is formed and then released. The formation of Out of 9878 phonemes, 7679 were classiﬁed correctly and
the constriction is achieved when the tongue dorsum TD ﬁrst 278 failed to match against any of the 14 available classes.
rises to its maximum position (TD-RaiseMax) at 0.248 sec The overall accuracy is 77.74%. Analysis shows that /n/
completing the constriction before the phoneme boundary by was often misclassiﬁed as /d/ and /m/ as /b/, both due to a
touching the velum VL (VC-Touch) at 0.266 sec). The con- failure of the pre-processor to detect the corresponding phys-
striction release is accomplished by lowering the tongue dor- iological changes. We expect performance to improve with a
sum TD (TD-LowerMid) at 0.416 sec, then parting the tongue more accurate pre-processor and reﬁned class descriptions.
dorsum TD from the velum VL (VC-Part) at 0.460 sec). Note:
vibration of the vocal folds VF (VFV-Start) occurs at the on- References
set of /g/ at 0.380 sec.                              [Browman and Goldstein, 1992] C. Browman and L. Gold-
  An ETS  transform is an encapsulation of a regular tem- stein. Articulatory Phonology: An Overview. Phonetica,
poral pattern of primitives. An ETS supertransform is a set 49:155–180, 1992.
of closely-related transforms specifying the description of a [Goldfarb et al., 2004] L. Goldfarb, D. Gay, O. Golubitsky,
class, where structural variations account for noise in the and D. Korkin. What is a structural representation? Tech-
class. Note that the learning of class structure is described nical Report TR04-165, Faculty of Computer Science,
in [Goldfarb et al., 2004] and is outside of the scope of University of New Brunswick, Canada, April 2004.
this paper. In the articulatory representation, a supertrans- [Gutkin and King, 2005] A. Gutkin and S. King. Detection
form is identiﬁed with the family of articulatory gestures that of Symbolic Gestural Events in Articulatory Data for Use
collectively describe the class structure of a single, general in Structural Representations of Continuous Speech. In
phoneme. We deﬁned 14 consonantal classes (see, for exam- Proc. ICASSP, Philadelphia, March 2005.
ple, the identiﬁed phoneme /g/ in Figure 2).
                                                      [Jakobson and Halle, 1971] R. Jakobson and M. Halle. Fun-
  We developed a structural matching algorithm for detect- damentals of Language. Mouton de Gruyter, 1971.
ing the presence of an ETS transform in a given struct. It per-
                                                      [Jelinek, 1997] F. Jelinek. Statistical Methods for Speech
forms a rooted depth-ﬁrst search in O(n2 log n) time, where
                                                         Recognition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, March 1997.
n is the number of primitives in the transform to be matched.