        Redesign Support Framework based on Hierarchical Multiple Models 
                                                
  I. López-Arévalo1, A. Rodríguez-Martínez2, A. Aldea3, R. Bañares-Alcántara4, and L. Jiménez5  
                     1 Department of Computer Engineering and Mathematics,  
              2 Department of Chemical Engineering, University Rovira i Virgili, Spain. 
              3 Department of Computing, Oxford Brookes University, United Kingdom. 
            4 Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. 
        5 Department of Chemical Engineering and Metallurgy, University of Barcelona, Spain. 
                                                
                   Abstract                            
                                                       
    A redesign support framework for complex techni-
    cal processes is described in this paper. This     
    framework employs a multi-model hierarchical       
    representation of the process to be redesigned to-  
    gether with a case-based reasoning engine that     
    helps us to decide the elements of the process that  
    should be modified. This framework has been        
    tested in the chemical engineering domain.         
                                                       
1 Introduction                                                          
                                                                        
In this paper a redesign support framework is proposed.     Figure 1. The redesign framework. 
This framework integrates model-based reasoning and case-  
based reasoning techniques. The original process is mod- matically generate the hierarchical models. Based on 
elled hierarchically exploiting means-end and part-whole the data extracted from the simulator, the functional 
concepts of MFM [Larsson, 1996] and Multi-modelling   and teleological models can be inferred. 
[Chittaro et al., 1993] approaches. A CBR system is used to A unit that encapsulates these four types of 
obtain alternative process sections, which can be adapted knowledge is generated for each physical equipment. 
into the original process. Therefore, this framework allows Furthermore, an ontology of functions and equip-
us to model the process; to identify process components ments (not necessarily with formal specification) 
suitable for redesign; to obtain alternative components and; have to be specified. This ontology is used to define 
finally to adapt these components into the original process. a priority order of functions. Given the priority of 
This procedure can be seen as a reverse engineering activity functions of units and on their goals, it is possible to 
where abstract models at different levels are generated from identify incrementally the functional sections of the 
a detailed description of the existing process to reduce the process. The grouping of functions generates meta-
complexity of the process. The framework has been applied units and identifies a functional section. Units/meta-
on the chemical engineering domain, by means of three pro- units with lower priority functions are “absorbed” by 
totypes: HEAD, AHA!, and RETRO.                       units/meta-units with higher priority functions. This 
                                                      forms a tree of functions of the process. The connec-
2  The Redesign Framework                             tions between such functions denote the causal rela-
The proposed framework (see Figure 1) consists of four tions between the process variables and the goals. 
main stages, which can be summarised as follows: 2. Candidate identification. The aim of this stage is to 
1.  Design-description acquisition. This stage consists of: identify the units or meta-units that have to be modified 
  •   Data acquisition. Knowledge about the structure and to fulfil the new redesign objectives. Therefore, the de-
      behaviour of all components of the process is auto- sign description of the process and the new set of speci-
      matically extracted from a numerical simulator. fications that the process must satisfy are required. The 
      Therefore, human intervention is avoided and the process variable to focus on, according to the new re-
      simulator ensures that data is consistent.    quirements of the process, must be set. Then a diagno-
  •   Functional identification. This is the modelling stage. sis algorithm is used to identify the units/meta-units that 
      The data extracted from the simulator is used to auto- affect such process variables.        The diagnosis algorithm [Larsson, 1996] applies     To facilitate the adaptation, an adaptation cost is 
    causal reasoning to identify the units/meta-units where computed to suggest the “adaptability” of the chosen 
    the process variables do not achieve the needed values. unit/meta-unit. This adaptation cost is based on the dif-
    No simulation is required; the algorithm uses the onto- ferences between the chosen unit (source case) and the 
    logical assumptions and the values of such variables. As cause and consequence units/meta-units identified with 
    result, a small list of the most possible “faulty” the diagnosis algorithm. Thus, the cost is a normalised 
    units/meta-units is obtained. Based on any identified value denoting the difference on the values of the proc-
    unit/meta-unit, their corresponding “cause” and “conse- ess variables involved in the performance of the unit 
    quence” units are identified. “Cause” unit/meta-unit is and the values of the process variables involved in the 
    the unit/meta-unit that provides the actual operational performance of the neighbour units/meta-units. The ad-
    conditions to the involved process variables in the func- aptation cost will have a value between 0 and 1. Values 
    tion of the unit/meta-unit of interest. “Consequence” close to 0 means that the adaptation is difficult.  
    unit/meta-unit is the unit/meta-unit affected by the op- Note that this framework does not redesign processes ei-
    erational conditions given by the unit/meta-unit of in- ther automatically or autonomously. The aim is to support 
    terest. The “causes” and “consequences” units/meta- human designers to understand a process and facilitate the 
    units are important in the adaptation and evaluation redesign activities. Also any assumption on some specific 
    stage.                                       domain has been considered, but the domain must allow a 
3.  Generation of alternatives. From the identified well-defined structure on functions. 
    unit/meta-unit in the previous stage, similar units/meta-
    units can be suggested. New units/meta-units are gener- 3  Evaluation and conclusions 
    ated from others similar processes. This can be 
    achieved by a CBR system. The retrieving stage of the This framework has been implemented and applied to the 
    CBR system corresponds to this stage, and the rest of chemical engineering process domain over 20 chemical pro-
    stages refer to the two last stages of the redesign cesses (consequently the number of ground and abstract 
                                                 cases is higher). Interesting results have been. The func-
    framework (the adaptation and evaluation stages).  
                                                 tional ontology developed includes concepts from the well-
      We apply a hierarchical case-based reasoning ap- known chemical process design methodologies developed 
    proach. Then each unit and meta-unit is considered a by Douglas [Douglas, 1988] and Turton [Turton et al., 
    ground case and an abstract case respectively. A ground 1998]. The numerical simulators employed were Hysys and 
    case is a case located at the lowest level in the hierarchy Aspen.  
    and represents a specific unit. An abstract case is a case The central point of this framework is the hierarchical 
    represented at a higher level of abstraction and corre- multi-model representations used in all redesign activities. 
    sponds to a meta-unit. Thus the unit or meta-unit identi- The framework implements a hybrid approach of problem 
    fied in the previous stage is the target case. Similar solution: means-end and part-whole model-based method-
    units/meta-units (source cases) are retrieved from a case ologies. This framework integrates model-based reasoning  
    library according to its similarity respect to the target and case-based reasoning. The framework aims to support 
    case. Numerical, symbolic and hierarchical similarity human designers to understand the process and to guide 
    measures are used. As result, a set of the most similar them in the redesign process by suggesting components or 
    units/meta-units is obtained. The human designer may sections to be modified or substituted.  
    test them in the adaptation and evaluation stage. 
                                                 References 
4.  Adaptation and evaluation. The reuse, revision, and 
    retention stages of the CBR cycle correspond to the ad- [Chittaro et al., 1993] Chittaro, L., Guida, G., Tasso, C. and 
    aptation and evaluation stages in the redesign frame- Toppano, E. Functional and Teleological Knowledge in 
    work. Retention is not considered an explicit stage in the Multimodeling Approach for Reasoning About 
                                                   Physical Systems: A case study in diagnosis. IEEE 
    the framework but is carried out. 
                                                   Trans. on Sys, Man & Cyb. 23(6), pp. 1718-1751, 1993. 
      The most similar units/meta-units proposed in the 
                                                 [Douglas, 1988] Douglas J.M. Conceptual design of chemi-
    previous stage must be adapted and evaluated in the 
                                                   cal process, Mc Graw Hill, New York, 1988. 
    process of interest until obtain an appropriate alterna-
    tive process design. Both stages are not systematised in [Larsson, 1996] Larsson, J.E.  Diagnosis based on explicit 
    the redesign framework.. Since the aim of the redesign means-end models, Artificial Intelligence 80, 29-93. 
    framework is to deal with complex technical process, 1996. 
    the adaptation and revision of the most similar cases re- [Turton et al., 1998] Turton R., R.C. Bailie, W.B. Whiting 
    quire complex simulations. The human designer must and J.A. Shaeiwitz, Analysis, synthesis and design of 
    carry out them manually by means of the simulator used chemical process, Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1998. 
    in the data acquisition  