   A Multidimensional Semantic Framework for Adaptive Hypermedia Systems  

              Francesca Carmagnola, Federica Cena, Cristina Gena, Ilaria Torre 
                               Department of Computer Science  
                                      University of Turin  
                            carmagnola,cena,cgena,torre@di.unito.it 


                  Abstract                      regarding what features of the system have to be adapted 
                                                and which dimensions (of the user, context, etc.) have to be 
   This paper introduces a multidimensional semantic 
   framework for adaptive systems. Different planes taken into account to perform adaptation; (ii) knowledge 
   allow us to represent ontologies of user, her ac- regarding adaptation strategies and rules for inferring new 
   tions, context, device, domain, while the intersec- knowledge. Following the 'equation' ontology=(i) taxonomy 
   tion between planes allow us to represent the se- + (ii) axioms proposed by the RuleML Initiative [Boley et 
   mantic rules for inferring new user features or ad- al, 2001], we represent (i) the declarative descriptions of 
   aptation strategies. The adoption of ontology-based user models, domain knowledge, etc., with taxonomies ex-
   framework aims at creating a server for user mod- pressed in the standard semantic markup language for the 
   eling and adaptation strategy.               Semantic Web, OWL1, and (ii) the adaptation rules with 
                                                RuleML2, a candidate rule markup language. 
1 Introduction 
The Semantic Web aims at representing information in the 2. Goals of the project 
WWW such that machines can use it for automation, inte- While many works exploit ontologies to describe applica-
gration and reuse of knowledge across applications. The tion domains and some recent ones adopt them to represent 
advantage of such an approach can be particularly useful in user models, devices features, context of interaction, etc. 
the field of adaptive hypermedia systems. These systems (e.g., UbisWorld, http://www.u2m.org/), the semantic repre-
typically reflect some features of the user in the user model sentation of reasoning strategies is still little addressed in 
and apply this model to adapt various aspects of the system mature projects. Nevertheless, besides the discussed advan-
(content, interface, navigation, etc) to the user [Brusilovsky, tages of using standard markup languages for the ontologi-
1996]. Current adaptive systems may also take into account cal representation of knowledge, a semantic representation 
other features, besides the user model, such as the context of of rules could extend this goal. Indeed, it could allow appli-
interaction, the device, etc. Usually the corpus of the docu- cations (and designers) to share reasoning strategies, to de-
ments and services the system can adapt is already known at tect incompatibilities, to validate or eventually refuse them. 
the design time and can be defined as a closed corpus of 
                                                  Furthermore, the conjunction of taxonomies with a se-
adaptation [Dolog et. al, 2004]. The application of Semantic 
                                                mantic representation of rules brings benefits to both of 
Web technologies to those systems and the use of shared 
ontologies and metadata to describe resources can contribute them. For example, in adaptive systems, it allows to provide 
to extend the closed corpus to an open corpus of adaptation. explanations about the inference of new user features,  the 
Thus, external documents and resources, which are semanti- system behaviour and the forms of adaptation by exploiting 
cally annotated, can be considered during the adaptation to the ontological description of terms which are involved in 
the users. Furthermore, representing the user model with a the rules. Moreover, since the semantic representation of 
semantic formalism and shared ontologies can be the base rules provides a proof of the reasoning of the system, it is 
for building a user model server: a server that enables the also relevant for the so called proof layer of the Semantic 
reuse of user models across applications [Kay et al., 2002]. Web, which “involves the actual deductive process as well 
Different adaptive systems can query the same user model as the representation of proofs in Web Languages and proof 
server, be primed with the user model that has already built validation”[Antoniou et al., 2004]. 
up and share the common knowledge.               
 This paper describes an ontology-based framework for 3. Framework description 
adaptive hypermedia systems which is aimed at providing a 
methodological approach for the semantic definition of two                                                  
kinds of relevant knowledge for adaptation: (i) knowledge 1 http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
                                                  2 http://www.ruleml.org/  The framework aims at supporting the visual design, the The same methodology can be applied to infer other di-
 semantic representation and the implementation of rules in mensions, such as, user’s goals and plans, or to define the 
 adaptive hypermedia systems based on symbolic reasoning. adaptation rules, clearly changing the planes to take into 
 These rules include user modeling rules (which can be con- account. For instance, to identify adaptation rules, on the Z1-
 sidered derivation rules) that add new knowledge about plane we put the ontology that describes the device that can 
 user, starting from her current environment, usage data and be used by the user (PDA, PC, mobile phone, on-board sys-
 context of interaction, and adaptation rules (which can be tem etc.); on the Z2-plane we put the ontology of the adap-
 considered reaction rules), that define adaptation strategies tation (adaptation of content, interface, etc.); on the Z3-
                                                 plane, the ontology of context conditions (e.g. driving, 
(content, presentation, modality). 
                                                 walking, night, etc.) and on the Z4-plane, the ontology of the 
  The choice of using a semantic formalism  in order to user model dimensions, integrated/updated with the user’s 
define the framework arises from the evidence that user dimensions inferred by the previous user modeling rules. 
modeling dimensions are common to different applications The ontologies on the planes are written in OWL, while 
and, if semantically descripted, they can be shared among rules, at the intersection of planes, are written in RuleMl. 
them (e.g. the feature user familiarity with the system is Both of them can be translated into popular rule engines 
used by almost all adaptive systems). Defining these dimen- such as CLIPS and Jess. 
sions once for all represents an interesting opportunity in  
terms of reducing costs of design and optimization of re- Conclusion and Future Work 
sults. Similar considerations can be made for modality and In future we plan to use the proposed methodology with dif-
contexts of interaction. While for the domain and service ferent adaptive applications (e.g., [Amendola et al., 2004]) 
features, the reason to exploit an ontological representation we developed in the past in order to use these applications 
especially deals with the diffusion of this kind of ontologies as test bench to evaluate the correctness of our approach.  
on the web, and the possibility to link such ontologies and 
integrating with Web Services [Mizoguchi et al, 1997]. References 
  For the definition of this semantic framework we devel-
                                                 [Amendola, 2004] Amendola I., Cena F., Console L., Cre-
oped a multidimensional matrix [Torre, 01] in which each vola A., Gena C., Goy A., Modeo S., Perrero M., Torre 
plane contains the ontological representation of a specific I., Toso A.: "UbiquiTO: A Multi-device Adaptive Gui-
kind of knowledge (user model, user actions, device, do- de", In Proc. of Mobile HCI 2004, LNCS 3160, pp.409-
main, context and adaptation ontology).            414, 2004. 
Being a framework, the ontologies on the planes are appli- [Antoniou et al., 2004] Antoniou, G., Van Harmelen F. A Se-
cation independent, modular and layered in a first level on- mantic Web Primer. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 
tology, containing the definition of general concepts, and 2004. 
successive levels with specialized concepts. In this way, the 
                                                 [Boley et al, 2001] Boley, H., S. Tabet, and G. Wagner., 
framework can be used by different applications, selecting a Design Rationale of RuleML: A Markup Language for 
sub-part of the most generic ontology, in the considered Semantic Web Rules, in Proc. of the First Semantic Web 
planes, and instantiating only the concepts they are inter- Working Symposium, SWWS'01, pp. 381-402, 2001. 
ested in. 
                                                 [Brusilovsky, 1996] Brusilovsky P.L.: Methods and Tech-
  The basic idea of the matrix is that derivation rules and niques of Adaptive Hypermedia. In User Modelling and 
reaction rules derive from the intersection of planes and that 
                                                   User-Adapted Interaction 6  pp. 87–129, 1996. 
the matrix representation helps the visual design of such 
rules. For example, for the definition of derivation rules, on [Dolog et. Al., 2004] P. Dolog, N. Henze, W. Nejdl, M. 
the X1-plane we put the ontology which describes the user Sintek. The Personal Reader: Personalizing and Enrich-
 actions on adaptive system (selection, bookmark, print, ing Learning Resources using Semantic Web Technolo-
 etc.); on the X2-plane the ontology which describes the pos- gies. In Proc. of the AH 2004 , pp. 85-94, LNCS, 
sible domain features (business, tourist, e-learning etc); and Springer Verlag, 2004. 
on the X3-plane, the ontology of the user model dimensions [Kay et al, 2002] J. Kay, R. Kummerfeld, P. Lauder. Per-
 (demographic features, preferences, interests, etc). sonis: A Server for User Models. In Proc. of the AH, pp. 
 From the intersection of dimensions on these planes we can 203-212, 2002, LNCS, Springer Verlag, 2002. 
 define user modeling rules (derivation rules), in the form of: 
                                                 [Mizoguchi et al, 1997] R. Mizoguchi, M. Ikeda, K. Sinitsa: 
 If ((X Plane user actions=a) AND (X Plane domain_feature=b) 
     1                     2                       Roles of shared ontology in AI-ED Research. In Proc. of 
         AND(X Plane explicit_user_features=c,d)) 
              3                                    AI-ED, pp. 537-544, 1997. 
            Then (inferred_user_feature=i) 
in which the Left Hand Side specifies the dimensions that [Torre, 2001] Torre I.: "Goals, tasks and Application do-
contribute to define the value of the inferred feature and the mains as the guidelines for defining a framework for 
Right Hand Side represents the assignment of this value. User modelling", in User Modelling 2001, LNCS, 
                                                   Springer Verlag, pp. 260-262, 2001. 