                                                                                     ∗
                  Development of new techniques to improve Web search                 

                                   David Sánchez, Antonio Moreno 
                           Department of Computer Science and Mathematics 
                                   University Rovira i Virgili (URV) 
                          Avda. Països Catalans, 26. 43007 Tarragona (Spain) 
                               {david.sanchez, antonio.moreno}@urv.net 

                     Abstract 
    Web search engines are a great help for accessing 2  Discovery of lexicalizations and synonyms  
    web sites but they present several problems regard- There are several methodologies that try to find lexicaliza-
    ing semantic ambiguity.  In order to solve them, we tions for a keyword like Latent Semantic Analysis [Deer-
    propose new methods for polysemy disambiguation  wester et al, 1990]. It considers that words that co-occur in 
    of web resources and discovery of lexicalizations the same documents are semantically related. However, it 
    and synonyms of search queries.                  tends to return domain related words but, sometimes, not 
                                                     truly “equivalent” ones [Bhat et al, 2004]. Other techniques 
1 Introduction                                       [Valarakos et al, 2004] identify lexicalizations with the as-
Search engines like Google have become an indispensable sumption that they use a common set of ‘core’ characters. 
tool. However, their ranking algorithms are based only on a They can detect alternative spellings (e.g. Pentium III, Pent. 
keyword’s presence and have some serious handicaps that 3), but not synonyms (e.g. sensor and transducer).  
are reflected on the final results. On the one hand, if several We have developed a novel methodology for discovering 
ways of expressing the same search query exist (e.g. syno- lexicalizations and synonyms using an initial taxonomy and 
nyms, lexicalizations, or even morphological forms), a con- a web search engine. Our approach is based on considering 
siderable amount of relevant resources will be omitted. On the longest branches (e.g. subcutaneous amperometric glu-
the other hand, if the user selects a polysemic word as a cose sensor) of the taxonomy as a contextualization con-
query, the set of returned results will contain sites that are straint and using them as the search query ommiting the 
using that concept in different contexts (e.g. Virus). initial keyword (e.g. “subcutaneous amperometric glucose“) 
  In order to face these two problems, in this paper we pre- for obtaining new webs. In some cases, those documents 
sent new, automatic and autonomous methodologies for will contain equivalent words for the main one just behind 
semantic disambiguation and classification of web re- the searched query that can be considered candidates for 
sources and for discovery of lexicalizations and synonyms lexicalizations or synonyms (e.g. subcutaneous amperomet-
for a specific domain. These techniques use a previously ric glucose transducer). For each candidate (see Table 1 
obtained taxonomy of terms and web resources through the with candidates for the Sensor domain), a relevance measure 
method described in [Sanchez and Moreno, 2004] to per- (1) is computed, obtaining a ranked candidate list. Those 
form the appropriate contextualization (see an example for that overpass a minimum threshold computed in function on 
the Sensor domain in figure 1).                      the number of multiwords considered will be selected. 
                                                      relev=#Dif _Web_ Appear*(10^(#Multi_ words_terms−1)) (1)

                                                     Table 1. Lexicalizations and synonyms candidates for the Sensor 
                                                     domain (24 multiwords). Elements in bold are selected results. 
                                                     Concept and derivates  Hits  Webs  Multi    Relev. 
                                                     sensor, sensors        437   294    24      2E25 
                                                     transducer, transducers  28  19     3       1900 
                                                     system 4 4 2 40 
      Figure 1. Example of an initial taxonomy of Sensors. probe 2 2 2 20 
                                                     transmitter 11 11 1 11 
                                                     measurement 10 7 1 7 
   ∗ The support of "Departament d'Universitats, Recerca i So-
cietat de la Informació" of Catalonia is acknowledged. 3  Polysemy detection and semantic clustering        4 Conclusions  
In this case our goal is to be able to group different concepts Taking into consideration the amount of resources available 
(and their associated web sites) of the taxonomy associated easily on the Web, we believe that methodologies that ease 
to a search query in sets according to the concrete sense in the search of information should be developed. Standard 
which they are used. So, the user will obtain disambiguated search engines are widely used for this task but they present 
sets of relevant web sites for the desired domain.   serious limitations due to their pattern-search algorithms 
  For that purpose, many techniques [Ide and Véronis, because they lack any kind of semantic content. 
1998] use an external dictionary to select the most appropri-   On the one hand, polysemy becomes a serious problem 
ate meaning in each case. However, performing this classi- when the retrieved resources obtained from the search en-
fication without previous semantic knowledge is not a trivial gine are only based on the keyword’s presence; in this case, 
process [Sanderson and Croft, 1999]. In this sense, we can we propose an automatic approach for polysemy disam-
take profit from the context where each concept has been biguation of concepts and web resources. On the other 
extracted, concretely, the web documents that contain it. We hand, in order to extend the search widely and retrieve the 
can assume that each website included in the taxonomy is largest amount of resources that are semantically relevant 
using the initial keyword (e.g. virus) in a concrete sense, so for the query specified, an algorithm for discovering alter-
concepts that are selected from the analysis of that single native keywords (lexicalizations and synonyms) for the same 
document (e.g. linux, email) belong to the domain associ- domain is also proposed. This is very useful for domains 
ated to the same keyword’s meaning. Applying this idea with a little amount of available web resources.    
over a significant amount of web sites we can find, as Moreover, it is important to note that the proposed meth-
shown in figure 2 for the Virus example, quite consistent odologies perform in an automatic and autonomous way, 
semantic relations between concepts.                 allowing to maintain the results updated easily by perform-
  The algorithm performs a clusterization process with the ing executions as frequently as desired. This is a very useful 
list of terms of a specific level of the taxonomy. For each feature when dealing with a highly changing environment 
pair, a similitude measure (2) is computed based on the like the Web and distinguishes our approach from other 
amount of coincidences between the concept’s URL sets. similar ones in which user’s interaction or a thesaurus like 
The resulting similarity matrix allows us to detect the most WordNet are required [Lamparter et al, 2004]. 
similar concepts and join them. A new matrix is computed 
for the resulting set of classes. This process is repeated until References 
no more concepts can be joined (there are no coincidences 
                                                     [Bhat et al, 2004] V. Bhat, T. Oates, V. Shanbhag and C. 
between URLs), building a dendogram (see figure 2). 
                                                        Nicholas: Finding aliases on the web using latent seman-
        =  ⎛ # Coin(URL(A),URL(B)) # Coin(URL(A),URL(B)) ⎞ (2) tic analysis. Data Knowledge & Engineering 49, 2004. 
  sim(A, B) Max⎜           ,               ⎟
           ⎝     #URL(A)         #URL(B)   ⎠         [Deerwester et al, 1990] S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, T. Lan-
                                                        dauer, G. Furnas and R. Harshman: Indexing by latent 
  The result is a partition (with 2 elements for the virus 
                                                        semantic analysis, Journal of the American Society of In-
domain as shown in figure 2) of classes that groups the con-
                                                        formation Science 41 (6) pp. 391-407. 1990. 
cepts and web resources that belong to a specific meaning. 
                                                     [Ide and Véronis, 1998] N. Ide and J. Véronis: Introduction 
The number of final classes is automatically discovered by 
                                                        to the special issue on word sense disambiguation: The 
the clustering algorithm thanks to the constrained joining 
                                                        state of the art. Computational Linguistics 24. 1998. 
criteria. Note that this methodology can be applied to a set 
                                                     [Lamparter et al, 2004] S. Lamparter, M. Ehrig and C. 
of terms at any level of the taxonomy. 
                                                        Tempich: Knowledge Extraction from Classification 
                                                        Schemas. ODBASE 2004, LNCS 3290, 2004. 
                                                     [Sanchez and Moreno, 2004] D. Sanchez and A. Moreno: 
                                                        Automatic Generation of Taxonomies from the WWW. 
                                                        In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
                                                        Practical Aspects of Knowledge Management. LNAI, 
                                                        vol. 3336, Vienna, 2004. 
                                                     [Sanderson and Croft, 1999] M. Sanderson, B. Croft: Deriv-
                                                        ing concept hierarchies from text. In: Proceedings of the 
                                                        22nd Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on 
                                                        Research and Development in Information Retrieval. 
Figure 2. Dendogram representing semantic associations between 1999, Berkeley, USA. 
the classes found for the keyword “virus”. Two final clusters are [Valarakos et al, 2004] A.G. Valarakos, G. Paliouras, V. 
obtained: Sense 1 groups the classes associated to “computer pro- Karkaletsis and G. Vouros: Enhancing Ontological 
gram” and Sense 2 the ones related to “biological agent”. Knowledge Through Ontology Population and Enrich-
                                                        ment, EKAW 2004, LNAI 3257,  2004. 