                                   Explaining     Search   Results∗

                                   Maurice  Coyle  and  Barry  Smyth
                        Smart Media  Institute, Department of Computer  Science,
                                   University College Dublin, Ireland
                                 {maurice.coyle,  barry.smyth}@ucd.ie

                    Abstract                          For related work on the issue of explanation in recommender
                                                      systems see [Cunningham and McSherry, 2004].
    In this paper we argue that it may be possible to   Of course, Web search engines do attempt to provide some
    help searchers to better understand the relevance of explanation with their result-lists. Typically, for example,
    search results by generating explanations that high- each result is accompanied by a snippet of text from the result
    light how other users have interacted with such re- page in question to give some insight into the content of the
    sults under similar search conditions in the past. page. Both these query-sensitive snippets and the approach
    We propose the use of the search histories of a com- to explanation in information retrieval introduced in the Tile-
    munity of online users as a source of these expla- Bars system ([Hearst, 1995]) are content-based techniques for
    nations. We describe the results of a recent study aiding the user in result selection. We believe that other forms
    to examine the use of such explanation-based tech- of explanatory information can be usefully provided.
    niques to help Web searchers better appreciate the  In [Wexelblat and Maes, 1999], interaction histories are
    relevancy of search results. We highlight shortcom- introduced, whereby a user’s interactions with their Web
    ings of this approach in its current form and offer browser (e.g. selection of a link in a Web page, typing a URL
    suggestions as to how it may be improved in future into the location bar, etc.) are recorded as they browse, and
    work.                                             this information is later used to help other users to locate in-
                                                      formation items. The concept of interaction histories is ap-
                                                      plied to Web search in [Coyle and Smyth, 2005]; the pages
1  Introduction                                       in a user’s navigation sequence beyond the initial results page
                                                      are recorded and used to enhance future search result lists
Scale, document diversity, and limited searcher expertise all
                                                      when  similar queries are submitted. We propose the use
combine to make the Web a very challenging information re-
                                                      of search history information (speciﬁcally query-submission
trieval environment. Consequently, Web search engines have
                                                      and result -selection information) for the generation of search
had to evolve beyond their term-based information retrieval
                                                      result explanations. In this paper we describe a recent study
roots; see [Brin and Page, 1998; Lawrence, 2000] for ap-
                                                      to evaluate different approaches to generating these explana-
proaches that leverage connectivity and context information
                                                      tions based on 3 types of user interaction information.
to improve search. In this paper we adopt a very different
perspective on how search engines might be improved. We
ask whether there is an opportunity to present search results 2 Explaining Search Results
to users more effectively. This is related to the use of cluster- Result snippets provide one type of explanation. What other
ing methods to impose order on search results at presentation types of explanation might be generated? In this paper we
time (e.g., [Leuski, 2001]). However, we try to explain re- consider 3 additional types of explanation information that
sults to users, to help users gain a better understanding of the can be derived from the search histories of communities of
appropriateness of these results to their needs.      users. We will describe these types of information in a mo-
  In related work, [Hearst, 1995] introduces a visualisation ment but ﬁrst it is worthwhile considering the source of these
paradigm that offers an explanation not just of how strong the search histories.
match between the user’s query and a given result page is, but
also how frequent each term is, how each term is distributed 2.1 Collaborative Web Search
in the text and where the terms overlap within the document. Collaborative Web search (CWS) is a form of meta-search,
This approach provides the user with additional explanatory relying on the search services of a set of underlying search en-
information which better aids them in their decision as to gines and manipulating their results in response to the learned
whether or not each page is relevant to their information need. preferences of a given community of users ([Smyth et al.,
                                                      2003; In Press]). Very brieﬂy, a central data structure in CWS
  ∗
   The support of the Informatics Research Initiative of Enterprise is the hit-matrix, H. It encodes the search behaviour of a
Ireland is gratefully acknowledged.                   given community of users; each time a community memberselects a result pj in response to some query qi, the entry in
cell Hij is incremented. In turn, the relevance of a page pj
to qi can be estimated as the relative number of selections
pj has received in the past for qi. For example, if the page
                                   0.65
www.jaguarcars.com has a relevance of  for the query  Figure 1: Search result for the query ‘ijcai’ with only a snip-
jaguar, this means that 65% of the selections for this query pet text explanation.
have been for this result. More generally, the relevance of
a page pj to some target query qT can be calculated as the
weighted sum of its relevance to a set of queries (q1, ..., qn)
that are similar to qT , with each individual relevance value
discounted by the similarity between qT and the query in
question; see [Smyth et al., In Press] for further information.
  The type of interaction data generated by CWS, which can
be stored and later used as a source of search histories in-
cludes, but is not limited to, search result selection, query
submission and query modiﬁcation (i.e., the same user sub-
mitting a number of queries one after the other which are sim- Figure 2: Search result for the query ‘ijcai’ with interaction
ilar to each other regarding their component terms). The point history-based explanation (type 6) added below the snippet
to note is that this stored interaction data can be leveraged in text explanation.
future search sessions to provide explanation text alongside
search results which can be used to determine a result’s popu-
larity, by analysing how users within the same searching com- searchers for similar queries such as ‘q1’ and ‘q2’ have also
munity have previously interacted with it. With this added selected it”.
information, the user is better positioned to judge whether or By way of an example, consider the search results pre-
not each result is relevant to their information need. sented in Figures 1 and 2. Figure 1 shows a standard Web
                                                      search result returned for the query ‘ijcai’ with the page’s title
2.2  Explanation Types                                and a contextualised snippet provided as a means for the user
                                                      to determine if the result is relevant to their query. In Figure
In this paper we propose to use the interaction data captured
                                                      2, we can see the same search result but this time with ex-
by CWS as a source of 3 different explanation types: 1) rele-
                                                      planation text added below it (explanation type 6, see above)
vance scores; 2) related queries; 3) timing information. From
                                                      which was generated using the interaction histories of previ-
these we have generated the following 6 explanation types.
                                                      ous users. This explanation contains information about how
                     The relevance of a result to some
  Type 1 - Relevance.                                 many times this result has been selected in the past for the
query is simply the percentage of times that other searchers
                                                      current query and also for other, related queries. Further, the
have selected the page for the query. Thus each result is ac-
                                                      user can see how recently this result has been selected, which
companied by an explanation of the form: “r% of searchers
                                                      should give them some idea of how ‘fresh’ the result is for the
for this query have selected this page”.
                                                      current query.
  Type 2 - Related Queries. Related queries refer to other
queries that have also led to the selection of the page in ques-
tion. They provide users with an alternative understanding of 3 Evaluating Search Result Explanations
the circumstances in which other users have found a page to To evaluate the utility of these different explanation types,
be worth selecting; e.g., “This page has also been selected we surveyed the opinions of 57 postgraduate students. Each
for queries such as ‘q1’ and ‘q2’”.                   survey was composed of 6 pairs of search engine result-lists.
  Type 3 - Timing. Timing information helps the searcher to In each pair there was a standard result-list, that contained the
understand the recency of any selection activity for this page sort of result-list presented by Google and other major search
and may give an indication of the currency of its content; e.g., engines; each result contained a title, a snippet, and a URL
“This page was last selected t minutes ago”.          (see Figure 1). Each pair also contained an explanation result-
  Type 4 - Relevance + Related Queries. We can combine list in which the same results were presented with one of the 6
relevance information with related queries to generate expla- explanation types described above (see Figure 2). The 6 pairs
nations of the form: “r1% of searchers for this query have of each survey allowed users to compare each explanation
selected this page and r2% of searchers for similar queries type to a standard result-list; for each pair the user was asked
such as ‘q1’ and ‘q2’ have also selected it”.         to indicate whether they felt the explanations helped them to
  Type 5 - Relevance + Timing. Similarly, we can combine understand the value of the results in relation to the target
relevance and timing information to generate explanations of query. In each survey the type of results and queries used to
the form: “r% of searchers for this query have selected this generate them were randomised so no two pairs of result-lists
page as recently as t minutes ago”.                   contained the same query-result combination for any user.
  Type 6 - Relevance + Related Queries + Timing. And    Summary  results are presented in Figure 3 as the percent-
ﬁnally, we can combine all 3 types of data to produce expla- age of users who found the explanations to be more informa-
nations of the form: “As recently as t minutes ago, r1% of tive (better) than the standard result-list against each result
searchers for this query have selected this page and r2% of type; we also show the percentage of users who found each        100%                                          tual presentation techniques such as mouse-over tool-tips or
                       Better                         else through the use of a visualisation approach whereby the
                       Worse                          user interaction information for a search result is summarised
         75%                                          using graphical icons in a manner similar to that found in
                                                      [Hearst, 1995]. It is worth noting that only a small percentage
       s
       r


       e                                              of users viewed the additional explanations as having a neg-
       s 50%
       U                                              ative impact on the search results. This allows us to be opti-


       %                                              mistic that a more economical, visual presentation metaphor
                                                      might reduce this percentage and lead to an increase in the
         25%                                          perceived worth of the various explanation types.

          0%                                          References
               1    2    3    4    5    6             [Brin and Page, 1998] Sergey Brin and Lawrence Page. The
                     Explanation Type                    Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search En-
                                                         gine. Computer  Networks and ISDN  Systems, 30(1–
                                                         7):107–117, 1998.
             Figure 3: Summary of results.
                                                      [Coyle and Smyth, 2005] Maurice Coyle and Barry Smyth.
                                                         Enhancing web search result lists using interaction histo-
explanation type to be less informative (worse) than the de- ries. In Proceedings of the 27th European Conference on
fault. The results show a clear preference for relevance in- Information Retrieval, (ECIR-05), pages 543–545, Santi-
formation (type 1 explanations) with more than 80% of users ago De Compostela, Spain, 2005. Springer-Verlag.
indicating that this type of explanation helped them to better [Cunningham and McSherry, 2004] Padraig Cunningham
understand the usefulness of results; only 3% of users rated and David McSherry. Workshop on Explanation in CBR.
this explanation type as worse than the default.         7th European Conference on Case-Based Reasoning,
  In general, the users appear to be less convinced about Madrid, Spain, 2004.
the value of the other explanation types with just under 50% [Hearst, 1995] Marti A. Hearst. Tilebars: Visualisation of
viewing the related queries (type 2) and timing (type 3) as bet- term distribution information in full text information ac-
ter than the default; although only about 12%-14% of users cess. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Hu-
found these explanations to be worse than the default. When man Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’95, pages 59–66,
these explanation types are combined with relevance informa- Denver, Colorado, USA, May 1995. ACM Press.
tion (in types 4, 5 and 6) the user ratings are seen to increase,
although never above the 80% found for relevance informa- [Lawrence, 2000] Steve Lawrence. Context in Web Search.
tion on its own. This increase appears to be due to the inclu- IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 23(3):25–32, 2000.
sion of the relevance data, however.                  [Leuski, 2001] Anton Leuski. Evaluating document clus-
                                                         tering for interactive information retrieval. In Ling Liu
4  Conclusions                                           Henrique Paques and David Grossman, editors, Proceed-
                                                         ings of Tenth International Conference on Information and
In this paper we have suggested that modern Web search   Knowledge Management  (CIKM’01), pages 41–48, At-
engines might be usefully improved if they included some lanta, Georgia, USA, 2001. ACM Press.
form of explanation information alongside their search re-
                                                      [               ]
sults. This could potentially provide searchers with a clearer Smyth et al., 2003 Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Peter
understanding of how each result relates to their information Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and Jill Freyne. Collaborative Web
need, if at all. We have tested a number of different explana- Search. In Proceedings of the 18th International Joint
tion types using a combination of information sources.   Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, (IJCAI-03), pages
                                                         1417–1419. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. Acapulco, Mexico.
  The results of this experiment indicate that there is po-
tential for Web searchers to beneﬁt from the presentation of [Smyth et al., In Press] Barry Smyth, Evelyn Balfe, Jill
additional explanatory information alongside standard result- Freyne, Peter Briggs, Maurice Coyle, and Oisin Boydell.
list information. Concrete relevance information in particular Exploiting Query Repetition and Regularity in an Adap-
was found to be valued by more than 80% of users, although tive Community-based Web Search Engine. User Model-
other forms of explanation were found to be less compelling. ing and User-Adapted Interaction: The Journal of Person-
One of the problems with these other forms of explanation alization Research, (In Press).
data appears to be linked to their increased space require- [Wexelblat and Maes, 1999] Alan Wexelblat and Pattie
ments. For example, the use of related queries and timing Maes. Footprints: history-rich tools for information
information in particular adds considerably to the size of ex- foraging. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
planations, which takes away from valuable screen-space that Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI’99, pages
could otherwise be used to present additional search results. 270–277, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, 1999. ACM
  It is likely that this presentation issue could be resolved Press.
however, either through the use of more economical tex-