         Trust No One: Evaluating Trust-based Filtering for Recommenders
                                    John O’Donovan, Barry Smyth
                                      Adaptive Information Cluster
                                    Department of Computer Science
                                       University College Dublin
                                       Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
                              john.odonovan@ucd.ie, barry.smyth@ucd.ie

                    Abstract                            [Avesani et al., 2004] describe a trust-based recommender
                                                      system in the skiing domain. However these approaches rely
    To be successful recommender systems must gain    on models of trust that are built from the direct feedback of
    the trust of users. To do this they must demonstrate users; in short, individual users are expected to indicate those
    their ability to make reliable predictions. We ar- partners that they place the most trust in and a trust model is
    gue that collaborative ﬁltering recommendation al- generated from the resulting graph of relationships.
    gorithms can beneﬁt from explicit models of trust   [Massa and Bhattacharjee, 2004] build a trust model di-
    to inform their predictions. We present one such  rectly from explicit user-provided trust ratings. This work
    model of trust along with a cost-beneﬁt analysis  is carried out using the popular epinions.com service. Epin-
    that focuses on the classical trade-off that exists be- ions.com is a web site that allows users to review various
    tween recommendation coverage and prediction ac-  items (cars, books, music, etc.). In addition they can assign
    curacy.                                           a trust rating to reviewers based on the degree to which they
                                                      have found them to be helpful and reliable in the past. [Massa
                                                      and Bhattacharjee, 2004] argue that this trust data can be ex-
1  Introduction                                       tracted and used as part of the recommendation process, espe-
Recommender systems have been developed as a solu-    cially as a means to relieve the sparsity problem (lack of over-
tion to the well documented information overload problem. lapping user ratings) that has hampered traditional collabora-
[Resnick et al., 1994], [Breese et al., 1998]. These systems tive ﬁltering techniques [O’Sullivan et al., 2002]. [Massa and
employ techniques from user proﬁling, machine learning and Bhattacharjee, 2004] argue that it is possible to compare users
information ﬁltering to produce individual recommendations according to their degree of connectedness in the trust-graph
of items to suit users’ requirements. Collaborative ﬁltering encoded by Epinions.com, but do not show that this method
(CF) recommenders operate on the assumption that similar of comparison maintains recommendation accuracy.
users share similar tastes; recommendations are generated for Our benchmark algorithm uses Resnick’s standard predic-
a target user by analysing the rating histories of a set of suit- tion formula which is reproduced below as Equation 1; see
able recommendation partners.                         also [Resnick et al., 1994]. In this formula c(i) is the rating
  The traditional CF approach relies heavily on the similar- to be predicted for item i in consumer proﬁle c and p(i) is
ity between the target user and its partner as a way to weight the rating for item i by a producer proﬁle p who has rated
each partner’s predictions [Resnick et al., 1994]. In this pa- i. In addition, c and p refers to the mean ratings for c and p
per we propose that, in addition, it is possible to model the respectively. The weighting factor sim(c, p) is a measure of
trustworthiness of these partners, and to use this as another the similarity between proﬁles c and p, which is traditionally
factor to inﬂuence their prediction contributions. Indeed the calculated as Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient.
idea of explicitly modeling and using trust in ﬁltering tasks is          X
becoming increasingly popular. For example, [Golbeck and                      (p(i) − p)sim(c, p)
Hendler, 2004] presents a trust-based email ﬁlter, trust scores           pP (i)
                                                                c(i) = c +    X                       (1)
in this system are calculated through inference and propaga-                     |sim(c, p)|
tion, of the form (A ⇒ B ⇒ C) ⇒  (A ⇒  C), where A,
B and C are users with interpersonal trust scores. The Trust-                 pPi
Mail application [Golbeck and Hendler, 2004] looks up an As we have seen above Resnick’s prediction formula dis-
email sender in the reputation/trust network, and provides an counts the contribution of a partner’s prediction according to
inline rating for each mail. These trust values can tell a user its degree of similarity with the target user so that more simi-
if a mail is important or unimportant. Trust values in this sys- lar partners have a large impact on the ﬁnal ratings prediction.
tem can be deﬁned with respect to a certain topic, or on a We argue that there is another factor which might be used
general level, in a similar manner to work in [O’Donovan and in conjunction with similarity to inﬂuence recommendation
Smyth, 2005a] and [O’Donovan and Smyth, 2005b].       and prediction. We believe that the reliability of a partnerproﬁle to deliver accurate recommendations in the past is an-
other important factor, one that we refer to as the trust. In-
tuitively, if a proﬁle has made lots of accurate predictions in
the past, then they can be viewed as more trustworthy than
another proﬁle that has made many poor predictions. We de-
scribe a computational model of trust that can be generated
unobtrusively, during the normal operation of a CF recom-
mender system, by mining the recommendation histories of
different recommendation partners. We re-evaluate work in
[O’Donovan and Smyth, 2005b] which shows that trust-based
methods can improve prediction accuracy when compared to
existing CF approaches. However, we describe a more com-
prehensive cost-beneﬁt analysis by considering three accu-
racy beneﬁts against changes in recommendation coverage.         Figure 1: Recommendation Error.

2  A Computational Model of Trust                     opinions of the predicted ratings, or this might be conﬁrmed
Intuitively, if a recommendation partner (proﬁle) has made by evaluating the user’s actions on the basis of the rating pre-
many good predictions in the past, it can be viewed as more dictions; if a user buys a highly rated item then we might
trustworthy than one with many poor predictions. The trust assume that the high rating was justiﬁed.
model [O’Donovan and Smyth, 2005b] is based on this idea.
We differentiate between proﬁles generating recommenda- 2.2 Trust-Based Recommendation
tions (producer proﬁles) and those receiving recommenda- We incorporate our trust-model into CF by modifying the
tions (consumer proﬁles) in a particular recommendation ses- standard Resnick prediction algorithm in 3 ways to produce
sion. To generate a predicted rating, p(i), for item i for some 3 different trust-based variations. Resnick’s standard predic-
consumer c, conventional CF systems draw on the services tion formula is given in Equation 1. Normally it uses the
of a number of producer proﬁles, combining their individual similarity between the target user proﬁle and each recommen-
recommendations according to some suitable function, such dation partner proﬁle to weight their prediction contributions,
as Resnick’s formula. (see Equation 1). Our trust model de- shown as sim(c, p) in Equation 1; Equation 6 shows our mod-
pends on whether these predicted ratings are correct relative iﬁcations to this standard equation by adding the w(c, p, i)
to the true ratings of the consumer, c(i); see Equation 2. weighting term. Our ﬁrst variation (WItem) modiﬁes this so
                                                      that the weighting term is a combination of item trust and pro-
          Correct(i, p, c) ⇔ |p(i) − c(i)| <   (2)   ﬁle similarity; we use the harmonic mean of trust and similar-
                                                      ity. The FItem approach differs in that it uses proﬁle similar-
2.1  Item-Level Trust                                 ity as the weight factor, but ﬁlters out proﬁles that fall below a
We deﬁne the item-level trust for each producer p with respect given trust level for the target item prior to recommendation.
to a given proﬁle item i to be the percentage of times that p Finally, the CItem approach uses the obvious combination of
has made a correct rating prediction for i across some set WItem and FItem.
of consumers; see Equation 3. To do this we consider the                   X
rating that p alone predicts for i, for the consumer in question.             (p(i) − p)w(c, p, i)
We deﬁne the RecSet(p) (Equation 4) to be the total set of                pP (i)
                                                                r(i) = r +    X                       (6)
rating predictions that p has made; each (rk, ik) refers to a                     |w(c, p, i)|
rating prediction, rk that p has made for item ik. Similarly,                pP (i)
CorrSet(p) is the subset of these ratings that are considered
to be correct; Equation 5.                            3   Evaluation
                                                      For the following evaluation we use the 943 proﬁles from
                |{(r , i ) ∈ CorrSet(p) : i = i}|
  T rustI (p, i) = k  k                k        (3)   the MovieLens data-set, split into 80% as training proﬁles
                |{(rk, ik) ∈ RecSet(p) : ik = i}|     and the remaining 20% as test proﬁles. During training we
                                                      use a leave-one-out approach to build our trust model over
          RecSet(p) = {(r1, i1), ..., (rn, in)} (4)   the training proﬁles. Brieﬂy, each training proﬁle is used as
                                                      a consumer with the remaining acting as producers. Item-
                                                      level trust values are computed on the basis of the correct-
CorrSet(p) = {(ck, ik) ∈ RecSet(p) : Correct(ik, p, ck)} ness or otherwise of the producer predictions. During testing,
                                                (5)   we evaluate the predictions of the training proﬁles for each
  Thus, the trust of p in relation to item i is a measure of how of the items in the test proﬁles using our 4 basic algorithms
often p’s predicted ratings for i have been considered correct (Resnick, WItem, FItem, CItem).
in the past. This information can be accumulated during the In this evaluation we are especially interested in the trade-
normal course of operation of a CF recommender system in off between the coverage of a recommender (the percentage
a variety of ways. For example, users could be asked their of items that a rating can be predicted for) (Figure 2) and                                                         recommender system. 1st Workshop on Friend of a Friend,
                                                         Social Networking and the Semantic Web. Galway, Ire-
                                                         land, 2004.
                                                      [Breese et al., 1998] John S. Breese, David Heckerman, and
                                                         Carl Kadie. Empirical analysis of predictive algorithms for
                                                         collaborative ﬁltering. In Gregory F. Cooper and Seraf´ın
                                                         Moral, editors, Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Un-
                                                         certainty in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (UAI-98), pages 43–52,
                                                         San Francisco, July 24–26 1998. Morgan Kaufmann.
                                                      [Golbeck and Hendler, 2004] Jennifer Golbeck and James
                                                         Hendler. Accuracy of metrics for inferring trust and repu-
                                                         tation in semantic web-based social networks. In Proceed-
                                                         ings of EKAW’04, pages LNAI 2416, p. 278 ff., 2004.
         Figure 2: Recommendation Coverage.
                                                      [Kushmerick, 2002] N. Kushmerick. Robustness analyses of
                                                         instance-based collaborative recommendation. In T. Elo-
the error over these predictions (Figure 1). The error graph maa, H. Mannila, and H. Toivonen, editors, Proceedings of
shows a positive response to error for the trust-based meth- the European Conference on Machine Learning, Helsinki,
ods, especially those that employ trust-based ﬁltering and in Finland., volume 2430, pages 232–244. Lecture Notes in
particular for the higher trust-levels. For example, at a trust Computer Science Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, 2002.
level of 0.9 only those proﬁles that have previously been cor-
rect 90% or more of the time that they have been called upon [Levien, 2003] Raph Levien. Attack resistant trust metrics.
to rate an item, are included as recommendation partners for Ph.D Thesis, UC Berkeley, 2003.
the ﬁlter-based approaches (FItem and CItem). And for these [Massa and Bhattacharjee, 2004] Paolo Massa and Bobby
approaches we see signiﬁcant error reductions of up to 57% Bhattacharjee. Using trust in recommender systems: an
compared to the baseline Resnick. However, the coverage re- experimental analysis. Proceedings of 2nd International
sults indicate that these error reductions come at a cost. In Conference on Trust Managment, Oxford, England, 2004.
particular, the minimal error rates at the highest trust thresh- [O’Donovan and Smyth, 2005a] John O’Donovan and Barry
olds reduce coverage by over 90%, which is unlikely to be Smyth. Eliciting trust values from recommendation errors.
acceptable in most recommendation scenarios. However, for In Proceedings of the 18th International FLAIRS Confer-
trust thresholds below 0.5 we get signiﬁcant error reductions ence. AAAI Press, 2005.
while preserving coverage to a reasonable degree. In partic-
ular, the error for CItem is seen to drop most rapidly up to a [O’Donovan and Smyth, 2005b] John O’Donovan and Barry
trust threshold of 0.2, at which point it offers 85% coverage Smyth. Trust in recommender systems. In Proceedings
and an error of 0.71; Resnick’s error is 22% higher than this. of the 10th International Conference on Intelligent User
                                                         Interfaces, pages 167–174. ACM Press, 2005.
4  Conclusions                                        [O’Mahony et al., 2002] Michael P. O’Mahony, Neil Hurley,
We believe that computational models of trust can improve and Guenole C. M. Silvestre. An attack on collabora-
the effectiveness of recommender systems. We have shown  tive ﬁltering. In Proceedings of the 13th Int. Conf. on
that by integrating an item-level model of trust into standard Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages 494–
collaborative ﬁltering we can increase accuracy by up to 57% 503. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
by using only the top 1% most trustworthy proﬁles as recom- [O’Sullivan et al., 2002] Derry O’Sullivan, David C. Wilson,
mendation partners. While this beneﬁt comes at a signiﬁcant and Barry Smyth. Improving case-based recommenda-
coverage cost, more reasonable coverage can be achieved  tion: A collaborative ﬁltering approach. In Proceedings
with reduced error rates by less drastic ﬁltering thresholds. of the Sixth European Conference on Case Based Reason-
In addition to improving prediction accuracy, we believe that ing., pages LNAI 2416, p. 278 ff., 2002.
this trust-based approach may make recommenders more ro- [Resnick et al., 1994] Paul Resnick, Neophytos Iacovou,
bust to attack by malicious users, as discussed in [O’Mahony Mitesh Suchak, Peter Bergstrom, and John Riedl. Grou-
et al., 2002], [Levien, 2003] and [Kushmerick, 2002]. This is plens: An open architecture for collaborative ﬁltering of
a matter that we will investigate as part of future work. netnews. In Proceedings of ACM CSCW’94 Conference
                                                         on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Sharing Infor-
5  Acknowledgments                                       mation and Creating Meaning, pages 175–186, 1994.
This material is based on works supported by Science Foun-
dation Ireland under Grant No. 03/IN.3/I361
References
[Avesani et al., 2004] Paolo Avesani, Paolo Massa, and
  Roberto Tiella. Moleskiing: a trust-aware decentralized