                          Towards More Intelligent Mobile Search

                          Karen Church, Mark T. Keane and Barry Smyth
                                     Adaptive Information Cluster,
                        Smart Media Institute, Department of Computer Science,
                         University College Dublin, Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ireland
                          {Karen.Church, Mark.Keane, Barry.Smyth}@ucd.ie

                    Abstract                          stylus. So while previous incarnations of the Mobile Inter-
                                                      net were not viewed as a success there is increasing optimism
    As the mobile Internet continues to grow there is about the future of this important information medium. These
    an increasing need to provide users with effective new handsets, coupled with improved content, more attractive
    search facilities. In this paper we argue that the billing arrangements and greater bandwidth appear to be at-
    standard Web search approach of providing snippet tracting more and more users to the Mobile Internet on a daily
    text alongside each result is not appropriate given basis. This in turn is likely to lead to a need for improved
    the interface limitations of mobile devices. Instead search facilities, facilities that we argue need to be carefully
    we evaluate an alternative approach involving the adapted to the features of the Mobile Internet, its devices and
    use of related queries in place of snippet text for the differing needs of its users
    result gisting.
                                                      2   Characteristics of Mobile Search
1  Introduction
                                                      We do acknowledge that even current mobile devices suffer
The mobile world is growing at an astonishing rate. In 2004, from inherent limitations that can greatly effect the usabil-
the number of mobile users worldwide reached 1.52 billion, ity of many mobile applications [Ramsay and Nielsen, 2000].
in Europe alone the number of users exceeded 340 million This is largely due to the fact that very little effort has been
and the volume of pages viewed on the Mobile Web continues made to cater for the unique requirements of the Mobile Inter-
to rise [CellularOnline, 2004]. Five years has passed since the net. Such limitations can be especially problematic for mo-
publication of the renowned WAP usability report, which de- bile search applications. Small displays restrict the number
tailed the various limitations of both WAP (as a means of mo- of results that can be displayed on a single screen and input
bile Web access) and mobile devices [Ramsay and Nielsen, limitations impact the type of queries that are provided. Most
2000]. However, the Mobile Internet has since been success- mobile search engines offer only simple adaptations to stan-
fully re-branded by leading mobile operators like Vodafone dard Web search interfaces. For example, fewer results are
and O2, thus encouraging users to take advantage of next- returned per page and the snippet text associated with each re-
generation mobile devices.                            sult may be truncated or simply removed [Jones et al., 2002].
  If we examine current mobile devices, we can divide them We believe that more fundamental adaptations are necessary.
into three classes. At the lowest level we have standard WAP In particular we believe that displaying snippet text along-
enabled phones. Although the screen real-estate of these de- side each search result is not feasible in the mobile realm.
vices is still very small, most of them come equipped with However we also think that displaying just a title or a url to
high-resolution color interfaces and predictive text input ca- represent each search result does not provide the user with
pabilities - a signiﬁcant improvement over 1st generation meaningful information about the context of a given result.
WAP-handsets. The second class of device includes next- Instead we propose the use of related queries in place of snip-
generation smart phones with 3G capabilities. The majority pet text as a more economical form of result gisting. Econ-
of these devices encompass larger screens, higher-resolution omy of screen-space is a major concern in mobile search and
interfaces, enhanced Web-browser support and multiple input the use of related queries can signiﬁcantly increase the num-
options. For example, most of these phones support XHTML, ber of results displayed per screen on mobile devices. More-
(e.g. Nokia 6630, Siemens SX1) and some of the phones in- over, in this paper we also show that the terms in these related
corporate ﬂip-out messaging keyboards, (e.g. Nokia 6820, queries can be more informative, when it comes to capturing
Siemens SK65). The ﬁnal class of mobile device includes the content of an associated page, than the page’s snippet text.
PDA’s, XDA’s and other small handhelds. These devices have Similar work has also been carried out in [Jones et al., 2004],
much larger screens, higher-resolution interfaces, integrated where key phrases, automatically extracted from web pages
Web-browsers supporting standard HTML as well as a multi- are used to provide users with accurate, meaningful represen-
tude of input options including full messaging keyboards and tations of search results on mobile devices.3  Towards Intelligent Result Gisting                 the representativeness of a set of terms relative to some page
A personalized search engine called I-SPY, [Smyth et al., could be measured by the position of the page in the result-
2003], can provide these related queries by tracking and list generated by some search engine when using these terms
recording past queries that have resulted in the selection of as a query. Hence, in our evaluation we transformed each set
a given result page. I-SPY is a community-based meta search of related queries and piece of snippet text into a new search
engine that records the search histories of communities of engine query, submitted the queries to HotBot and compared
like-minded users [Smyth et al., 2003; Forthcoming]. Each the position of the target page, p, in the two result-lists pro-
time a user selects a result, p, for a query, q, I-SPY updates a duced. We compared a number of variations of this approach
counter in a hit-matrix to reﬂect this selection. This informa- by constructing our search queries in different ways.
tion is used to adapt future result-lists for similar queries by
promoting results that have been selected in the past. 4.1 Query Generation
  One of I-SPY’s distinguishing features is that it can rec- Probably the most important part of our evaluation was the
ommend related queries alongside a search result. For each generation of the test queries from both the related queries
search result p, that is associated with some target query q , I- and snippet text. In all, six query generation strategies were
SPY can generate a set of related queries from those queries, tested: two that produced queries from the terms contained in
q1, ...qn, that have also led to the selection of p [Smyth et the related queries for a page and four that used terms from
al., Forthcoming]. These related queries can also be ranked the page’s snippet text. Strategy RQ1 produces a test query
according to the likelihood that they match a user’s current re- by concatenating the related query terms into a single query.
quirements. These ranking strategies are described in [Balfe Strategy RQ2 uses a similar approach but duplicate terms are
and Smyth, ]. Figure 1 illustrates these related queries in ac- removed.
tion. If we take, for example, the query ’MP3’ we can see that The snippet text conversion was slightly more complicated.
the ﬁrst search result, ’mp3.com’ is associated with queries To ensure a fair evaluation, we generated a test query from
such as ’music’ and ’charts’. These related queries can in- the snippet text using the same number of terms as the test
form the user as to the context of the search result in question. queries produced from the related queries. To generate the
                                                      test queries we parsed the snippet text to remove stop-words
      Query                                           and special characters and then selected terms from the re-
                                                      maining snippet text using four different strategies. In strat-
                                                      egy S1 we select a random set of k terms, where k is the
      Result                                          number of terms in the test query produced by RQ1. Strat-
                                                      egy S2 selects the top k most common terms in the snippet
      Related                                         text, where k is the number of terms in the test query pro-
      Queries                                         duced by RQ2. For strategy S3 we again select a random set
                                                      of k terms but this time k is the number of terms produced
                                                      by RQ2. Finally, strategy S4 selects the top k most com-
       Figure 1: Query ’MP3’ on a mobile phone        mon terms in the snippet text, where k is the number of terms
                                                      produced by RQ1.
  It is interesting to consider whether these related queries
could be used as an alternative to snippet text to gist search 4.2 Relevance Assessment
results, especially given the interface limitations of mobile After submitting each test query to the HotBot search engine,
devices. Preliminary empirical evidence generated from a we examined the top 500 HotBot results only and compared
similar evaluation we carried out suggests that these related the position of p, the target result-page, in the result-lists pro-
queries may be as informative as snippet text [Church et al., duced for each test query. The higher p is in the result-list
2005]. In our previous evaluation we used a smaller dataset the more representative the test query must be as an indicator
and a different independent search engine, namely Google. of p0s content and hence the more representative the related
In order to validate our earlier ﬁndings, we decided to carry queries or snippet text. Along with this positional information
out a more in-depth evaluation using a different independent we also examined the percentage of results matched by each
search engine, namely HotBot and a larger dataset. The de- test query strategy as well as the average length in number of
tails of this evaluation are described in the following section. terms of the related queries vs. snippet-based strategies.
4  Evaluation                                         4.3  Results
The data for this evaluation was collected by mining the First we looked at the average position of each p in the result-
search logs of I-SPY. Speciﬁcally we collected a set of 684 lists produced by HotBot, see Figure 2. When calculating the
result-pages that were selected by searchers in response to average position, a penalty is applied when the target result
various queries. Each of these pages was associated with at cannot be found for the query in question. If the target result
least 2 related queries and a unit of snippet text generated cannot be found, p is given a default position value of 501
by Google. The purpose of our experiment was to consider (because we are only examining the ﬁrst 500 HotBot results).
how well these related queries represented the page in ques- Both related query strategies, RQ1 and RQ2, perform very
tion, relative to its snippet text. To do this we supposed that well. RQ2 locates p at an average position of 39 in the result-list compared to the best performing snippet-based strategy   40
which locates p at an average position of 103.

                                                                                     35
                                                              30

        200

                                                              20
                                   180
        150                                                                                   21
                        144
                                                              10
        100                   118


                                         103                 Average  Number of Terms
                                                                    6
                                                                             4
                                                               0
       Average  Position 50                                        RQ1      RQ2     Snippet Parsed Snippet
             46
                   39
         0                                                 Figure 4: Average number of terms in test queries
            RQ1   RQ2   S1    S2    S3   S4
                      Test Query Strategy
                                                      informative gisting approach. Moreover, related query terms
      Figure 2: Average position of p in result-lists take up a small fraction of the screen space associated with
                                                      the display of snippet text, which is a major advantage for the
  The poor showing for the snippet text strategies could have provision of mobile search.
been due to frequent penalties being incurred when p was not
present in the top 500 results. To understand this we exam- 6 Acknowledgements
ined the percentage of results found for each test query strat-
egy in the top 500 HotBot results, see Figure 3. The related This material is based on works supported by the Science
query strategies succeed in producing result-lists that contain Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 03/IN.3/I361.
p for between 92% and 94% of queries, a signiﬁcant improve-
ment when compared to the snippet text strategies which re- References
turn p for between 66% and 80% of the test queries.   [Balfe and Smyth, ] E. Balfe and B. Smyth. Collaborative
                                                         Query Recommendation for Web Search. In Proceedings

        100                                              of 16th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,

             92   94                                     pages 268–272, Valencia, Spain.
        80
                              78         80           [CellularOnline, 2004] CellularOnline.         See,
                        73
        60                         66                    http://www.cellular.co.za/, 2004.

        40                                            [Church et al., 2005] K. Church, M. T. Keane, and B. Smyth.
                                                         An Evaluation of Gisting in Mobile Search. In Proceed-
        20                                               ings of the 27th European Conference on Information Re-
       %  Found in Top 500 Results

         0                                               trieval, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2005.
            RQ1   RQ2   S1   S2    S3    S4           [Jones et al., 2002] M. Jones, G. Buchanan, and H. Thim-
                      Test Query Strategy
                                                         bleby. Sorting out Searching on Small Screen Device.
 Figure 3: Percentage found in the top 500 HotBot results In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on
                                                         Human Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices, Pisa,
  These results suggest that the terms contained in the related Italy, 2002.
queries are more representative of the pages they refer to than [Jones et al., 2004] S. Jones, M. Jones, and S. Deo. Using
an equivalent number of terms taken from the snippet text Keyphrases as Search Result Surrogates on Small Screen
associated with these pages. And by using related queries Devices. International Journal of Personal and Ubiqui-
instead of snippet text we can achieve a signiﬁcant saving in tous Computing, 8(1):55–68, 2004.
display-space. For example, as shown in Figure 4, our related [Ramsay and Nielsen, 2000] M. Ramsay and J. Nielsen. The
queries contained only 4 unique terms on average, compared WAP Usability Report, 2000.
to snippet texts with an average of 35 terms (words), or 21
terms with stop-words removed.                        [Smyth et al., 2003] B. Smyth, E. Balfe, P. Briggs, M. Coyle,
                                                         and J. Freyne. Collaborative Web Search. In Proceedings
5  Conclusion                                            of the 18th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial In-
                                                         telligence, pages 1417–1419, Acapulco, Mexico, 2003.
One of the main issues with mobile search engines concerns
                                                      [Smyth et al., Forthcoming] B. Smyth, E. Balfe, J. Freyne,
the manner in which search results are displayed. In this pa-
                                                         P. Briggs, M. Coyle, and O. Boydell. Exploiting Query
per we have suggested using related queries as an economical
                                                         Repetition & Regularity in an Adaptive Community-Based
alternative to snippet text for result gisting. Our evaluation
                                                         Web Search Engine. User Modeling and User Adapted
suggests that the terms in related queries have the potential
                                                         Interaction, Forthcoming.
to better capture the essence of their associated pages than
the terms in the snippet texts, and so may serve to be a more