          A  Cognitive    Model    of Visual   Analogical    Problem-Solving       Transfer
                                               Jim Davies
                               Queen’s  University, School of Computing
                        Kingston, Ontario, Canada  K7L  3N6,  jim@jimdavies.org

                                 Ashok   K. Goel, Nancy  J. Nersessian


                         Georgia Institute of Technology, College of Computing
                                                                


           801 Atlantic Drive, Atlanta, Georgia, USA,  30332,   goel, nancyn ¡ @cc.gatech.edu
                    Abstract                          2   The  Galatea  Model  of L14
                                                      Galatea is intended to be a partial cognitive model of visual
    Complex problem solving typically involves the    analogical transfer in human beings. To support Galatea with
    generation of a procedure consisting of an ordered respect to its psychological plausibility we modelled some
    sequence of steps. Analogical reasoning is one    of the visual aspects of four experimental participants’ draw-
    strategy for solving complex problems, and visual ings, one of which we will describe in detail in this paper.
    reasoning is another. Visual analogies pertain to   Dr. David Craig ran 34 participants in an analogical trans-
    analogies based only on visual knowledge. In this fer experiment [Craig et al., 2002]. Participants were shown
    paper, we describe the use of Galatea, a computa- a problem-solving solution about a laboratory, presented with
    tional model of visual analogies in problem solv- text and a diagram. They were asked to solve an analogous
    ing, to model the problem solving of a human sub- problem with a weed-trimmer, presented with text only. Of
    ject (L14). L14 was a given the task of solving a these, 17 participants (in three conditions) correctly described
    complex problem using analogy in a domain that    the analogous solution. All participants were asked to draw a
    contained both visual and non-visual knowledge,   diagram to illustrate their suggested solutions.
    and was encouraged to use visual analogy. We de-    The source given was a laboratory clean room problem. A
    scribe how Galatea models L14’s use of visual anal- single door lets in dirty air, so a vestibule is added, with two
    ogy in problem solving.                           doors where one door stayed shut while the other was open.
                                                      The target problem is a weed trimmer arm attached to a truck
                                                      that must be able to pass through street signs. The analogous
                                                      solution is to design an arm with two latching doors, so that
1  Introduction                                       while one is open to let the sign pass, the other stays closed to
                                                      support the arm and trimmer. Participants produced diagrams
Complex problem solving typically involves the generation describing their solutions to the problems. We modelled four
of a procedure consisting of a strongly-ordered sequence of of these experimental participants in Galatea, one of which,
steps. These procedures have two important properties: 1) L14, we will describe in detail.
the procedure contains two or more steps, and 2) some steps We represented the source analog as a series of s-images
cannot be executed before some other steps have already been connected with transformations. See the top of Figure
executed. Analogical reasoning is one strategy humans often 2 for an abstract diagram of our Galatea model of the source
use to solve complex problems. Analogical problem solving analog.
takes a solution from a source analog and applies some ver- The ﬁrst transformation is replicate. The sec-
sion of that solution to a target problem. Visual reasoning is ond transformation is add-connections which
another strategy humans sometimes use to address complex places the door sets in the correct position in rela-
problems.                                             tion to the top  and bottom  walls.  The  third and
  We have used Galatea to model data on problem solving by fourth transformations are add-component, which
several human subjects. This data was collected in a pyscho- add the top and bottom containment walls. The ﬁfth
logical experiment run by Dr. David Craig. In this experi- transformation, another add-connections, places
ment, the human participants were given the task of solving these containment walls in the correct positions in relation to
a complex problem using analogy in a domain that contained the door sets and the top and bottom walls.
both visual and non-visual knowledge, and were encouraged
to use visual analogy in their problem solving. In this paper, 2.1 Evaluation
we describe how Galatea models one participant’s (L14’s) We can now examine what made L14 differ from the stimulus
use of visual analogy in problem solving. In the interest of drawing: long vestibule, rotation, line to double line, sliding
space, we refer you to [Davies and Goel, 2001] for informa- doors, added objects, numeric dimensions added, and mecha-
tion about the Galatea modelling language.            nisms added. Of these seven differences, our model success-Figure 1: The source data for L14. The drawing above and handwritten text are what participant L14 produced on the experi-
ment sheet.


Figure 2: The implementation of L14. The top series of s-images represents the source analog (the lab problem) and the
bottom series the target. There are six s-images for the ﬁve transformations.

fully re-creates four of them, all through manipulation of the Claim two: The successful transfer of strongly-ordered
input knowledge and by adding transformations. That is, the procedures in which new objects are created requires the
source Galatea code did not need to be changed.       reasoner to generate intermediate knowledge states and
  Unaccounted for are the two bent lines emerging from the mappings between the intermediate knowledge states of
vestibule on the left side, the numeric dimensions and words the source and target analogs. In the course of creating this
describing the mechanism. Also, L14 shows one of the doors model, we discovered something about analogical transfer in
retracting, and the model does not. The model also fails to general: A characteristic of strongly-ordered procedures is
capture the double line used to connect the door sections, be- that components of the problem are created by the operations,
cause the single line is transferred without adaptation from and these components are acted on by later operations.
the source. This could be ﬁxed, perhaps, by representing the Our model shows how this might work for human cog-
argument to the add-component  as a function referring nition: The doorway is replicated, then moved, then sealed
to whatever element is used to represent another wall, rather with containing walls. For the transfer of multi-step, strongly-
than as a line.                                       ordered procedures it was necessary for Galatea to generate
                                                      intermediate knowledge states and mappings.

3  Conclusion                                         References
Our initial view was that visual knowledge facilitates transfer [Craig et al., 2002] David L. Craig, Nancy J. Nersessian, and
even when non-visual knowledge might be available. In con- Richard Catrambone. Model-Based Reasoning: Science,
clusion, the evaluation supported this and resulted in one un- Technology, & Values, chapter Perceptual simulation in
expected discovery, for a total of two claims: Claim one: Vi- analogical problem solving. Kluwer Academic: Plenum
sual knowledge facilitates transfer even when non-visual Publishers, 2002.
knowledge might be available. L14’s data is an example of
                                                      [Davies and Goel, 2001] Jim Davies and Ashok K. Goel. Vi-
a cross-domain analogical problem solving that could have
                                                         sual analogy in problem solving. In Proceedings of the
been represented both non-visually and visually. Our im-
                                                         International Joint Conference for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
plemented model of L14 uses only visual knowledge. The
                                                         2001, 2001.
level of abstraction of the visual symbols in Covlan allows
the cross-domain transfer of problem-solving steps to occur,
supporting our hypothesis. Further it shows that Galatea can
account for human participant data.