                       Online Support System for Mediator Education  
                                                    
                                                    
             Takahiro Tanaka, Yoshiaki Yasumura, Daisuke Katagami, Katsumi Nitta 
                                     Tokyo Institute of Technology 
                    Department of Computational Intelligence and Systems Science 
                        4259 Nagatsuta, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Japan 226-8502 
                                       takat@ntt.dis.titech.ac.jp 

                     Abstract                        2.  Online mediation education assistance sys-
    To settle the disputation, ADR (Alternative Dispu-   tem 
    tation Resolution) has been becoming popular in-  
    stead of the trial. However, to educate the mediation Online mediations are carried out by connecting to the server 
    skill, much training is needed. In this paper, we in- through the Internet by the users using the argument interface. 
    troduce the overview of the online mediator educa- Mediator (host) and the two parties are present for the system. 
    tion system. This system navigates the users by  Educational assistance is done by the instructor suggesting 
    providing materials for decision making by refer- the next possible remark and judging the mediator's skill by 
    ring to old cases. Users can communicate with each analyzing the accumulated mediation records statistically. 
    other by using avatars,  and they can see the status of 
    disputation in the form of several diagrams.      
                                                     The main features of this system are the following three; 
1.  Introduction                                     (1) To provide online mediation education environment 
                                                       Exchanging remarks online, setting index to the remark 
   
                                                     contents and show them in diagrams and   accumulate  them 
These days, there are various types of troubles related to 
                                                     in case example base 
transactions on the Internet. Especially the number of trou-
                                                     (2) To navigate mediations using case example base 
bles in online shopping and online auctions are on the in-
                                                       During mediation practice, similar past mediation cases 
crease. Since going through trials to argue is high cost and 
                                                     can be searched and the next remarks   candidate  are  indi-
time-consuming, therefore it is difficult to provide effective 
                                                     cated to the student acting as a mediator. 
remedy for these types of troubles. Prompt and low-cost 
                                                     (3) To analyze mediation skill using case example base 
mediations and arbitrations called the Alternative Disputa-
                                                       By analyzing mediation records in case example base, 
tion Resolution (ADR) are in the spotlight. 
                                                     assess the mediation student's skill. 
  Non-legal professions can carry out mediations, however, 
                                                      
as the demand increasing, we are lacking mediators. Trainee 
mediators not only need education on the procedures and 
skills for actual mediations but also need to practice with 
example cases  [Katsh, 2000; Rule, 2002]. However, when 
mediators practice, they need constant attendance by in-
structors. They have to be at the same location at same time 
which is a great burden. 
  Given this factor, we have been researching to aim for 
developing an online mediator education system. This sys-
tem does not only provide online argument environment, but 
also assists and educates the mediators by using case example 
base. It also suggests a new education model using the ana-
lyzed data accumulated by the system. 
 
 
                                                                                                      
                                                                               
                                                                 Figure 1: Argument Interface 
                                                                                 Situated mediations are carried out with Argument Inter- However, searching similar situations are not easy. Similar 
face as shown in Figure 1. Users input "remark texts", "link remarks can always be slightly different from one another, as 
data" and "avatar expressions".                      the expressions are different, and what we understand from 
  The case data dealt in this study is natural-language texts them differs regarding the previous remarks. 
representing conversations in mediations. To be able to To make searching for similar situations easier, we pro-
search for similar situations from the conversations and to pose a searching method of using index of remarks. This 
analyze statistically, we propose to index the remarks as method, as shown in Figure 2, goes back to two of the pre-
follows;                                             vious remarks from the present subject remark and within 
  Firstly, when instructors set questions, they should know these three remarks, the point at issue and the relation (link 
what the point at issue is, for instance, in mediations for data) are compared and similar situations are assessed. 
auction troubles, the following point at issues are to be in-  
cluded [Ashley, 1991; Aleven, 1997];                 3. Utilizing the case base  
                                                      
f1: Whether or not the product auctioned was a defect 
                                                     By analyzing old cases statistically, we can draw various 
   f11: Does it have any flaw? 
                                                     information which is useful for legal education strategy. For 
     f12: Is it broken? 
                                                     example, by observing the number of issue points which the 
f2: Was there enough description for the product? 
                                                     mediator introduced in the case,  we can estimate how posi-
    f21: Did the product description picture show the defect 
                                                     tively the mediator controls the mediation. This information 
       part? 
                                                     is used to measure the mediation skill.  
    f22: Did the description explain the defect-status well? 
                                                       Another example is that we can classify the mediation data 
 
                                                     in the case base by comparing the flow of issue points. The 
  For each question set, we prepare around twenty points at 
                                                     classified data is used to arrange the mediation records and to 
issue for it beforehand. In addition, for each of them, we 
                                                     evaluate the results of mediation training. 
register which points at issue is on the topic when which term 
(or groups of term) appear. This extraction of wordlist is  
done by TF/IDF method by using mediation records in the 4. Conclusion 
case example base.                                    
  This allows one remark to have two data be indexed; (1) We introduced the outline of the online system of ADR me-
the point at issue in the remark and (2) the relation  with the diation education assistance. The characteristics of this sys-
previous remark.                                     tem are that it uses case example base to compare the me-
                                                     diation navigation and to assist mediator education.  
  During mediation, we tend to be stuck what remarks to The final object of this study is to develop a mediation 
make next. In those cases, it would be helpful if we can refer agent that carries out mediations instead of human. Media-
to other people's remarks in similar situations picked up from tion agent acts as a host following the Argument models. 
the case example base, and by knowing how the mediation With using the case example base, they can refer to the re-
proceeded can help them refer to making next remark. marks form similar situations to use in hosting. Therefore, we 
                                                     need to collect more simulated mediation cases and statisti-
                                                     cally analyze them and with the results of them, we need to 
                                                     improve the accuracy of the similar situation search. 
                                                      
                                                     References 
                                                      [Rule, 2002] Colin Rule, Online Dispute Resolution For 
                                                         Business, Jossey-Bass, 2002.  
                                                     [Katsh, 2000] Ethan Katsh and Janet Rifkin, Online Dispute 
                                                         Resolution : Resolving Conflicts in Cyberspace, 
                                                         Jossey-Bass, 2000.  
                                                      [Ashley, 1991] Ashley, K.D, Reasoning with cases and 
                                                         hypotheticals in HYPO, Int.J.ManMachine Studies 34, 
                                                         pp.753-796, 1991.  
                                                      [Aleven, 1997] Vincent Aleven, Teaching Case-Based Ar-
                                                         gumentation Through a Model and Examples, Univer-
                                                         sity of Pittsburgh, 1997.  
           Figure 2: Similar Situation Search 
                          