Achieving Allocatively-Efﬁcient and Strongly Budget-Balanced Mechanisms in the
                   Network Flow Domain for Bounded-Rational Agents
                            Yoram Bachrach      and Jeffrey S. Rosenschein
                                        {yori, jeff}@cs.huji.ac.il
                             School of Engineering and Computer Science
                                           Hebrew University
                                            Jerusalem, Israel

                    Abstract                          only requires that even if an agent is given the reported types
                                                      of the other agents, it has a computationally intractable prob-
    Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) mechanisms are a      lem to solve if it wishes to ﬁnd a beneﬁcial manipulation (i.e.,
    framework for ﬁnding a solution to a distributed  report a false type to the mechanism to gain higher utility).
    optimization problem in systems of self-interested  In this work, we consider the domain of network ﬂows.
    agents. VCG mechanisms have received wide at-     In that domain, the edges of a network ﬂow belong to sev-
    tention in the AI community because they are ef-  eral self-interested agents. Each agent reports its edges to the
    ﬁcient and strategy-proof; a special case of the  mechanism. The mechanism is then required to choose a ﬂow
    Groves family of mechanisms, VCG mechanisms       from the source vertex to the target vertex. Agents gain utility
    are the only direct-revelation mechanisms that are from ﬂow units on their edges. Agents can lie, and declare a
    allocatively efﬁcient and strategy-proof. Unfortu- subset of the edges they really own. This manipulation may
    nately, they are only weakly budget-balanced.     change the ﬂow that the mechanism chooses, and agents may
    We consider self-interested agents in a network   try to take advantage of this. However, we show that it is
    ﬂow  domain, and show   that in this domain,      possible to use the fact that agents have computational lim-
    it is possible to design a mechanism that is      itations and are not unboundedly rational, so as to construct
    both allocatively-efﬁcient and almost completely  mechanisms with beneﬁcial properties.
    budget-balanced. This is done by choosing a mech-
    anism that is not strategy-proof but rather strategy- 1.1 Self-Interested Network Flows
    resistant. Instead of using the VCG mechanism, we We explore the problem of designing a mechanism for
    propose a mechanism in which ﬁnding a beneﬁcial   bounded-rational agents in a distributed ﬂow problem. We
    manipulation is an NP-complete problem, and the   demonstrate that for this domain, we can ﬁnd a mechanism
    payments from the agents to the mechanism may     that is allocatively-efﬁcient, -budget-balanced, and strategy-
    be minimized as much as desired.                  resistant. This means that if we assume the agents are
                                                      bounded-rational and would not try to manipulate the mech-
1  Mechanisms for Network Flow                        anism if such manipulation is an NP-complete problem, they
Mechanisms face the problem of ﬁnding a system-wide so- would all truthfully report their preferences. Once the mech-
lution to an optimization problem based on private informa- anism gets their true preferences, it chooses the outcome that
tion given by self-interested agents. A well-known solution to maximizes total utility of the agents. To achieve this truth-
such problems in the case of quasi-linear preferences is that fulness, the mechanism requires payments; however, the total
of Groves mechanisms. A special case of the Groves fam- sum of these payments can be minimized as much as required.
ily of mechanisms are VCG mechanisms, which are budget- We now present the self-interested layered-graph network
balanced, allocatively-efﬁcient, and strategy-proof.  ﬂow problem. Consider a ﬂow network on a layered graph.
  A signiﬁcant disadvantage of VCG mechanisms is that they We have a graph G =< V, E >, with source vertex s and
are only weakly budget-balanced. We would in principle pre- target vertex t. The vertices of the graph are partitioned into
fer a strongly budget-balanced mechanism, where the total n + 1 layers, L0 = {s}, L1, ..., Ln = {t}. The edges only
                                      P               run between consecutive layers. We have a capacity function
sum of payments to the mechanism is zero: i ti(θ) = 0.
Impossibility results ([Green and Laffont, 1977] and [Hur- c : E → R which is the maximal ﬂow allowed on the edges.
wicz, 1975]) show that in a quasi-linear environment, it is We also have a set I of agents. Each agent controls a subset
impossible to achieve a mechanism that is strategy-proof, Ei ⊂ E of the graph’s edges. No two agents control the same
allocatively-efﬁcient, and strongly budget-balanced.  edge: ∀i6=jEi ∩ Ej = φ.
  We address this by slightly relaxing the strategy-proof re- The mechanism chooses a valid ﬂow from s to t.
quirement, replacing it with strategy-resistance. A mecha- A valid ﬂow is a function f : E →  R  such that
nism is strategy-proof if the dominant strategy of each agent ∀(u,v)∈Ef(u, v) ≤ c(u, v), ∀(u,v)∈Ef(u, v) = −f(v, u), and
                                                                P
is to reveal its true type to the mechanism. Strategy-resistance ∀u∈V −{s,t} v∈V f(u, v) = 0.  Each agent values the ﬂow according to the total ﬂow go- tion here, we do give some intuition about how it was con-
ing through its edges. Let f be the valid ﬂow chosen by the structed. Given the original VERTEX-COVER instance, we
mechanism, and Ef the set of edges in f through which there build a layer graph, where one of the agents, A1, controls
is a positive ﬂow: Ef = {e ∈ E | f(e) > 0}. We denote the all the edges between two consecutive layers. Each edge
set of Ai’s edges used in the ﬂow f by: Ef,i = Ef ∩ Ei. The A1 owns corresponds to a vertex in the original VERTEX-
agent’s valuation of the ﬂow is v (f) = P f(e).       COVER graph. The network ﬂow graph is constructed so
                           i       e∈Ef,i
  When the mechanism  is given the agents’ true types, that in order for A1 to maximize its valuation, it must declare
θ =  E1, E2, ..., EI , we want it to choose the ﬂow that a subset of edges that is a vertex cover of G. However, in
maximizes the total utility of the agents. The mecha- order to minimize its payment to the mechanism, A1 must
nism would be allocatively-efﬁcient if it chooses f ∗(θ) = choose as few edges as possible. If the payment constant c is
arg max  P  P      f(e). In a layered graph the ﬂow that small enough, A1’s top priority is to make its chosen vertices
       f   i  e∈Ef,i
maximizes the sum of agents’ utilities is the maximal ﬂow a vertex-cover, and only then choosing as few edges as possi-
(proof of this is given in the full paper). Thus, if each agent ble. This makes its preferred choice the minimal vertex cover
truthfully declares its subset of edges, the mechanism can eas- of the original graph.
ily compute f ∗(θ) by running a maximal ﬂow algorithm, such
as the Edmonds-Karp algorithm.                        2   Conclusions and Future Directions
  As shown in the full version of this paper, a naive mecha- We have suggested a mechanism for the distributed network
nism for the self-interested ﬂow problem, with no payments ﬂow problem with self-interested agents. With a proper
to the mechanism, is not strategy-proof. An agent may de- choice of the payment constant c, ﬁnding a beneﬁcial manip-
clare a subset of the edges it controls, to change the ﬂow that ulation is an NP-complete problem. Since ﬁnding a beneﬁcial
the mechanism chooses to a ﬂow that the agent values more. manipulation is intractable, we encourage agents to truthfully
                                                      report their preferences. In this case, the mechanism would
1.2  Self-Interested Network Flow Mechanism           choose the result maximizing the sum of agents’ utilities, and
                                                      we have an allocatively-efﬁcient mechanism.
We assume quasi-linear utility. Each agent pays the mech-
                                                        Given some   >  0, we can make the mechanism  -
anism a payment p , and its utility is u (f) = v (f) − p .
                i                 i       i      i    budget-balanced, by choosing a small enough payment con-
We now show that by using a straightforward payment rule,
                                                      stant c <         , where n is the number of agents.
we make ﬁnding a beneﬁcial manipulation NP-hard. The             n(|E|+|V |)
payment rule we use is simple: each agent pays the mech- This way, all of the agents together pay less than . The
anism a constant of c for each edge it declares it owns. Let mechanism we have described is also individual-rational.
 0                                                    Therefore, in the domain of network ﬂows, this achieves an
Ei ⊂  Ei be the subset of edges an agent declares it owns.
         0       0                                    individual-rational, allocatively-efﬁcient, -budget-balanced,
Then pi(Ei) = c|Ei|. We also give a minor correction to
make sure the mechanism is individual-rational. The payment and strategy-resistant mechanism. The standard VCG solu-
                                                      tion in this domain would be only weakly budget-balanced,
pi gives the agent a utility of 0 when the agent’s valuation of
the chosen ﬂow is less than the payment to the mechanism. but strategy-proof.
                     0                                  Impossibility results ([Green and Laffont, 1977] and [Hur-
Assume that Ai knows Ej for all j 6= i. It can easily calcu-
late the utility it would get by truthfully declaring all its edges. wicz, 1975]) indicate that no direct-revelation mechanism
How hard is it for i to ﬁnd a subset of edges it could declare can achieve strong budget-balance without sacriﬁcing either
to the mechanism so as to gain a higher utility? We deﬁne the allocative-efﬁciency or strategy-proofness. We believe that in
problem of ﬁnding a useful manipulation in the self-interested many cases, trading strategy-proofness for strategy-resistance
network ﬂow domain as follows.                        is a fair price to pay for achieving strong budget-balance.
  FLOW-EDGE-SUBSET: We are given a layered graph        Our strategy-resistance rested on the worst case assump-
ﬂow network, with the capacity function c : E → R, E  tions of NP-hardness, which only indicates that a certain
                                                −i    problem has some hard instances. A stronger notion of
the declared edges of the other agents, and Ei, the set of our
edges. We are also given the constant c of the payment, and strategy-resistance could also require the manipulation prob-
we know that if we declare that we have k edges, our pay- lem to have no approximation methods, that it be in some
                                                      harder complexity class, or that it be hard to ﬁnd any (not just
ment to the mechanism would be pi = ck. We assume the
mechanism prefers a maximal ﬂow that maximizes our util- the optimal) beneﬁcial manipulation. This work constitutes a
ity of all the possible maximal ﬂows. We are also given a ﬁrst step in establishing the notion of strategy-resistance.
constant k, the target utility for Ai. We are asked if there is
                     0                                References
a subset of Ai’s edges Ei ⊂ Ei, such that the maximal ﬂow
                       ∗              0               [Green and Laffont, 1977] Jerry Green and Jean-Jacques
chosen by the mechanism, f (E1, ..., Ei−1, Ei, Ei+1, ..., EI )
                              ∗           ∗              Laffont. Characterization of satisfactory mechanisms for
gives Ai a utility of at least k: ui(f , pi) = vi(f ) − pi =
P       f(e) − c|E0| ≥ k.                                the revelation of preferences for public goods. Economet-
  e∈Ef∗,i         i                                      rica, 45(2):427–38, March 1977.
  A reduction, given in the full version of this paper, indi-
                                                      [            ]
cates that FLOW-EDGE-SUBSET is an NP-complete prob-    Hurwicz, 1975 Leonid Hurwicz. On the existence of al-
lem.  The reduction given is from a general VERTEX-      location systems whose manipulative Nash equilibria are
COVER instance to a FLOW-EDGE-SUBSET problem.            pareto-optimal. In 3rd World Congress of the Econometric
                                                         Society (Unpublished), 1975.
  Although we do not include the full details of the reduc-