              Appropriate Microplanning Choices for Low-Skilled Readers 

                                  Sandra Williams and Ehud Reiter 
                                   Department of Computing Science,  
                          University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3UE, U.K. 
                                   {swilliam,ereiter}@csd.abdn.ac.uk 


                    Abstract                          some  psycholinguistically-motivated rules for expressing 
                                                      discourse relations, but did not evaluate them at all. 
    We have developed a set of microplanning choice 
    rules which are intended to enable Natural Lan-
    guage Generation (NLG) systems to generate ap-    2   Microplanning choices investigated 
    propriate texts for readers with below-average lit- The document (content) planners of our systems produce as 
    eracy, focusing in particular on choices related to output a tree, where core messages are related by discourse 
    how discourse structure is expressed (cue phrases, relations such as explanation or concession. Discourse rela-
    ordering, sentence structure). Evaluation experi- tions are essentially RST relations, and messages are repre-
    ments suggest that our rules do enhance the read- sented using a deep-syntactic representation. An example of 
    ability of texts for low-skilled readers, although an extract from a typical content plan, with messages shown 
    there is still room for improvement.              as text glosses instead of deep syntactic structures, is shown 
                                                      in Figure 1. 
1   Introduction 
                                                       
Natural Language Generation (NLG) systems are computer                 Concession 
programs that generate written texts in English or other hu-  
man languages [Reiter and Dale, 2000]. Most existing NLG  [Many people find        Condition 
systems assume that generated texts will be read by profi-  reading hard] 
cient readers with good literacy levels. However, many peo-
                                                              [Your skills will improve] [You practice reading] 
ple in the UK and elsewhere are not proficient readers. The 
goal of our research is to generate texts which low-skill Figure 1 – Extract from a typical content plan 
readers will find (relatively) easy to read. 
  Generating appropriate texts for poor readers is a multi- Our work focuses on how discourse relations such as Con-
faceted problem, which involves choices at all NLG levels cession in Figure 1 are expressed, in particular: 
(content, microplanning, realisation). The focus of our re- • cue phrases: which cue phrases (if any) should be used 
search is on microplanning choices, in particular on choices to express a discourse relation?  
related to the expression of discourse structure. 
                                                        • ordering: which order should the constituents related 
  This work was done in the context of the GIRL and Skill-
Sum1 projects. These projects worked in the application area by a discourse relation be expressed in?   
of generating feedback reports on assessments of adult basic • punctuation (sentence structure): should constituents 
skills (e.g. literacy). That is, users took a test assessing their be expressed in separate sentences (paragraphs?). If 
basic skills, and GIRL/SkillSum generated for them reports not, should punctuation be used to separate them? 
that summarized their performance on the test. 
                                                        We  developed a set of rules for these choices which we 
  While many previous researchers have looked at tailoring 
                                                      hypothesised were appropriate for low-skill readers; this is 
generated texts according to the user’s domain expertise 
                                                      our Enhanced Readability (ER) model. We also developed a 
(e.g. [Paris, 1988]), less has been done on tailoring texts 
                                                      control model for making these choices, based on the most 
according to the reader’s literacy. Perhaps the best known 
                                                      common choices in the RST-DTC [Carlson et al., 2002]. 
previous work in this area is PSET [Devlin et al., 1999], 
                                                        We created a microplanner that generated texts according 
which examined choices in texts intended for aphasic read-
                                                      to the rules in the ER and control models. We used a con-
ers. Unfortunately most of PSET’s rules were not experi-
                                                      straint-based approach that in general terms is similar to 
mentally validated. Scott and de Souza [1990] suggested 
                                                      Power [2000]; further details are given in Williams [2004]. 
                                                 
   1 Funded by PACCIT-LINK Grant ESRC RES-328-25-0026.         Fred Bloggs,                                    Fred Bloggs, 

      English Skills                                  English Skills 

      You scored fifteen. Thus you did well.          You scored fifteen. And you did well.  

      You did very well on grammar, while you did not do so well You did very well on grammar.  
      on spelling, for example, you did not find the correct  
                                                      But you did not do so well on spelling.  
      spelling for "parliament".  
                                                      And you did not find the correct spelling for "parliament".  
      Though many people find reading and writing hard, if you 
      improve your skills, it could help you to do a course which Many people find reading and writing hard.  
      you said you were interested in.  
                                                      But it could help you to do a course, if you improve your 
      Why not contact LearnDirect on 0800 101 909 to find out skills.  
      about courses. 
                                                      And you said you were interested in doing a course.  

                                                      Why not contact LearnDirect on 0800 101 909 to find out 
                                                      about courses. 

Figure 2: Examples of output from research system SkillSum. Left-hand control text automatically generated using corpus rules (and NOT 
intended for low-skilled readers),  right-hand text generated with ER model. 
                                                      and should be done. In particular we would like to include 
    3   Evaluation                                    lexical choice in our models, and also develop different 
                                                      models for people with different skill profiles. Nevertheless, 
GIRL evaluation experiment: 38 subjects, of varied literacy we think our results to date are encouraging, and suggest 
levels, took the GIRL assessment and were shown GIRL’s that good choice rules can make a difference. 
feedback reports. Subjects were initially shown texts gener-
ated with either the ER or control version (randomised), and 
asked to read the report aloud; we measured reading time References 
and reading errors (reading aloud was preferred over silent  [Carlson et al, 2002] L. Carlson, D. Marcu, and M. E. Oku-
reading because pilot tests showed that many poor readers rowski. Building a Discourse-Tagged Corpus in the 
would skim texts when asked to silently read). Subjects  Framework of Rhetorical Structure Theory. In van Kup-
were then shown both versions (ER and control) of the re- pevelt and Smith (eds.), Current Directions in Discourse 
port, and asked to state a preference.                   and Dialogue. Kluwer. 
The results showed that poor readers on average seemed to  [Devlin et al, 1999] S. Devlin, J. Tait, Y. Canning, J. Car-
read ER texts faster, make fewer reading errors on ER texts, roll, G. Minnen and D. Pearce. The Application of Assis-
and also preferred ER texts; however none of these results tive Technology in Facilitating the Comprehension of 
were statistically significant. There was little difference be- Newspaper Text by Aphasic People. In Buhler and 
tween the two versions for good readers                  Knops (eds.) Assistive Technology on the Threshold of 
SkillSum evaluation experiment: 60 subjects were selected the New Millennium. IOS Press. 
by skills experts to be people with moderate but not severe 
literacy problems, we also removed outliers; hence this  [Paris, 1988] C. Paris. Tailoring Object Descriptions to a 
group was more homogenous that of the first experiment.  User's Level of Expertise. Computational Linguistics 
After completing the assessment and reading their own re- 14(3):64-78. 
port, each subject was asked to read a report generated for [Power, 2000] R. Power: Planning texts by constraint satis-
someone else (in order to de-personalise the experiment); faction. Proc of COLING 2000, 642-648 
half read ER and half read control versions. In fact the re-
                                                      [Reiter and Dale, 2000]. E. Reiter and R. Dale. Building 
ports read were those shown in Figure 2. As in the GIRL 
                                                         Natural Language Generation Systems. Cambridge Uni-
experiment, we measured reading aloud rate and reading 
                                                         versity Press. 
errors (but not preference). 
  This time our results showed a significant effect on read-  [Scott and de Souza, 1990] D. Scott and C. de Souza. Get-
ing rate, subjects read the ER version 9% faster than the ting the Message Across in RST-Based Text Generation. 
control version (p=0.04). There was also a weakly signifi- In R Dale, C. Mellish and M. Zock (eds.), Current Re-
cant (p=0.058) improvement in reading errors.            search in Natural Language  Generation. Academic 
                                                         Press. 
4   Conclusion                                        [Williams, 2004] S. Williams. Natural language generation 
We have only scratched the surface of the topic of generat- (NLG) of discourse relations for different reading levels. 
ing appropriate texts for low-skilled readers; much more can PhD Thesis, University of Aberdeen. 