                     Disjunctive    Temporal     Planning     with  Uncertainty

                     K. Brent  Venable                            Neil Yorke-Smith
                   Dept. of Mathematics                     Artiﬁcial Intelligence Center
                   University of Padova                           SRI  International
                       Padova,  Italy                       Menlo  Park, CA  94025, USA
               kvenable@math.u     ni pd .i t                 nysmith@ai.sri.      co m

                    Abstract                          the Disjunctive Temporal Problem with Uncertainty (DTPU).
                                                      Consider, for instance, planning the schedule of an elderly
    Driven by planning problems with both disjunctive patient [Peintner and Pollack, 2004]. On the one hand, her
    constraints and contingency, we deﬁne the Disjunc- schedule includes events, such as exercising and a relative’s
    tive Temporal Problem with Uncertainty (DTPU),    visit, that are not totally ordered by the problem requirements;
    an extension of the DTP that includes contingent  on the other hand, while the patient has some idea when the
    events. Generalizing existing work on Simple      relative will arrive, the precise time is not under her control.
    Temporal Problems with Uncertainty, we divide
    the time-points into controllable and uncontrollable
    classes, and propose varying notions of controlla- 2  Extending  the DTP   with Uncertainty
    bility to replace the notion of consistency.      Following the STPU formalism [Vidal and Fargier, 1999], in
                                                      a DTPU  we divide the time-point variables into two classes:
1  Introduction                                       the controllable decision variables Vd and the uncontrollable
                                                      parameters Vu. In an STPU, this induces a partition of the
For modelling and solving real-world planning and schedul- temporal relation constraints C into two types. A constraint
ing problems, quantitative temporal constraint networks in Y − X ∈ [a, b], where Y ∈ Vu, is a contingent link. Intu-
the form of the Simple Temporal Problem (STP) [Dechter et itively, contingent links model tasks with uncertain durations.
al., 1991] are widely known. The STP has been indepen- If a constraint is not contingent, it is an executable link; thus
dently extended in two orthogonal directions.         all other constraints (i.e. where Y ∈ Vd) are executable links.
  First, since the STP formalism is unable to express con- In a DTPU, each constraint is a disjunction of links:
cepts such as “event A occurs before or after event B”,
the Disjunctive Temporal Problem (DTP) [Stergiou and  Deﬁnition 1 A DTPU  is a tuple hVd, Vu, Rd, Ru, Ci, where
Koubarakis, 2000] admits more than one disjunct in a con- Vd, Vu are as above, Rd is the set of all executable links, and
straint. Thus DTP constraints are disjuncts of the form: Ru is the set of all contingent links, and C is a ﬁnite set of
Y1−X1  ∈ [ai1, b1]∨· · ·∨Yn−Xn ∈ [an, bn]. Note a variable disjunctive temporal constraints.
may appear in more than one disjunct. A simple way to solve
a DTP is to consider the component STPs obtained by se- Thus in a DTPU, three types of constraints arise according
lecting one disjunct from each constraint. The computational to the contingent status of the included disjuncts. First, only
complexity of solving each component STP (deciding consis- Rd disjuncts; analogously with STPUs, the constraint is said
tency and deriving the minimal network) is polynomial, while to be executable. Second, only Ru disjuncts; analogously
the worst-case complexity of solving a DTP is NP-hard [Ster- with STPUs, the constraint is said to be contingent. Third,
giou and Koubarakis, 2000]; but in practice, efﬁcient solv- both Rd and Ru disjuncts. Here, a situation which has no
ing techniques have been developed (e.g. [Tsamardinos and analogue in an STPU, the constraint can be satisﬁed by the
Pollack, 2003]), and tractability results are known for some satisfaction of either some executable link (a possibility under
classes of DTPs [Satish Kumar, 2005].                 the agent’s control), or of some contingent link (which is not);
  Second, since the STP formalism assumes all time-points we say that it is semi-executable.
are under the complete control of the execution agent, the A constraint is satisﬁed if at least one of its disjuncts is
Simple Temporal Problem with Uncertainty (STPU) [Vidal satisﬁed. A solution to a DTPU is a complete assignment to
and Fargier, 1999; Morris et al., 2001] divides the time-points all variables V = Vd∪Vu that satisﬁes all the constraints in C.
into two classes, executable and contingent. Contingent time- A solution s can be partitioned into sd ∪ su, where sd and su
points are controlled by exogenous factors, often referred to are the set of temporal values assigned to elements of Vd and
as ‘Nature’, and consistency of an STP is replaced by varying Vu respectively. sd is called a decision, and su is a realisation
notions of controllability.                           (or possible world, or scenario). We say a component STPU
  Driven by planning problems that feature both disjunctive of a DTPU is the problem obtained by selecting one disjunct
constraints and contingent events, in this poster we propose from each constraint.Example 1 Consider further the example of an elderly pa- Since SC =⇒  DC  =⇒   WC  (inherited from the STPU
tient’s schedule [Peintner and Pollack, 2004]. The time- case), by testing whether a DTPU is trivially controllable,
points in a DTP model of the schedule include Es and Ee, we have a sufﬁcient but not necessary condition for all other
and Vs and Ve, which describe the start and end of exercising types of controllability. Testing for this condition requires, in
and a visit respectively. One of the constraints is:  the worst case, checking the consistency of every component
                                                      STP. While there may be exponentially-many such STPs to
        Vs − Ee ∈ [5, inf) ∨ Es − Ve ∈ [0, inf) (1)
                                                      check, the consistency of each can be determined relatively
stating that “Exercise must ﬁnish at least 5 minutes before the quickly, compared to other inference tasks for DTPUs.
visitor arrives or start anytime after the visitor leaves.” The other constraints of Example 1, not shown here, are all
  While the visitor has a scheduled arrival time of 4:30 p.m., single-disjunct executable constraints. Thus, since a compo-
his precise arrival is not under the control of the patient; thus nent STP arising with the second disjunct of (1) is consistent,
Vs is a parameter. This means that the ﬁrst disjunct of (1) is the whole problem is trivially controllable. While so for this
a contingent link. The second disjunct is an executable link, particularly simple example of a DTPU, more interesting DT-
and so constraint (1) is semi-executable.             PUs are not TC in general.
2.1  Controllability                                  3   Future  Work
For space reasons, we present informal deﬁnitions extending
                                                      As a step towards modelling real-world planning problems
the notions of controllability to DTPUs. The important new
                                                      with disjunctive temporal constraints and contingent events,
possibility is of a semi-executable DTPU constraint.
                                                      we have proposed the Disjunctive Temporal Problem with
                                                      Uncertainty. While the DTPU extends previous work on the
Strong Controllability. A DTPU is strongly controllable STPU, much future work is needed. On the theory side, our
(SC) if there exists a decision that, combined with any re- main task is to formally state and prove properties of DT-
alisation, satisﬁes the constraints. In other words, there is a PUs; on the practical side, our task is to develop algorithms
way to assign values to the decision variables such that, given to check the various controllability notions, and prove their
any values for the parameters, at least one disjunct on each complexity. Beyond this, we are interested to combine the
constraint is satisﬁed. Note this means that a DTPU is SC if DTPU framework with user preferences [Peintner and Pol-
some component STPU is SC. The converse is false, however, lack, 2004], in a similar manner to [Rossi et al., 2004].
since in a SC decision, sd ∪ su may satisfy different disjuncts
in different realisations.                            Acknowledgments. We thank M. Pollack and T. Uribe for useful
                                                      discussions, and the reviewers for their comments. This material
                                                      is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research
Dynamic Controllability. A DTPU is dynamically control- Projects Agency, through the Department of the Interior, NBC, Ac-
lable (DC) if there exists an incremental, online decision that, quisition Services Division, under Contract No. NBCHD030010.
given knowledge of the values of all parameters that have oc-
curred until now, can be dynamically extended to a decision References
in the future, whatever the values of the parameters that have
not yet occurred. Note this means that a DTPU is DC if some [Dechter et al., 1991] R. Dechter, I. Meiri, and J. Pearl. Temporal
component STPU is DC, provided the decision for the com- constraint networks. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 49(1–3):61–95, 1991.
ponent STPU can be consistently extended to a decision to [Morris et al., 2001] P. Morris, N. Muscettola, and T. Vidal. Dy-
all decision variables in the complete DTPU. (A component namic control of plans with temporal uncertainty. In Proc. of
STPU may involve a strict subset of Vd.) Again, the converse IJCAI’01, pages 494–502, Seattle, WA, 2001.
is false in general.                                  [Peintner and Pollack, 2004] B. Peintner and M. E. Pollack. Low-
                                                        cost addition of preferences to DTPs and TCSPs. In Proc. of
                                                        AAAI-2004, pages 723–728, San Jose, CA, 2004.
Weak  Controllability. A DTPU  is weakly controllable
(WC) if for any realisation there exists a decision that, com- [Rossi et al., 2004] F. Rossi, K. B. Venable, and N. Yorke-Smith.
bined with that realisation, satisﬁes the constraints. That is, Controllability of soft temporal constraint problems. In Proc. of
                                                        CP’04, LNCS 3258, pages 588–603, Toronto, Canada, 2004.
every realisation can be consistently extended to a decision.
Once more, a DTPU is WC if some component STPU is WC, [Satish Kumar, 2005] T. K. Satish Kumar. On the tractability of
but the converse is false.                              restricted disjunctive temporal problems. In Proc. of ICAPS’05,
                                                        pages 110–119, Monterey, CA, 2005.
                                                      [                       ]
Trivial Controllability. The situation where every con- Stergiou and Koubarakis, 2000 K. Stergiou and M. Koubarakis.
                                                        Backtracking algorithms for disjunctions of temporal constraints.
straint is semi-executable brings the possibility that the agent Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 120(1):81–117, 2000.
could satisfy the DTPU without regard to the contingent links,
                                                      [                       ]
by satisfying at least one executable link in each constraint. Tsamardinos and Pollack, 2003 I. Tsamardinos and M. E. Pol-
                                                        lack. Efﬁcient solution techniques for disjunctive temporal rea-
We say a component STPU of a DTPU is a component STP    soning problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 151(1–2):43–89, 2003.
if it contains only executable links. A DTPU is trivially con-
trollable (TC) if one or more of its component STPUs is a [Vidal and Fargier, 1999] T. Vidal and H. Fargier. Handling con-
consistent component STP. Consistency of a component STP tingency in temporal constraint networks: From consistency to
                                                        controllabilities. JETAI, 11(1):23–45, 1999.
is required to prove that: every TC DTPU is SC.