                 Can we assign attitudes to a computer based on its beeps?                       
  －Toward an effective method for making humans empathize with artificial agents

                                          Takanori Komatsu 
                                      Future University-Hakodate 
                                School of Systems Information Science 
                          Kamedanakano 116-2, Hakodate 041-8655, JAPAN 
                                          komatsu@fun.ac.jp 
                     Abstract 
    Can we assign attitudes to a computer based on its 
    beeps? If so, which kinds of beeps are perceived as 
    specific attitudes, such as “disagreement”, “hesita-
    tion” or “agreement”? To examine this issue, I car-
    ried out an experiment to observe how participants 
    perceive or assign an attitude to a computer ac-
    cording to beeps of different durations and F0 con-
    tour’s slopes. The results revealed that 1) beeps with 
    increasing intonation regardless of duration were 
    perceived by participants as “disagreement”, 2) flat 
    sounds with longer duration were interpreted as 
    “hesitation”, and 3) decreasing intonations with    Figure 1.  Eleven different F0 contours (duration; 189 
    shorter duration were as “agreement.”              ms):  “u25” indicates that F0 transition range was 25 Hz 
                                                            with upward slope (increasing intonation). 
1 Introduction                                       in which various beeps were presented to participants from a 
The purpose of this study is to clarify an effective method for laptop computer. The purpose of the experiment was to ob-
making users perceive artificial agents as having attitudes serve and analyze how participants assign specific attitudes 
and empathize with them. Actually, many researchers have to the computer based on the presented beeps.   
developed humanoid robots [for example, Breazeal and 
Velasquez, 1998] that can exist in the same physical space 2 Experiment 
with users and life-like (or character) agents [for example, I prepared 44 different types of beeps with four different 
Morishima et al., 1995] that appear on computer screens. durations and 11 different F0 contours. Specifically, the four 
These anthropomorphic agents are believed to facilitate durations were 189, 418, 639, and 819 ms. The 11 F0 con-
communication between these agents and humans. Some  tours were set so that the transition range of F0 values that 
researchers, however, have reported that humans perceive the were linearly downward or upward (Figure 1). Participants 
attitudes of others from the information (e.g., humming were 23 Japanese (17 men and 6 women; 20 - 42 years old). 
without any language information), even if this information    An experimenter asked participants to assume that these 
is simpler than that derived from gestures or facial expres- presented beeps were answering speeches in a telephone 
sions [for example, Suzuki et al., 2004].            conversation (actually this was not true). As an experimental 
  Therefore, one may reasonably assume that the simple trial, one randomly selected beep among the 44 beeps was 
information presented by an agent without a human-like presented to participants. They were then asked to answer a 
shape or face would also cause people to perceive different question like “Did you feel that [***] was this computer’s 
attitudes and to assign specific attitudes to such agents. attitude based on this beep?”; [***] was the randomly se-
Moreover, this perception might induce the users’ sympathy lected attitude among the following three that were com-
toward the agent and eventually trigger smooth communica- plementary to each other. In addition, these three attitudes 
tion between them.                                   might correspond to valence evaluations; 1) Disagreement, 
  As a preliminary study aimed at achieving such a rela- e.g., surprising, doubting (negative valence), 2) Hesitation, 
tionship between users and agents, I have focused on a nor- e.g., being lost for words (neutral valence), 3) Agreement, 
mal laptop computer as the agent without a human-like shape e.g., acceptance (positive valence). Specifically, each par-
or face, and on beeps (sound stimuli) as simple information ticipant experienced 132 trials (44 beeps x 3 attitudes). 
presented to humans. Specifically, I conducted an experiment        Figure 2.  Relationship between F0 contours and rate of “disagreement” interpretation for each duration (left),  
                              rate of “hesitation” (center) and “agreement” (right).   

3   Results                                          4 Discussion and Conclusions  
Case 1: Disagreement Figure 2 (left) shows which beeps The results have established that different kinds of simple 
were interpreted as the computer’s attitude of “disagree- information “beeps” can be interpreted as presenting the 
ment.” In this figure, the horizontal axis lists the types of F0 different attitudes of an information sender “a laptop com-
contours and the labels on this axis, such as “u25” or “d100,” puter.” Therefore, sufficient possibilities exist to justify ap-
are the same ones used in Figure 1. The vertical axis shows plying the results to an actual application. The same argu-
the interpretation rates (IR) that give the proportion of par- ment was presented by Lin and Picard [2003] in their “subtle 
ticipants answering “yes” in the corresponding trials. There expressivity” study. At first glance, these results seem to 
are four lines indicating the duration of sound stimuli.  show that users can perceive only three agent attitudes; 
  In the results, no significant differences were found among however, implementing the findings of this study into a 
different durations (F(3,66)=.70, n.s.) and different F0 tran- laptop computer would create effective interactions with 
sition ranges in falling tones (F(4,88)= 1.68, n.s.). On the users. For example, when a computer responds to a certain 
other hand, rising tones showed a significant higher IR than action of users by presenting “beeps with increasing intona-
falling tones (F(1,22)=219.7, p<.01), and wider F0 transition tion,” users would intuitively assign a particular attitude (in 
ranges in a rising tone showed higher IR (F(4,88)= 9.81, this case “disagreement”) to the computer from this beep 
p<.01). To sum up, when the beeps with upward slopes sound: “Umm... this computer seems to have some doubts 
(increasing intonation) regardless of their duration were about my last command...” And also implementing these 
presented from the computer, this computer’s attitude results into a simple mobile robot would realize a Star Wars 
was interpreted as “disagreement.”                   R2D2 type robot, which can not speak clearly but can express 
                                                     its attitudes by its electric sounds or behaviors. Thus, the 
Case 2: Hesitation Figure 2 (center) shows which beeps results of this study can contribute to achieving an agent that 
were interpreted as “hesitation.” Longer duration showed the enables users to assign or interpret intuitively and effectively 
higher IR (F(3,66)=18.1, p<.01), and falling tones showed particular agent attitudes. 
the higher rate than the rising tones (F(1,22)=11.64, p<.01). 
Moreover, narrower F0 transition range in both rising and 
falling tones showed the higher IR than wider ones   References 
(F(4,88)=11.23, p<.01, F(4,88)= 8.89, p<.01). In sum, when [Breazeal and Velasquez, 1998] Breazeal, C., and Velasquez, 
the slower slopes (flat sounds) with longer duration were J. Toward teaching a robot ‘infant’ using emotive com-
presented, the computer’s attitude was interpreted as   munication acts. In Proceedings of ISAB workshop on 
“hesitation.”                                           Social Situated Intelligence, pages 25-40, 1998. 
                                                     [Lin and Picard, 2003] Liu, K., and Picard. W. R. Subtle 
Case 3: Agreement Figure 2 (right) shows which beeps were Expressivity in a Robotic Computer. In Proceedings of 
“agreement.” Shorter duration showed the higher IR      the CHI2003 Workshop on Subtle Expressivity for 
(F(3,66)=19.42, p<.01) and falling tones showed the sig- Characters and Robot, 2003.  
nificantly higher rate than rising tones (F(1,22)= 67.5, p<.01). 
And wider F0 transition range in falling tone showed rather [Morishima et al., 1995] Morishima, S., Iwasawa, S., 
higher rates than narrower ones (F(4,88)= 3.12, p<.05), and Sakaguchi, T., Kawakami, F., and Ando, M. Better Face 
in rising tones, narrower transition range showed higher rates Communication. In Visual Proceedings of SIGGRAPH95, 
than wider ones (F(4,88)= 5.48, p<.01). To sum up, when the pages 117, 1995. 
downward slopes with shorter duration were presented, [Suzuki et al., 2004] Suzuki, N., Kakehi, K., Takeuchi, Y., 
the computer’s attitude was interpreted as “agreement.” and Okada, M. Social effects of the speed of hummed 
                                                        sounds on human-computer interaction. International 
                                                        Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 60, 455–468, 2004. 