           SVM-based       Obstacles    Recognition     for Road    Vehicle   Applications

        M.  A. Sotelo, J. Nuevo, D. Fernandez,   I. Parra, L. M. Bergasa,  M. Ocana,  R. Flores
                                       Department  of Electronics
                                          University of Alcala
                      Campus   Universitario s/n Alcala de Henares, Madrid, Spain
                                        michael@depeca.uah.es

                    Abstract                          the estimated lane markings. This helps reduce the rate of
                                                      false positive detections. In case that no lane markings are
    This paper describes an obstacle Recognition Sys- detected, a basic area of interest is used instead covering the
    tem based on SVM and vision. The basic compo-     front part ahead of the host-vehicle. In a ﬁrst stage, an atten-
    nents of the detected objects are ﬁrst located in the tion mechanism has been devised with the intention of ﬁlter-
    image and then combined with a SVM-based clas-    ing out inappropriate candidate windows based on the lack of
    siﬁer. A distributed learning approach is proposed distinctive features, such as horizontal edges and symmetri-
    in order to better deal with objects variability, il- cal structures, which are essential characteristics of road ve-
    lumination conditions, partial occlusions and rota- hicles. This has the positive effect of decreasing both the to-
    tions. A large database containing thousands of ob- tal computation time and the rate of false positive detections.
    ject examples extracted from real road images has Each road lane is sequentially scanned, from the bottom to
    been created for learning purposes. We present and the horizon line of the image, looking for collections of hori-
    discuss the results achieved up to date.          zontal edges that might represent a potential obstacle. We use
                                                      a distributed learning approach in which each individual part
1  Introduction                                       of the vehicle is independently learnt by a specialized classi-
                                                      ﬁer in a ﬁrst learning stage. The local parts are then integrated
This paper describes an SVM-based object recognition sys- by another classiﬁer in a second learning stage. We have con-
tem that can recognise both vehicles and pedestrians using sidered a total of 3 different sub-regions for each candidate
vision. In our approach, the basic components of the ob- region, covering the most characteristic parts of the vehicle.
jects are ﬁrst located in the image and then combined with a Two small sub-regions have been located in the area of the
SVM-based classiﬁer. Our object detection technique is char- region where the wheels are supposed to be. A third sub-
acterised by example-based learning algorithms. The salient region is located in the central part of the region, covering the
features of a class are learnt by the system based on a set of area where car plates and rear windshield are usually placed.
examples. Example-based techniques have been previously The locations of the three sub-regions have been chosen in
used in natural, cluttered environments for pedestrian detec- an attempt to detect coherent and structural car features. A
tion [Shashua, 2004]. In general, these techniques are easy set of features must be extracted from each sub-region and
to use with objects composed of distinct identiﬁable parts ar- fed to the classiﬁer. Before doing that, the entire candidate
ranged in a well-deﬁned conﬁguration. This is the case of region of interest is pre-processed using a Canny operator in
road vehicles, where a distributed learning approach based on order to enhance the differential information contained in it
components [Mohan, 2001] is more efﬁcient for object recog- (edges). The Canny image provides a good representation of
nition in real cluttered environments than holistic approaches the discriminating features of the car class. On the one hand,
[Papageorgiou, 2000]. Distributed learning techniques can edges, both horizontal and vertical, are clearly visible and dis-
deal with partial occlusions and are less sensitive to object tinguishable. On the other hand, the vertical symmetry of a
rotations. The use of SVMs is a viable option as long as we car remains unchanged. In addition, edges are not affected
intend to discriminate between two classes: car and non-car. by colours or intensity. This property makes the use of edges
                                                      robust enough to different car models of the same type. The
2  System   Description                               pre-processed sub-region is directly applied to the input of
The system is divided in two modular subsystems. The ﬁrst the classiﬁer. The dimensions of the entire region of interest
subsystem is responsible for vehicle detection and tracking. are normalized before being fed to the classiﬁer. A size of
The second subsystem provides pedestrians detection using 70x80 pixels has been chosen, as it is adequate for detecting
the information obtained by the vehicle detection module. In vehicles at long distances (up to 80 meters).
this paper, we focus on the vehicle recognition system alone, The global training strategy is carried out in two stages. In
working with 320x240 monochrome images. The objects   a ﬁrst stage, separate SVM-based classiﬁers are trained using
searching space is reduced by using the limits established by individual training sets that represent a subset of a sub-region.This stage provides classiﬁcation of individual parts of the (SVM) [Boser, 1992]. The learning process has been simpli-
candidate sub-regions. In a second step, the outputs of all ﬁed by decomposing the candidate regions into 3 local sub-
classiﬁers are merged in a single SVM classiﬁer in order to regions that are easily learned by individual SVM classiﬁers.
provide the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result.                Several training sets have been built for each sub-region in
                                                      order to cope with different weather and illumination condi-
3  Results                                            tions. The results achieved up to date using a set of 2000
                                                      samples are encouraging. Nevertheless they still need to be
The system was implemented on a Apple PC at 2.0 GHz run- improved before being safely used as an assistance driving
ning the Debian GNU/Linux Operating System. The com-  system onboard road vehicles in real conditions. For this pur-
plete algorithm runs at 25 frames/s. We created a preliminary pose, the content of the training sets will be largely increased
database containing 2000 samples of road vehicles. The sam- by including new and more complex samples that will boost
ples were extracted from recorded images acquired in real ex- the classiﬁer performance. In addition, the attention mech-
periments onboard a road vehicle in real trafﬁc conditions in anism will be reﬁned in order to provide more candidates
Madrid. Two different training sets were built for the same around the original candidate region. This will reduce the
sub-region in different conditions in order to decrease the number of candidate regions that only contain a part of the
complexity of the training process. This yields a total of 6 vehicle, i.e., those cases in which the entire vehicle is not
training sets (2x3). All training sets were created at day time completely visible in the candidate region due to a misdetec-
conditions using the TsetBuilder [Nuevo, 2005] tool, specif- tion of the attention mechanism.
ically developed in this wok for this purpose. By using the
TsetBuilder tool different candidate regions are manually se- Acknowledgment
lected in the image on a frame-by-frame basis. This allows to
select candidate regions containing vehicles of different size, This work has been funded by Research Projects CICYT
from different manufacturers, and so on. The number of non- DPI2002-04064-05-04 and FOM2002-002 (Ministerio de Fo-
vehicle samples in the training sets was chosen to be similar mento, Spain).
to the number of vehicle samples. We obtained a detection
rate of 85% in a test set containing 1000 images, and a false References
detection rate of 5%. No image from the training set was used [Shashua, 2004] A. Shashua, Y. Gdalyahu, and G. Hayu.
in the test set. As an example, ﬁgure 1 shows a sequence of Pedestrian detection for driving assistance systems:
images in which a vehicle is detected and tracked along the single-frame classiﬁcation and system level performance.
lane of the host vehicle. A blue box is overprinted over the Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium,
detected vehicle indicating the estimated distance measured pages 1–6, Parma, Italy, June 2004.
from the host vehicle. Other vehicles appearing along the ad-
                                                      [           ]
joining lane are marked with a horizontal red line.    Mohan, 2001  A. Mohan, C. Papageorgiou, and T. Poggio.
                                                         Example-based object detection in images by components.
                                                         IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
                                                         ligence, 23, April 2001.
                                                      [Papageorgiou, 2000] C. Papageorgiou and T. Poggio. A
                                                         trainable system for object detection. International Jour-
                                                         nal of Computer Vision, 38,1:15–33, 2000.
                                                      [Boser, 1992] B. Boser, I. Guyon, and V. Vapnik. A training
                                                         algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. Proceedings of
                                                         the Fifth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning,
                                                         1992.
                                                      [Nuevo, 2005] J. Nuevo.     TsetBuilder User  Man-
                                                         ual.     Technical Report. University of  Alcala.
                                                         ftp://www.depeca.uah.es/pub/vision/SVM/manual.pdf,
                                                         2005.


  Figure 1: Vehicle detection and tracking in a sequence.

4  Conclusions   and  Future  Work
We have developed a visual multi-frame two-stage object
classiﬁcation system based on Support Vector Machines