                       Open-World Planning for Story Generation 

                Mark O. Riedl                                  R. Michael Young 
        Institute for Creative Technologies               Department of Computer Science 
         University of Southern California                 North Carolina State University 
    13274 Fiji Way, Marina Del Rey, CA 90292                    Raleigh, NC 27695  
               riedl@ict.usc.edu                               young@csc.ncsu.edu

                   Abstract                      possibility is that the story planner can find a solution plan, 
                                                 but the solution plan is strangely structured because the 
    The ability to generate narrative is of importance to 
                                                 planner must work around limitations inherent in the initial 
    computer systems that wish to use story effectively state description.   
    for entertainment, training, or education.  One way It is our belief that a story planner that has discretion over 
    to generate narrative is to use planning.  However, 
                                                 the description of the initial story world state will: 
    story planners are limited by the fact that they can •
    only operate on the story world provided, which  Be able to avoid failure conditions that are attributed 
    impacts the ability of the planner to find a solution to the human author’s definition of the initial world 
    story plan and the quality and structure of the story state. 
    plan if one is found.  We present a planning   • Find better quality solutions because the planner does 
    algorithm for story generation that can non-     not need to work around limitations inherent in the 
    deterministically make decisions about the       human author’s description of the initial world state. 
    description of the initial story world state in a least-
    commitment fashion.                          2  Initial State Revision 
 1 Introduction                                  The use of the closed world assumption (CWA) presupposes 
                                                 complete and correct knowledge about the world.  Since the 
 The standard approach to incorporating storytelling into a universe of discourse that describes any story world is 
 computer system is to script a story at design time.  That is, potentially infinite, the practical implementation of the 
a system’s designers determine ahead of time what the story CWA is to enumerate everything about the world that is 
should be and hard-code the story into the system.  An known to be true so that everything that is not explicitly 
alternative approach is to generate stories either dynamically 
                                                 declared to be true is presumed false.  Since story worlds are 
or on a per-session basis using planning.   
                                                 often fictional, the CWA places a burden on the human 
  Young [1999] suggests that planning has many benefits 
as a model of narrative.                         author to completely specify the story world or risk limiting 
                                                 the stories that can be constructed by the planner.  However, 
  •  Plans are comprised of partially ordered steps.  If 
                                                 there may be many aspects of the story world that the 
     steps are character actions, then a plan is a good 
                                                 human author may not have a preference over. 
     model of a story fabula – a chronological enumeration The Initial State Revision (ISR) algorithm partitions 
     of events that occur in the story world.    knowledge about the initial world state into three sets: 
  •  Planning algorithms construct plans based on causal known true (T), false (F), and undetermined (U).  T is 
     dependencies between steps.  This ensures that all the set of atomic ground sentences that are known to be true.  
     events are part of causal chains, resulting in coherent F is the set of atomic ground sentences that are known to be 
     story structure.                            false or are assumed to be false because their true value is 
 Story planners such as Universe [Lebowitz, 1985] and not specified by the human author.  U is the set of atomic 
 IPOCL [Riedl and Young, 2004] require a predefined world (but not necessarily ground) sentences whose truth values 
 description as input.  The task of creating the world in are undetermined but not assumed to be false.  U is the set 
 which a story is set is already accomplished by the “human of knowledge about the state of the world that the human 
 author” – the user – and a story planner only has to find a author has explicitly designated as having no preference 
 plot that can be performed in the story world.  It is possible over.  Consequently the possible values of U define 
 for the human author to describe a story world initial state possible worlds in which the story can be set.  Initial state 
 that cannot be transformed through character actions into revision reduces the set of possible worlds by committing to 
 the desired outcome.  In this case, the responsibility for a values of sentences in the undetermined set as necessary to 
 planner’s failure lies with the human author.  Another produce the best possible story plot.    Known True set (partial)  Undetermined set                                Office 
 (character secret-agent) (at gun1 HQ) 
 (character mastermind) (at gun1 courtyard) 
 (weapon gun1)          (at gun1 lobby) 
 (place HQ)             (at gun1 cache) 
 (place lobby)          (at gun1 office) 
 (place office) 
 (place cache) 
 ...                           Headquarters     Courtyard Lobby              Cache 
 (at scret-agent HQ) 
 (at mastermind office) 
 ... 

                               Figure 1: Diagram of the secret agent world. 
 2.1 Motivating Example                          simultaneously true in the initial state of the world.  ISR 
                                                 utilizes mutual exclusion sets (also called mutex sets).  A 
 Figure 1 shows an example domain in which a secret agent 
                                                 mutex set is a set of sentences such that no two sentences 
 must assassinate a terrorist mastermind.  However, the 
                                                 can both be true in the initial state.  If a sentence in a mutex 
 terrorist mastermind lives in a fortress which is heavily set is determined to be true, then all other sentences in the 
 guarded such that no one can enter the fortress while mutex set are determined to be false.  In the example, the 
 carrying a weapon.  The description of the story world sentences in U are all mutually exclusive to ensure that the 
 disallows any story that involves the secret agent entering gun cannot be in more than one place. 
 the fortress and assassinating the terrorist, for the secret 
 agent will be unable to carry a weapon past the guards.  3 Conclusions 
 Furthermore, suppose the story planner is constrained such 
 that the terrorist mastermind never leaves the fortress. In Planners are constrained to operate in the world as provided 
 this case the story planner can not find a complete story plan by their users.  For an agent operating in a limited domain, it 
 for this story world unless the planner is able to revise the is possible for the world to be completely specified.  For 
 initial state of the world.  Figure 1 shows the known true infinitely large domains such as a fictional story world, it is 
 and undetermined portions of the initial world state.  impossible to encode every fact about the world.  The closed 
 Properties of the gun have been defined such that its world assumption places a burden on the human author to 
 location is undetermined.  Through initial state revision, the describe a world that supports story generation.  It is 
 story planner can declare the gun to have always been inside possible, however, that despite the human author’s 
 the fortress, thus making it possible to find a complete plan. intentions, the story world description does not adequately 
                                                 suit storytelling, resulting in planner failure or in solution 
 2.2 The Algorithm                               story plans that are oddly structured to overcome limitations 
 ISR planning is an extension of the conventional partial of the world description.  The ISR planning algorithm 
 order causal link (POCL) planning algorithm [Penberthy assumes creative control over aspects of the story world 
 and Weld, 1992].  Plan steps have preconditions and effects.  description.  With control over the initial state of the story 
 In every complete plan, preconditions of a step must be world, a story planner can find better story plans because it 
 satisfied by a causal link from the effect of a preceding step is not limited by assumptions made by the human author. 
 or by the initial world state.  An open (unsatisfied) condition 
 on a plan step can unify with sentences in any set in the Acknowledgements 
 initial step, including the undetermined set,  When an open The work presented here has been supported by the National 
 condition p on some plan step unifies with a sentence q in Science Foundation CAREER Award #0092586. 
 the undetermined set, a causal link is established as in 
 typical POCL planning and, additionally, sentence q References 
 becomes determined.  If p is not negated, q is determined to 
be true and moved into set T, otherwise q is determined to [Lebowitz, 1985] Michael Lebowitz. Story-telling as 
be false and moved into set F.  By using q to satisfy an planning and learning. Poetics, 14, 1985. 
open condition, the planner has in effect committed to a set [Penberthy and Weld, 1992] J. Scott Penberthy and Daniel 
of possible worlds in which the value of q is determined.  S. Weld. UCPOP: A sound, complete, partial order 
                                                                                 rd
Note that it is not necessary for the undertermined set to be planner for ADL. In Proc. of the 3  Int. Conf. on 
empty for planning to be complete.  That is, the story plan Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, 1992. 
can be in a set of possible worlds if the distinguishing [Riedl and Young, 2004] Mark O. Riedl and R. Michael 
details are not integral to the plot.              Young. An intent-driven planner for multi-agent story 
  It is often the case that propositions that describe the state generation. In Procedings of AAMAS, 2004. 
of the world are mutually exclusive, i.e., if one is true then [Young, 1999] R. Michael Young. Notes on the use of 
the other cannot be true.  For example, an object cannot be planning structures in the creation of interactive plot. In 
in more than one place at a time.  The undetermined set U Proc. of the 1999 AAAI Fall Symposium on Narrative 
can contain atomic sentences that should never be  Intelligence, 1999. 