               Discovering     Inconsistency     through    Examination      Dialogues
                          Paul E. Dunne   Sylvie Doutre  Trevor Bench-Capon
                                    Department  of Computer  Science
                                         University of Liverpool
                                           Liverpool L69  7ZF
                                            United Kingdom
                                       {ped,sd,tbc}@csc.liv.ac.uk

                    Abstract                            In examination dialogues the dialogue process occurs
                                                      within an environment of relevant facts, arguments, and re-
    In this paper we introduce examination dialogues, lated issues that is (at least implicitly) recognised and under-
    an addition to the dialogue typology of Walton and stood by both parties, e.g. common knowledge of the subject
    Krabbe. In educational settings the purpose of di- in educational settings, matters of speciﬁc policies and legis-
    alogue is often to elicit the position of a student, lation in political interviews; issues of evidence and witness
    e.g. to test understanding. In other settings, a fre- testimony in trials; details of incidents under investigation in
    quently adopted tactic is to attack an opponent’s questioning suspects. In this paper our aim is to describe a
    stance by exposing internal inconsistencies in their generic abstract model within which the evolution of such ex-
    argument. In real debate such inconsistencies will amination dialogues can be analysed. In addition we outline
    often be rather more subtle than elementary log-  an approach intended to aid Q in selecting questions.
    ical fallacies since they arise from contradictions The foundational element for our model is provided by
    apparent in the opponent’s value system. Protag-  the Value-based Argument Frameworks (VAFs) of [Bench-
    onists will be better positioned to judge the appli- Capon, 2003], a development of the classical argument sys-
    cability of this tactic as more information is deter- tems of [Dung, 1995], which offer a richer interpretation of
    mined concerning the exact nature of their oppo-  the concept of an argument x “attacking” an argument y. In
    nent’s case, e.g. the arguments favoured and values addition to the computational advantages outlined in [Bench-
    endorsed. One obstacle, however, is that following Capon, 2003], further indications that VAFs provide a suit-
    a request to state a view, the challenged party may able mechanism for our analysis is presented by the meth-
    refuse to comment. In this paper we present an ap- ods discussed in [Dunne and Bench-Capon, 2004b]. A brief
    proach to modelling the evolution of examination  overview of VAFs is given in Section 2 and our model of ex-
    dialogues based on the concept of value-based ar- amination dialogue presented in Section 3. In Section 4 we
    gument frameworks and outline some algorithmic    outline some algorithmic aspects involving argument selec-
    issues regarding argument selection.              tion in this scheme. Conclusions are presented in Section 5.

1  Introduction                                       2   Value-Based   Argument   Frameworks
One important class of dialogue not found in the inﬂuential Value-based argumentation frameworks are introduced in
typology of [Walton and Krabbe, 1995] is the examination [Bench-Capon, 2003] as a development of the model of ar-
dialogue. In such dialogues one party – the Questioner Q – gument systems via directed graphs H = hX , Ai proposed
elicits statements and opinions from another – the Responder in [Dung, 1995]. A value-based argumentation framework
R – with the aim of discovering R’s position on some topic, (VAF) is deﬁned as hX , A, V, ηi, where hX , Ai is an argu-
either to gain insight into R’s understanding and knowledge ment system, V = {v1, v2, . . . , vk} is a set of k values, and
of the topic, or to expose an inconsistency in R’s position. η : X → V associates a value η(x) ∈ V with each argument
Examples include education by the Socratic method, viva x ∈ X . An audience ϑ for a VAF hX , A, V, ηi is a transitive
voce examination, cross examination of witnesses, and polit- and irreﬂexive binary relation on V. A pair hvi, vj i in ϑ is
ical interviews. In contrast to information seeking or inquiry referred to as ‘vi is preferred to vj’ with respect to ϑ.
dialogues, Q may already have beliefs on the topic: unlike Ideas analogous to those in Dung’s argument system
persuasion dialogues, Q may have no intention of convert- are now deﬁned relative to some audience: S ⊆ X is
ing R to his position. Examination dialogues may, however, conﬂict-free w.r.t. ϑ if ∀ x, y ∈ S: hx, yi ∈ A ⇒
be nested within information seeking dialogues: probing for hη(y), η(x)i ∈ ϑ; x is acceptable to S w.r.t. ϑ if ∀y ∈ X :
inconsistency increases conﬁdence in the veracity of R’s be- hy, xi ∈ A ⇒ (hη(x), η(y)i ∈ ϑ or ∃ z ∈ S s.t. hz, yi ∈
liefs; similarly, in persuasion dialogues, exposing inconsis- A and hη(y), η(z)i ∈/ ϑ); S is admissible w.r.t ϑ if each
tency is a useful prelude to persuasion.              x ∈ S is acceptable to S w.r.t. ϑ.3  Examination    Dialogues  in VAFs                  X to be accepted w.r.t. at least one audience ϑ, it must belong
In keeping with the observation that debates of interest take to an admissible w.r.t. ϑ set S ⊆ X . Consider disjoint sets of
place within some recognised context, we view this context propositional variables Z and W = {wi,j : 1 ≤ i 6= j ≤ k}.
                                                      Deﬁne the function, f(Z, W ) via: f(α, β) = > if and only
as a VAF G = hX , A, V, ηi. A debate in the context of G is a
                                                      if the subset S of X indicated by α, i.e. xi ∈ S ⇔ αi = >,
sequence µ1µ2 . . . µj of at most 2|X |+1 moves: odd indexed
moves being played by Q and even indexed moves by R.  is admissible with the binary relation ϑ encoded in β, i.e.
                                                      hvi, vj i ∈ ϑ ⇔ βi,j = > and this relationship is an au-
  Suppose the next move to be made is µ2 −1 (i ≥ 1). The
                                    i                 dience, i.e. irreﬂexive and transitive. This function can be
options for the next move(s) – µ2i−1 · µ2i – are,
                                                      described by a “short” propositional formula Φf (Z, W ) of
(a) µ2i−1 = ASK(p): Q asks R their view on p ∈ X ; ASK(p)            3
is legal provided that it has not occurred at an earlier point length O(|A| + k ) that with the addition of at most O(|A|)
                                                      auxiliary variables (D) translates to an equivalent CNF for-
in the debate, i.e. ∀ j < i µ2j−1 6= ASK(p). The response                           3
                                                      mula, Ψf (Z, W, D) with O(|A| + k ) clauses, the longest of
µ2i is one of ACCEPT(p) (R agrees with p); DENY(p) (R
does not agree with p); or NO-COMMENT(p) (R refuses to which contains at most 2 + maxx∈X |{y : hy, xi ∈ A}| lit-
say anything about p).                                erals. Using Ψf the strategy pursued by Q will be to obtain
                                                      responses from R that result in Ψ evaluating to ⊥ (i.e. R
(b) µ2 −1 = FOUND(p, STAT(p)): here p is an argument to                            f
     i                                                is inconsistent) or to infer the unique instantiation of that
which R has responded NO-COMMENT(p) after ASK(p) ear-                                              zi
lier. Q expresses a claim to know R’s view of p as accepted satisﬁes Ψf with the replies already given.
(STAT = ACCEPT) or otherwise (STAT = DENY).
                                                      5   Conclusions  and  Development
(c) µ2i−1 = RESOLVE(S): S  is a set of arguments all of
which have been asked about with none receiving a “NO- We have introduced a class of question-response dialogues
COMMENT”  reply. Q asserts that at least one of these replies – examination dialogues – and modelled them using VAF
cannot be correct with respect to the context G.      schemata as the basis for representing related knowledge. A
(d) µ2i−1 = CONCEDE: Q can neither determine R’s view in number of issues – both theoretical and applicative – form the
respect of NO-COMMENT arguments nor expose inconsisten- subject of work in progress. In addition to on-going empirical
cies in the collection of “deﬁnite” responses.        investigations of argument selection strategies employing the
  The debate ends once one of the moves (b)–(d) is played. propositional translation brieﬂy outlined in Section 4 there
Noting that we assume (b) or (c) can be played only if Q may are several questions of interest regarding properties of the
justify the claim made, these result in a “win” for Q, whereas model when the protagonists are “limited” in different ways.
(d) results in a “win” for R.                         Thus, to what extent is Q at an advantage if an upper bound
  As a very simple example consider: X = {x, y, z}; A = is placed on the number of “NO-COMMENT” and/or false re-
{hx, yi, hy, zi, hz, xi}; V = {A, B}; and η(x) = η(z) = A; sponses R can make? Similarly, if Q is restricted to some
η(y) =  B.  If R replies NO-COMMENT(y)  or DENY(y)    maximum  number of questions (rather than being allowed to
to ASK(y) then Q wins (by playing FOUND(y, ACCEPT) or ask about the status of every argument in X ) it is likely that
RESOLVE(y)) since, regardless of whether R’s audience in- Q must adopt a dynamic selection mechanism (rather than
cludes hA, Bi or hB, Ai, R must accept y. On the other hand choosing a set to query in advance) so as to adapt effectively
– assuming R replies ACCEPT(y) – the only responses re- to R’s responses.
garding R’s view of {x, z} that could lead to a win for Q
are when exactly one NO-COMMENT occurs; or it is claimed References
both are accepted; or both denied. Notice that may R report [Bench-Capon, 2003] T. J. M. Bench-Capon. Persuasion
hACCEPT(x), DENY(z)i (or vice versa) despite believing oth- in Practical Argument Using Value-based Argumenta-
erwise and Q will be unable to detect this.              tion Frameworks. Journal of Logic and Computation,
  In general, within such debate contexts, both players have a 13(3):429–448, 2003.
number of non-trivial strategic issues to resolve. In particular, [Dung, 1995] P. M. Dung. On the acceptability of arguments
assuming that R wishes to hide information (and therefore and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic reasoning, logic
will either respond “NO-COMMENT” and/or misreport some
                                                         programming and n-person games. Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
views), R may have to form a partition of X determining  77:321–357, 1995.
those queries to which false and true responses will be given.
We note that, as indicated in the small example above, refus- [Dunne and Bench-Capon, 2004a] P. E. Dunne and T. J. M.
ing to comment on any argument or misreporting the status Bench-Capon. Complexity in value-based argument sys-
of every argument may fail to be a successful strategy; more- tems. In Proc. 9th JELIA, volume 3229 of LNAI, pages
over it is an easy consequence of [Dunne and Bench-Capon, 360–371. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
2004a] that the decision problem faced by R determining if [Dunne and Bench-Capon, 2004b] P. E. Dunne and T. J. M.
classifying p as NO-COMMENT loses, is coNP–complete.     Bench-Capon. Identifying audience preferences in legal
                                                         and social domains. In Proc. DEXA’04, volume 3180 of
4  Choosing   Arguments                                  LNCS, pages 518–527. Springer-Verlag, 2004.
                                                      [                     ]
We conclude the brief technical discussion, by outlining an Walton and Krabbe, 1995 D. N. Walton and E. C. W.
approach to query selection that is based on a translation to Krabbe. Basic Concepts of Interpersonal Reasoning. State
propositional formulae. Given hX , A, V, ηi, in order for p ∈ Univ. of New York Press, 1995.