overview of  planning speech acts  
c. raymond perrault and philip r. cohen 
dept. of computer science university of toronto 
   we are developing and testing a computer model of conversation by constructing a program that engages i t s user in purposeful conversation to help him perform some task. conversation is viewed as a sequence of actions performed by the participants  intentionally affecting each other's model of the world  primarily their beliefs and goals. these actions can only be performed if certain conditions hold. 
	we 	show 	here 	how 	some 	of these speech acts 
 searle   can be described as operators in problem-solving systems such as strips  fikes and nilsson    and how they can be incorporated into plans with non-linguistic acts such as scheduling t r i p s or opening doors. language analysis and generation can thus be related to problems of plan generation  execution  and recognition. our work so far has concentrated on the speech act generation aspect. 
   consider for example a request from a speaker sp to a hearer h that h should perform a certain action act. sp would like h to make act one of his goals by having him recognize that sp wants him to. certain conditions must be satisfied before the request can be usefully performed: 
1  sp believes that h can do act 
1  sp believes h believes h can do act  1  sp wants to perform the request. 
condition 1  excludes requests when h may be lacking necessary information although he may be familiar with a l l the necessary procedures. want preconditions like 1  w i l l appear on a l l actions performed  by human agents. if one agent sp is planning for another agent h to perform act  sp cannot assume that act is a goal of h; this want precondition of act is precisely what a request is meant to satisfy.  in fact  we assume that h's believing that sp wants him to do act is the effect of the request  rather than just h's wanting to do act  and we postulate an intermediate act to bridge this gap.  as well as request  our system includes a speech act inform whose effect is that the hearer believes the speaker believes some proposition p is true. again  a mediating act is used to produce the hearer's believing p. 
system overview. 
   our current system uses an object-centered representation developed by levesque    implemented using partitioned semantic networks  hendrix    a semantic network interpreter that executes programs in the net  and an interactive network definition package. the system is coded in spitbol on an ibm 1 ii under tso. 
memory organization. 
   we use hendrix' spaces both as manipulable objects and as contexts for procedure execution. a space is identified as representing the  belief  or  want  of an agent s by placing it as the value of a case in a proposition stating  s believes  or  s wants . the space representing the system's beliefs  sb  includes spaces containing the system's beliefs about the system's wants  sbsw  and the system's beliefs about the user's beliefs  sbub  that in turn contains the user's wants  sbubuw . these spaces can share information  and the interpreter can add new levels of nesting as necessary  and test arbitrarily deeply nested propositions. plans for the various agents are created in the want spaces. 
an example 
¡¡¡¡let the world consist of a room with a swinging aoor and a lock. system is outside and user is inside. assume acts to move through an open door  push an unlocked door  unlock the door with a key  and  fetch a key. also assume that the system believes that both it and the user know the state of the world. our current system can plan the following utterances to achieve i t s being inside: 
1. i request you to unlock the door. 
1. i request you to push the door. 
1. i want you to unlock the door. 
1. i want you to push the door. 
   utterances 1. and 1. are requests to perform actions  and 1. and 1. are informs of wwts. if the system did not believe the user knew the location of the key  it would issue an appropriate inform. further details are available in perrault and cohen  
concluding remarks. 
   other natural language systems possess the means for generating utterances  e.g. atn's  but not the motivation. ours  on the other hand  plans what it should say  but currently does not decide how to say i t . we are investigating the interactions this approach has with plan recognition and strategies for being helpful  and trying to extend it to the planning of references. 
