the use of dynamically extracted context for anaphoric reference resolution 
david klappholz and abe lockman 
department of electrical engineering and computer science columbia university 
new york  new york 1 
   we define anaphora more broadly than is usually done  i.e. to include not only pronoun  proadverb 
 e.g. here  there  then   pro-verb  e.g. do as in john goes to bed early; i do too.   definite  etc. reference  but also indefinite reference  as in 1 below  as well as reference by an entire sentence or subsentence to a previous sentence or subsentence  as in 1 below . in 1 an extremely interesting tatooed lady is a reference to the circus  with the intended relation  was performing i n   or something similar; in 1 my car wouldn't start is viewed as reference to i was late to work yesterday with an intended relation which  to sweep the d i r t under the rug  might be termed  cause   but 
which in fact is far more complicated. an anaphoric reference in this extended sense is thus an implied relation from an item  word  phrase  subsentence  sentence  in a text to one or more previously occurring items  word  phrase  subsentence  sentence  group of sentences  in that text. resolution of anaphora involves the identification of the latter item s  as well as of the relation intended by the writer/speaker. thus the resolution of a l l instances of anaphora in a text amounts to the determination of that part of the  meaning  of the text which is more than the collection of the  meanings  of its indiviudal sentences taken in isolation. 
since  in general  there is no test as to whether a particular item in a text is or is not an anaphoric reference  even a definite noun phrase need not be--e.g. the f i r s t president of the united states in most contexts refers to a particular person  but not necessarily to a previously occurring item in the text   an anaphora resolver must be a  guess and test  type algorithm. for each item in a new sentence  a resolver mast hypothesize relations between the item and some  hopefully limited  set of possible referents  and then 
use directed inferencing to judge which  if any  relation  to which  if any  possible referent was intended by the writer. 	this directed inferencing 
must use not only semantics and world knowledge  but also the structure of the previous text in order to properly resolve the reference. 
we are concerned with that aspect of an a l g o r i t h i mic theory of anaphora resolution which is dependent upon the  structure  of the text. most previous approaches have either assumed that the structure of the text is known in advance or have ignored it entirely. in particular we reject the 
notion that frames/scripts somehow  solve  the problem of anaphoric reference resolution.* 
most previous approaches make no real use of i n formation that the text i t s e l f provides concerning the flow of context. a successful algorithm must make use of the ways in which writers choose a particular form of presentation of their ideas in order to guide the flow of contexts and allow the user to recover and use it in processing the text. these choices provide clues which must be used to dynamically extract local context at every point in the processing of a text. this local context is then a guide to reference resolution. 
the most important factor in determining the local context is the way in which each sentence as a whole develops the material presented in the previous sentences of the text.. each sentence in a 
text is or contains either an expansion on  a further detail  adverbial  cause  effect   how   etc.  or a temporal continuation of one or more previous sentences in the text  expansion can be either of a whole sentence or of one or more items within a sentence . in fact  the default assumption made by readers is that a sentence expands or temporally continues the immediately previous sentence of its text; semantics and world knowledge based inferencing must demonstrate that this link hypothesis is relatively weak in order to allow a sentence's interpretation as an expansion or temporal continuation of a  several  sentence  s  further back in the text. 
the set of expansion/temporal continuation relations among the sentences of a text constitutes a graph which defines the context structure of the text. our approach is to f i t a new sentence into i t s proper places in the context graph representing the previous text  a f i t that is accomplished by searching up the graph and hypothesizing and testing sentence relations  expansion/ temporal continuation . item to item reference hypotheses are entailed by the sentence relation hypotheses  and validated if and only if the relations entailing them have been validated. 
finally we have demonstrated that  for a number of syntactic constructions  the choice that a writer 
makes as to how to group his semantic predicates into a surface sentence influences the way in 
which a reader w i l l resolve later 