making inferences in natural language dialogs 
　　　　　　　　　  charles l. hednck 
coordinated science laboratory 
university of i l l i n o i s at urbana-champaign 
	urbana  i l l i n o i s 	1 
this paper discusses the need in a natural language understanding system for a model of the speaker and of the conversation process i t s e l f . most current programs use models of the domain of discourse to supply the knowledge necessary to understand what is being talked about.  see  e.g.  schank or charmak  1 j.   for example  schank's system might contain a restaurant  script   l i s t i n g a l l of the actions one normally does at a restaurant  from entering and being seated to paying the check and leaving. such systems appear to be based on the idea that natural language texts are mostly assertions about the domain of discourse  and can be mapped into additions to a data base involving this domain. however  examination of real english texts suggests that much of it has other purposes. 
consider the following example  taken more or less at random from the 1 may 1 issue of the christian science monitor:  as the f i r s t heat waves r o l l in and good humor trucks jingle for customers  a most sticky question is being thrashed out in the back halls of government: what is ice cream   as a f i r s t approximation  we may say that this is mostly an exercise in wit. one pales at the thought of an a . i . program churning away on i t   bringing out the association between ice cream sales and hot weather  and retrieving the various facts needed to understand good humor's marketing strategy. this passage is intended somehow to impress the reader  but not to be translated directly into entries in his  world model  in the same way as more prosaic parts of the story. 
another kind of problem shows up in the following dialog  given by schank 1  p. 1 : 
 john meets his friend fred on the street. fred is holding a knife. . . .   
	john: 	i could use a knife right now. 
　　　 agitated tone  fred: what's the matter  
john: 	damn mary  always on my back. 	she'll be sorry. 
	fred: 	i don't think a knife w i l l help you. 
the actual subject matter of the conversation is never explicitly mentioned. it is john's rhetorical threat to use a knife on mary. nevertheless that threat is so clearly implicit in the dialog that the latter may be considered to contain a sort of conceptual anaphoric reference 
f 
 current address: computer science dept.  rutgers  new brunswick  n.j. 1 
to i t . this sort of undertone i s   of course  far more prevalent in conversation than in newspaper articles. indeed there seems to be a tendency in conversation to mention any sensitive topic only by indirect or ambiguous language. 
let us consider what inferences would be needed to process the dialog above. 	superficially   i could use a knife right now  is a simple fact. 	however such a statement is usually intended as a request. in this case  it is not a serious request  but rather an expression of john's agitation. presumably the tone of voice is what allows fred to realize this. 	with this understanding   what's the matter   is not really asking what john wants the knife for  which mxght be the interpretation in other contexts. 	instead it refers to whatever has upset john  and is really just a sympathetic encouragement to go on. 	thus  damn mary  always on my back  is not the non sequitur it might appear to be. 	it is what john intended to say originally  if he got a sympathetic response.  she'll be sorry  is the most d i f f i c u l t part. 	it must f i r s t be recognized as a threat. 	then it must be connected with the knife  which makes the content of the threat clear. 	finally  in the context of this discussion  the threat must be recognized as only rhetorical. 
we propose that a more complete analysis be done of the ways that readers and hearers use utterances. we suspect that in a typical passage  much of the text serves to direct attention and otherwise control the course of the interaction between the speaker and listener. actually  existing programs have mechanisms that are relevant to the sort of processing we have in mind. these programs  explain  observed actions by f i t t i n g them into known patterns and inferring motives for the actors.  see  for example  schmidt and sndharan  1 .  however such a system must be applied to explaining what the speaker is doing  as well as what is going on in the domain he is talking about. it must also have a variety of ways to respond to an utterance  other than treating it as data to be added to memory. 
