 
       the paper discusses the i n c o r p o r a t i o n of r i c h e r semantic structures i n t o the preference semantics system: they are c a l l e d pseudo-texts and capture something of the i n f o r m a t i o n expressed in one type of frame proposed by minsky   q . v .   . however  they are in a format  and subject to r u l e s of i n f e r e n c e   consistent w i t h e a r l i e r accounts of t h i s system of language analysis and understanding. their use is discussed in connection w i t h the phenomenon of extended use: sentences where the semantic preferences are broken. it is argued that such s i t u a t i o n s are the norm and not the exception in normal language use  and that a language understanding system must give some general treatment of them. 
d e s c r i p t i v e terms: 	n a t u r a l language understanding  
semantics  frames  pseudo-text  preferences  templates  formulas  thesaurus. 
i n t r o d u c t i o n 
       this paper sketches how one might deal w i t h extensions of word sense in a n a t u r a l language understanding system  nlus : that is to say  normal utterances that break preassigned semantic s e l e c t i o n   or preference  r e s t r i c t i o n s . the proposals here extend the knowledge r e p r e s e n t a t i o n of the preference semantics nlus  wilks 1  1  
w i t h pseudo-texts 	 ft  which are one type of frame s t r u c t u r e s in the zense of 	 minsky 1   but 
which are also consistent w i t h the general assumptions of t h i s p a r t i c u l a r nlus. at. the end i s h a l l describe  an implementation environment under cons t r u c t i o n   which may make possible some t e s t of the r e l a t i v e c o n t r i b u t i o n s of pts and very general pragmatic p r i n c i p l e s l i k e   p r e f e r e n c e    see below  to language extension. 
       to understand  preference  consider the f o l lowing sentence  chosen  i promiseyou  at random from the f r o n t page of a d a i l y newspaper:  the times 1 . 1 . 1   : 
 1  mr. wilson said that the l i n e taken by the shadow cabinet  that an assembly should be given no executive powers would lead to the break-up of the united kingdom. 
　　　this sentence presents no problems to the average reader of that newspaper  who is presumed to know what a cabinet i s   and what the u.k. i s . however  at each of the four underlined points  the noun would violate the normal semantic selection restrictions for the associated verb: lines  for example  would violate the normal  physical 
　　　i shall refer to such restrictions as preference restrictions  because of the way the present nlus is already able to accept natural language that violates preferences  as  1  does  see recap in next section for more detail . such usage as  s  
w i l l be referred to as extended  or preference violating  and these w i l l serve instead of the more literary and philosophical term  metaphorical . 
　　　it is an important assumption of this paper that such usage is the norm in ordinary everyday language use  and cannot be relegated to the realm of the exceptional  or the odd  and so dealt with by considerations of  performance . on the contrary it i s   i would argue  central to our language capabilities  and any theory of language must have something concrete to say about i t . even if the newspaper usages above are  extended   i would suggest that anyone who could not grasp these extension could not be said to understand english properly  given adequate knowledge from which to extend  and we shall come to that.  it w i l l be obvious already that the commitment to a norm implies a corresponding commitment to general everyday language as a proper topic for al. this assumption needs defence  but there is no space for it here. however  one might bear in mind that  although non-general micro-worlds have been put forward as the e.coli et al  they may in fact turn out to be our phlogiston! 
semantic sense-projection 
　　　the process described in this paper is called projection: sense descriptions for words w i l l be rewritten  in preference-violating texts  with the aid of the specific knowledge in pts; which is to say that part of the pt is projected into the sense description for a word. so  for example in 
 1  some detailed p o l i t i c a l knowledge in a pt  see below  for  united kingdom  could show that a breaking of such an entity could be caused  and we would then replace the sense description of  lead to the break-up  and providing a more appropriate sense description of  lead to for analysis of the rest of this text. 
　　　the essence of this process is finding in the appropriate pt  what it is that can normally be done with an entity of that type. as we shall see  matching this is not always a simple matter. i f   with the aid of knowledge representations and sense descriptions  projection  even to a small degree  and generalized manner  we shall  at the same time  be able to explain why the same acceptable extenders use is not present i n   say  
 he broke up e v i l     
　　　thus the present task of explication w i l l   to that extent* make concessions to the main linguistic goal of the last two decades  that of setting boundaries to acceptability or meaningful-
natural language-1: wilks 1 ness  at least in so far as  1  would interpretable on the basis of a knowledge base  and rules of extension  while the last sentence would not. 
   however f some brief recap of the existing state of the nlus is necessary for setting out these extensions. 
brief recap of preference semantics 
　　　in previous papers i have described an nlus in which rules operate on semantic word-sense descritpions to build up text descriptions. the tules that insert sense descriptions into text descriptions are what 1 called  preferential : they seek preferred entities  but w i l l accept the less preferred if necessary. a sense 
description for the action  drink  would be the semantic formula: 	   
to   move cause  
	 flow stuff  	 this *  
 *anj    
                                thru part  this is a formal structure of semantic primitives expressing the meaning of the action  see king and wilks 1 : that drinking is a causing to move  preferably done by animate subject  -agent  and to a liquid  flow stuff . to a particular animate aperture  thru part   and into the self  -the animate agent . the last primitive cause  is the head of the formula and its main primitive. for short we w i l l write  1  as |drink|. 
　　　the text structures in the system are templates together with semantic ties between them  
where a template is a network of formulas  containing at least an agent  action and object formula  or appropriate dummies in place of them . thus the template for  'the adder drinks water  w i l l be written for short |the+adder drinks water  in which  1  is at the  action  node. 
　　　the process of setting up the templates allows the formulas to compete to f i l l noes in templates. thus tge formula for the  snake- adder goes to the agent node in the template above in preference to the  machine- adder because  1  specifies  by  vani subj  that it prefers to be accompanied in a template by an animate agent formula. however  in the sentence: 
 1  	my car drinks gasoline. 
the available formula for the f i r s t template node 
namely q:ar1  is not for an animate entity  yet it is accepted because there is no competitor for the position. the purpose of this paper is to investgate how the system might not merely accept such a preference-violating structure f1r 1  but might also interpret it. 
　　　an important later process is called extraction: 	template-like structures are inferred and added to the text representation even though they match nothing in the surface text. 	they are  deeper  inferences from the case structure of formulas in 
some actual template-where the case primitives are those underlined in  1 . thus  to the template for  1   we would add an extraction  in double square parentheses in abbreviated form :  1  |gasoline in carj j 
which is an inference extracted from the containment subformula of  1   self in . analogous extractions could be made for each case primitive in each formula in the template for  1 . 
　　　all these are  of course  complex and contentous issues  that can only be summarised here so that we can get on to something else. they have 
however been programmed and described in detail in  wilks 1  1 . 
　　　since then a structural change  wilks  1a  as allowed a wider  and more specific  form of expression in formulas by allowing thesaurus items  as well as primitives  to function in them  	no problems are introduced by doing this  provided that the thesaurus items are also themselves words in the dictionary  and so have thcirformulas defined elsewhere in their turn. 	one advantage of this extension is to impose a thesaurus structure on the whole vocabulary  and so render its semantic expression more consistent. 
　　　a thesaurus  like roget  is simply an organisation of a vocabulary into semi-synonymous rows  
which are themselves classified hierarchically under heads  and even more generally  sections. 
thus under some very general section name move  ＊motion  we would find heads  two of which might be aengine and vehicle. the former might be the name of a row of actual types of engine 
　　　 s  # 1 engine: turbine  internal combustion  steam...... 
where the number simply indicates the sequence position of # engine in the thesaurus. it is no accident that the most general section names like move can be identified with the semantic primitives of the present system. 
　　　the organisation is imposed by requiring inclusion relations  between the formulas for word senses  corresponding to the thesaurus relations of the words. 	thus  a l l the words in the row  1  
would have a common subpart to their formulas  and that common subpart would be the dictionary formula for  engine   probable expressing in primitives no 
more than a thing used by humans to perform some task  and self-moving in some way . if now thesaurus items can be inserted in formulas we may expect a formula for  car  at least as specific as: 
 1  
	 man use  	 obje thing  
 frenqine *art  

natural 	lan*uae*-1: wilks 1 

language boundaries and projection 
       let us return to examples like  1  for which the system constructs a template even though it contains a violated preference  and ask what should an intelligent system infer in such a situation * i would suggest that cars can be said to drink in virtue of something a system might already know about them  namely that they have a 
       fluid  gas/petrol  injected into them  and they use that in order to run. that is to say  the program should have access to a sufficiently ric h k nowledge structure to express the fact that cars stand in a relation to a particular f l u i d   a r e l ation that i s   of the  same semantic structure  as the relation in which a drinker normally stands to the thing drunk. all that may sound obvious  but how else are we to account for the naturalness of  1   but the relative unnaturalness  and uninterpretability  of  my car chews gasoline   and  the 
more distant   my car carves the sunday roast . one upshot of these proposals is to distinguish plausible  with respect to a knowledge base  preference violation from the implausible.** 
       the procedural upshot of the above would be to replace at least one formula in the template for  1  with another  either constructed by rule*** or drawn from the knowledge structure i t s e l f   to be called a pseudo-text  pt . let us 
now postulate that  car  points not only to  1   i.e. |car  but that |car  in turn points to : 

part of the pseudo-text for  car  
the system already deals with certain preference violations  such as those constituting the ergative case paradigm   the hammer broke the window  - see wilks 1b  and certain examples like  john got a shock   a class central to riesbeck's thesis  see schank  ed.  1 . 
** an important aspect of the interpretation of  1  is idiomatic  namely that the car uses  a lot of gas/petrol. this aspect of the meaning is beyond this  or i suspect any  general inference procedure. 
* * * in a fuller version of this paper  wilks  in press  i describe the relation of this work to attempts  such as  givon 1   to give general rules for projection: rules operating on the dictionary and independent of contexts of use. 
       this structure is called a pseudo-text because it is of just the same format as the text representations produced by the present nlus.lt can be extended to taste to express as much specific information about cars as is thought appropriate. given the parser for the present nlus  it could even be input as real text about cars. the representation consists of the templates  explained loosely at the r i g h t     together with the self-explanatory  case and cause ties between them. in the templates ; denotes a dummy and * 
denotes the formula  car  that points to the object  1 . the # prefixed items are thesaurus items  though the  ic engine  is simply a specificdictionary word pointing to its own formula - specificity is thus a matter of taste. so  for example  the thesaurus head #* liquid could be replaced by more explicit  gasoline . items in round parentheses remain in primitive form. 
       it w i l l be clear that the same information can be expresses in a number of different ways  and at different levels of generality; though the spirit of  minsky 1  suggests that they should be as specific as possible. the intention here is that the processes that operate on such entities as 1  shall be identical with those that 
operate on such entities as  1  shall be identical 
with those that manipulate representations derived from input texts. the approach is thus the reverse of the conventional one: we seek to assimilate knowledge structures to text structures  rather than the reverse  on the grounds that the representation of language is the d i f f i c u l t task  and that the representation of knowledge as such makes no sense apart from that. 
       we should note too  that just as the thesaurus structure imposes a containment relation on the formulas of co-row-member words  so it also imposes a hierarchical relationship on pts: that for # vehicle  for example  w i l l be a less specific version of  1 . further up the thesaurus would be pts for high-level sections: that for the primitive man would be highly complex. but note there is no  inheritance of property  problem in this system: the formula for  amputee  would have head man and would specify the loss of limbs. any inherited pseudo-text from man-asserting  two legs  -would be modified  amputee  . 
       the system now uses  1  to make a projection  so as to derive an interpretation for  1   by seeking  in  1   templates matching the source 

natural language1 	wilks 
1 

template |ray+car drinks gasoline}: namely the f i r s t and  fourth lines of  1 . the f i r s t match is in virtue of the similarity of  drink  and  # inject -based on the expression in primitives  as in  1   of causing liquid to be in an entity of the same type as the agent. this would allow us to confirm  by projection  the  humanness of the drinker   that has already been noted by earlier extraction* routines that extracted out from  drink | independently of the pt  1 . however  no projection is made at this stage onto |carj  though it might be later in the face of a sentence like his thirst is never slaked following  1   that confirms the humanness projection  because in the case of violations of the preferences of actions  as of  drink  in  1   the system always prefers to make a projection on to the action itself if it; can. 
　　　a stronger match is detected btween the |my+ car drinks gasoline| and the fourth line of  j  in v irtue of the containment of   engine*  in | car    and of | gasoline | in # l i q u i d j   which is evident in the formulas themselves. this results in the projection of the action node of the fourth line of  1   namely  use   on to |drink  in the template f i r  1 . this projection is taken to be strongly confirmed by the earlier match with the f i r s t line of  1   and is considered to carry over more sense that any alternative projection. the confirmation  of the match of the template to the fourth line of  1  by that of the f i r s t line  is necessary here  because |my+car leaks gasoline  would also match the fourth line  but no such projection would be appropriate. conversely  no projection could be made for  my car drinks mud  from the fourth line  even with the confirmation of the f i r s t . the general rule for action projections then i s : seek a pseudo-text  for agent or object  
with a template matching on agent and object nodes. 
project this generally if there is also a pseudotext template match to the action itself  for another template in the same pseudo-text. 
　　　we may note in brief because of pressure of space above suggestion. first consider the more complex example presented by a recent headline: 
 1  united kingdom tries to escape common market clearly  some projection would be appropriate here  of humanness on to the country  which would require a man-head for  u.k/ ;   common market . the knowledge required might be drawn from |escape| alone  by simple extraction and without recourse to the pseudo-texts for either of the entities of the u.k. joining  but not of leaving the common market. in such circumstances more historical facts are not enough  even when highly structured. we might conceivably be able to project some notion fclisassociatej onto escape 1    from the u.k. pt 
* 	extractions  it w i l l be seen  differ from projections in that they produce new templatelike entities  rather than  as here  replacing formulas inside existing templates. 
given some more sophisticated matching criterion that placed relevance above negation in such cases   i . e . would match |escape   with  associate  or  join . 
　　　secondly we might consider the problems presented by an example l i k e : 
 1  i see what you mean. here the jast clause breaks the preference expressed in |see| for a physical object. a system procedure w f l l present 
t n e
 actual object of  1  to the top-level temp-
late simply as the primitive sign  the primitive for symbols and intensional representations of them  which has been obtained  by 	extraction  from the preferred object in meanj .thus the system is effectively dealing with the template sequence. 	 i see  sign   |you man  sign j . but 
what could we expect as a pseudo-text for something as general as sign  so as to use the above procedures to project on to  see . if we take advantage of the hierarchical nature of the thesaurus  we might expect pseudo-texts at the 
very top level  associated with the section names - pure primitives like sign - just as specific pseudo-texts are associated with the lowest lever 1 items in the thesaurus - row members like  car . the pseudo-text for a primitive like sign would be wholly  care structural : it would consist of no more than primitive concatentions  in template form  like man think sign*  the most general thing that can be said about what is normally done to signs. however  even something as general as this might suffice to project think correctly onto  see . the interesting generality would come from using exactly the same projection procedures on the most general pseudo-texts like this  as on the most specific  like  1 . 
　　　thirdly  and this is treated at length in wilks  1a   we can consider a quite different type of projection for phrases like  1  a toy lion. 
　　this comes from a much discussed class of examples   plastic flower    stone horse  etc.   where an obvious projection mechanism is to replace the head of the formula for the noun  beast  in  lion  in  1   by the preferred object of predication in the qualifier - here *pkts1b ill  toy . this would be a very limited and general class of projections not requiring access to pts  but which might s t i l l provide a  projected formula  appropriate for examples l i k e :  1  the cat walked round the toy lion. 
* 	those familiar with the system of wilks  1  
1 etc.  w i l l remember that these are the  bare template  structures actually used to obtain the i n i t i a l template match. the suggestion here is that the  knowledge-aspect  of these highly-general structures is to be found as the pseudo-texts of primitives as the latter function right at the top of the conceptual hierarchy imposed by the thesaurus. 

natural 	laneiiage-1: 	wilks 

then he came back and sniffed i t . 
where we might be helped to refer  he  and   i t   correctly by the new  projected  formula |lion| 
whose head was no longer beast  and which could therefore no longer be the reference of  he  as a real lion would be. 
　　　a more radical and interesting development would be the construction of  pt repacking 
functions  specific to certain qualifiers. thus  for example  such a function for  toy   if faced with the phrase  toy car  might repack  1  using a general rule to delete a l l constituent templates based on the action use  as well as a l l those that are at end of a goal t i e   since toy cars cannot  normally serve human needs  uses and purposes. 
an implementation environment 
　　　it is proposed to implement these suggestions currently using a new base for the preference semantics system  expressed as a semantic augmented transition network. it is hoped that this more conventional re-expression of the semanticsdriven pattern matching parser w i l l make it more comprehensible and acceptable. the environment 
w i l l be a question-answering system that discusses in english  the construction of the semantic representation i t s e l f for a text. it is hoped too that this w i l l avoid the t r i v i a l i t i e s that lurk in answering questions about mini-worlds  where the answers to a l l possible questions sometimes seem preformed in the data base. some simulation of parallel processes is hoped for  so as to distinguish  as independent matching processes  those aspects of the present system that correspond to local context  like preference  and those that correspond to a global context like pts and the use of the thesaurus generally   and to apply these independently to a text  as 
parallel branches of analysis  each seeking template-like structures in the input text. the interest  and the possibility of test of the relative usefulness of the branches  would come from switching off some particular branch and seeing if the analysis deteriorated. 
　　　let us imagine such a dialogue as it might apply to the analysis of a real newspaper text i i k e :   the times: 1.1 . 
 1  an ambulance driver  answering an emergency went through red t r a f f i c lights and collided with a car k i l l i n g its driver. the interest here is how the program is to determine the reference of   i t s   as the car  rather than the ambulance driver. in what follows  the user interventions are in the upper case  notes are preceded and followed by square brackets. 
end of text input 
1. an ambulance answering an emergency call 
1. s went through red t r a f f i c lights 
1. and s collided with a car 
1. s k i l l i n g its driver 
 s marks missing template agents in the four fragments the text 
has been cut into for ease of reference   
all fragments match templates. 
template 1 fails preferences for agent. now repacking s slots 
1. the ambulance driver went through red traffic lights. 
why  
a driver is mobile  a call not. 
1. the abulance driver collided with a car. suggest: 
1. the ambulance driver killed   its driver 
　　　　　　　　　　 system unsure of s in  1   it is marked as a problem  why  only active agent available 
but now re-inferring as follows: 
preference breaking in  1  drives inferences as follows: traffic lights are aperture 
 went through  means  passed 
i select latter and project on to  went through  
|straightforward extraction in  1  plus access to pseudo-text for   t r a f f i c - l i g h t s     
examining preferences in 
1. 	s k i l l i n g its driver. 
  i t   is lights  number wrong  
or call or car or 
ambulance 
prefer car or ambulance for   i t   
 calls don't have driversj 
confirm 
1. 	ambulance driver 	k i l l s car's driver why  first: 
from traffic-lights pseudo-text passing red traffic light causes people hurt 
 'pass  has replaced  went through  by projection  remeraber  
 pseudo texts can have a  cause tied  template pair read out  

natural language-1 	wi1 ks 
1 

this confirms k i l l s car and ambulance driver. 
second: 
calling pragmatic over-ride its-cars 
  i t s   not twice coreferential 
|a general gricean* style pragmatics rule that maximises information in the fragment.   
confirm its=cars 
representation complete. 
the new point brought out of the hat at the end  as it were  shows the need for general pragmatic principles at the highest level. just as we needed preference at the lowest. the general interest here would be the possibility of two clashing general principles in the analysis of a given text: preference seeking  in some sense  to minimise information  argued in wilks 1   and another seeking to maximise i t . 
discussion 
　　　the cause-tied template pair  read out from the pt for fragment 1  shows that the function of the pt is not tied to just simple matching and inferences  and can span across texts of some length. 
　　　moreover  in an actual implementation  the hierarchical organization of the pts would plan a stronger role than appears here. as was suggested in connection with example  1   the pts would not a l l be stored explicitly  but would be constructed as required * from the more general pt for the corresponding thesaurus sub-head term  together 
with appropriate slot f i l l e r s . thus  the  ambulance example  would always access the 1# vehicle pt i n i t i a l l y and would attempt to deal with the text at that more general level  before proceeding to construct the  ambulance ptm from the 1h* vehicle one. 
     a number of very general comparisons and issues suggest themselves here. the pts are against in wilks 1b   although this maybe a purely academic  question in that scripts are at present  riesback 1  being applied independently at parsing procedures. this leads to close analogies between the present paper and the proposals 
of  granger 1  to use knowledge-based techniques  though not actually the scripts avaible in the system he is working as part of  to understand unknown wordsin texts. the relation between unknown words and preference-violating known words is complex and beyond the scope of this discussion. 
　　　another and very general and relevant issue is that of the relation of the  understood structure  derived for a text  and the memory structure to be associated with i t . ortony  1  has argued persuasively that one must not just assume the two to be the same  in the face of much counterevidence. in the present proposals  the  episode  structure for a text has the same format as a pt  or memory structure  but the two are not assumed to be the same  or even differently f i l l e d in copies  for any input. 
　　　the implementation environment  or debugging aid for nlus's  is  like moch al  only hand-waving in the face of very difficult!  and ill-understood problems. it it has a main distinguishing feature  it is in the attempt to separate those projections 
where the highly specific pts are helpful from 
those where they are not. in some cases general principles  like extraction or  pragmatic override   seem sufficient. the key interest of the proposed implementation would be the possibility of assessing the relative values of highly specific structures and general principles. this is in 
keeping with the  lazy system  assumption that has always been behind this nlus** that a system should do no more processing and inference work than is necessary to deal with the analysis problem in hand  even if that problem is coping with extended usage. 
　　　it is hoped that a system able to project in this way  from both general and specific knowledge structures  and to relate such projections to the application of wholly general pragmatic principles might give insight into the complex role of know-

clearly 	of the more static type of frame adumbrated 	ledge in 	language understanding  and into the 
in  minsky 1   in that  unlike those of 
 charniah 1   schonk 1b  etc.  they do not have a narrative line  temporally or causally 
ordered. 	indeed   1  is essentially unordered  
merely connected  and  should unconnected sub-pts exist in a pt  they may be considered connected by an unordered and predicate. 
so  since pts are non-narrative  or in crude terms  for nouns not verbs  the question of parsing text expectationally with their aid does not arise  as has been suggested in schonk 1b  and argued 
*  grice 1  the principle of avoiding unnecessary redundancy: if  it=ambulance driver  the writer would have used  killed himself . peculiar role of language boundaries that the preference restrictions symbolize. ** cf. the notion of  variable processing depth  in bobrow & winograd. natural language-1: wilks 

references 
robrow  d & winograd  t. krl - an overview of a 
	knowledge 	representation 
language. cognitive science u 1 
givon  t. 	the structure of e l l i p s i s .  systems development corp.: 	sta. 
calif . 1 
granger  r. foul-up.ubmitted to fifth ijcai  1 
grice  h. logice and conversation  unpublished mss. 1 
king  m. & wilks  y. semantics  preference and inference.  inst  for semantic and cognitive studies: geneva . 1 
minsky  m. a framework for represenation knowledge in winston  ed.  the psychology of computer vision. mcgraw h i l l : new york . 1  1. 
ortony  a. 	how episodic is semantic memory  
proc. theoret. issues in natural language. pricessing. bbn: camb. mass. 1. 
riesbeck  c.  as granger  1 
schank  r.  ed.  conceptual information processing.  north holland: amsterdam . 
1a 
using knowledge to understand  as 
ortony . 1b 
wilks  y. wilks  y. computable semantic derivations.  as givon . 1 
a preferential  pattern-matching  semantics for natural language understanding. a r t i f i c i a l intelligence  1  1. 
de minimis: 	the archaeology of frames. 
proc. aisb conference  dept. of a . i .   university of edinburgh   1a. 
processing case. amer. jn 1. comput. ling. 1. 1b. 
making p