 node indicates an inferred limit on how general the concept can be. thus the nodes act as bounds between which the concept must lie  and represent respectively sufficient and necessary conditions for an instance to be an example of the concept. 
we generalise this notion of an hieraichically-stiucturcd feature by defining a description space  d-space  as an upper semilatlice  d     v   with a top element  t  satisfying a certain finiteness condition. we show that the cartesian product of a number of these d-spaccs is itself a d-spacc. this provides us with a simple  uniform notation for referring to concepts  instances and hypotheses. 
we describe a simple nondeferministic algorithm which implements the  focussing strategy  for such a conjunctive description space  and discuss aspects of its behaviour on the concept learning task  lor example: 
1. due to the generality of the d-space idea  the algorithm deals uniformly with features which in winston's approach have to be treated as special cases. predicates  relations  a supports b   multi-valued dimensions  orientation  and tree-structured dimensions  shape  all give rise to examples of a d-space. 
1. given appropriate assumptions  it can be proved  a  that the hypothesis generated by the algorithm is always consistent with the data  i.e. it includes all the examples r.iid exclude:  all the non-examples it has so far been si-own  and  /   that given sufficient data  the algorithm correctly learns the concept. 
1. according to the algorithm  back-up occurs when the relation between the lower and upper bounds is violated. i he lower node af a hypothesis is affected only by positive examples  and the upper node only by non-examples. this clarifies the role of negative information and  near misses  in the concept learning. in paiiicular. it can be shown that . . . 
1. . . given a corpus of instances  the outcome of the icnning is independent of the order in which they are pieenlcd. moreover . . . 
1. . . . if all the examples are presented before the uou-cxamples  'hen the learning is free of errors  i.e. the 
algorithm never needs to back up. 
in the light of this analysis  we argue that winston's program is iisjlf an attempt to use a focussing strategy to learn conjunctive concepts with hierarchically-structured features  and v/c di.--.cuss various shortcomings and issues not dealt 
wi'.h in winmon's treatment. 
rl-i trencks 
iiruner  j. s.. good now  j. j. & austin  g. a. a study of i linking. wiley  1  . 
wit. ton  p. ii. learning structural descriptions from examples. in p. ii. winston  i'd.   the psychology of computer vision. mcgraw-hill  1. 

knowlf r!** repr.-s: young 1 
