a mechanized proof procedure for free intensicnal logics* 
raymond d. gurrib 
terrple university 
	philadelphia  pennsylvania 	1 
　　　included amongst the intensional logics are those dealing with obligation  deontic logic    necessity  modal logic   time  tense logic   and various other intensional concepts. these logics were developed to formalize the semantics of natural language discourses. the intensional logics studied here are extensions of some of the senteni a l logics known as the normal intensional logics. these logics include the modal logics k  m  b  s1  and s1 and their deontic and tense logic counterparts. the closure of the accessibility relation in these logics can be readily computed  a convenient property for mechanizing proofs. 
　　　in free logics  individual names need not have a referent  and the domain of discourse is not required to be non-empty. there is general agreement that a quantified intensional logic must have a free quantificational base if it is to capture the logic of natural language discourses. by having a free base  it is possible  e.g.  for two worlds to be compatible where  in one world  it is declared that something exists and  in the other world  that nothing exists. or a term can refer at one time but not at another. more technically  neither the barcan formula  vx 1a=  d ixa in a modal logic  nor i t s converse  dvxa  vx da  are provable in a free intensional logic. 
　　　if the free intensional logics are found to constitute the possible logical bases of semantic descriptions of natural languages  as many believe  then an adequate system for automatic natural language processing must handle these 
logics correctly. a mechanized proof procedure for these logics must be devised for such tasks as disambiguating discourses  question-answering  and guiding rule-governed behavior. 
　　　failure of the barcan formula and i t s converse rules out natural extensions of two theorem proving techniques in standard first-order logic to the free intensional logics. f i r s t   in the tradition of gentzen  beth  and smullyan  the device of using a single tree in a derivation is d i f f i c u l t to develop  as the same term on the one and only tree might have to refer in one place but not in another. second  the resolution method presupposes a prenex normal form theorem  but this f a i l s in the free intensional logics. if a com-
putational method could be developed for the free intensional logics using either the device of a single tree o r resolution  i t i s l i k e l y that i t 
would be somewhat cx unter-intuitive. 
　　　*this work was supported in part by a tenple university summer research fellowship. 
　　　instead  a mechanized proof procedure is presented in which there is a tree for each  possible world  and a scheme of branch numbering to i d e n t i fy corresponding branches of different trees. this tree method provides a new view of what constitutes a proof  and an appropriate semantics is developed. it applies to an ordered set of sets of sentences  known as an evolving theory  and not just to a single set of sentences as other deductive systems do. interleaved derivations are carried out in a f i n i t e number of worlds  trees  which interact. these interacting proofs could also be executed in p a r a l l e l . 
