computation of immediate texture discrimination 
bruce r. schatz 
m.i.t. artificial intelligence laboratory cambridge  massachusetts 1 
　　the computation of immediate texture discrimination involves finding boundaries between regions of differing texture. this paper describes two operators which together appear necessary and probably sufficient to accomplish this. 
　　texture can be regarded as the structural property of surfaces with respect to their constituents. the formation of texture crucially depends on small  fairly similar elements repeated fairly regularly over a large area. the problem examined here is how to compute texture discrimination  how to separate regions on the basis of immediate texture differences. the class of differences considered will be those in which the shape and location of an inner texture can be perceptually recognized in 1 milliseconds  i.e. not allowing directed eye movements . it will be assumed that the input is a processed version of the image consisting of information concerning such objects as edges  blobs  and lines  e.g. the primal sketch - marr . 
　　a restricted subclass of textures will be examined. color will be black/white  no motion will be allowed  and no depth information used. only differences in texture elements will be considered. this does not include  for example  the continuous case of region separation by edges. spatial frequency differences will be ignored by assuming constant density of points. the spacing between elements will also be large enough to avoid interaction effects. finally  the elements will consist of lines and points  and not  say  of blobs . 

　　the problem then is to define operators which distinguish between texture elements only when the textures generated by these elements are immediately discriminate. consider the basic properties of lines: length  orientation  and position. orientation differences clearly can produce immediate discrimination  c.f. fig i . length must be considered as well since gross differences in length can cause discrimination  even when the orientations are the same . thus an operator which accounts for these necessary features is 
 1  length and orientation of lines. 
however  this is not enough. in textures such as fig 1  the length and orientation of the tines is the same for both generating elements yet the textures are discrlminable. this appears to be due to the fact that the lines are arranged differently. as suggested by such textures as fig 1 with dotted lines  one solution is to introduce virtual lines  imaginary lines drawn between points which behave as though physically present  albeit somewhat more weakly . by using local virtual lines  connecting each point to all points within some small neighborhood   one can account for the local positional geometry. 
　　but this can produce a computationally unfeasible number of virtual lines.  there are an infinite number between two nearby lines  for instance.  so one should connect only  special  points. a logical choice is to use terminators  which  average  out all others. these include isolated points  endpoints of lines  and corners. thus the second operator is 
 1  length and orientation of local virtual lines between terminators. the corners are needed since the end of a tine should be a terminator whether or not there is another line attached to it. 
　　these two operators appear to be necessary  by example  in this texture class. but are they sufficient  for instance  grouping into elements or more complex shape descriptors might be needed. the sufficiency claim is based on 
ju1esz*s conjecture that two textures are indiscriminable if they have the same second order statistics. as these statistics can be calculated by comparing the length and orientation of dipoles in the image   lines  connecting points   the operators here can be considered as providing a feasible computation which mimics the dipole statistics. all of the physically present dipoles and a subset of the virtual ones are used. it is conjectured that all of the information  psychologically  available to the dipole statistics has been captured and thus  assuming julesz is correct  that the operators are sufficient. 
　　the computation can be implemented by moving a window of proper size over the image and asserting a boundary whenever there has been a sufficient change in the operators between adjacent windows  i.e. essentially comparing adjacent elements . for a comparison  the orientations are considered in equivalence classes of ＼1 degrees where for each class  a crude histogram of the lengths is considered. a boundary occurs when  i difference  /  i total    threshold . this ratio is needed since the elements must differ by a sufficient amount to cause discrimination. 
　　thus it appears that comparison of the length and orientation of actual and of local virtual lines between terminators can predict human immediate texture discrimination of the type considered. while the mechanism of the comparison is not completely settled  these operations appear to be necessary and  it is conjectured  sufficient. a more complete exposition can be found in $chatz 
acknowledgements: david marr  whitman richards  and especially shimon uliman provided helpful discussion. the author was supported by an nsf graduate fellowship and by the advanced research projects agency under contract n1-c-1. 
