a variable capacitance touch sensor* 
clifford c. geschke 
coordinated science laboratory 
university of i l l i n o i s at urbana-champaign 
	urbana  i l l i n o i s 	1 
　　　
　　　tactile feedback is useful in performing many robot manipulator tasks. this paper describes the simple touch sensor used on the robot manipulator at the coordinated science laboratory. this sensor has a range of 1 to 1 ounces with a resolution of about 1 ounces at the low end of the scale. it is inexpensive  easy to construct  and relatively free of hysteresis  d r i f t and fatigue. also  the output is inherently d i g i t a l   which aids in interfacing to a computer controller. 
where f is the force applied and x is the touch sensor reading. 
　　　the recent advances in hybrid circuit fabrication would indicate that an array of very small capacitors might be constructed to provide a shape-sensitive touch sensor. finding a material which acts as a compressible insulator may be a problem  but connections to an lsi oscillator/frequency counter should be straightforward. 
　　　
　　　the sensor consists of a variable capacitor which controls the frequency of an oscillator. the output of the oscillator is connected to a simple 1-bit frequency counter which can be read by a computer  or fed into a d/a converter. the variable capacitor consists of two parallel plates constructed from copper clad glass-epoxy printed circuit board stock. the two plates are separated by a 1  thickness of plastic foam. one plate is rigidly affixed to the robot manipulator  and the other to a movable finger t i p . applying a force to the finger tip compresses the foam which reduces the distance between the plates increasing the capacitance. 
　　　the oscillator circuit is constructed from two ttl monostables and generates a train of fixed 1 nanosecond pulses separated by 1 to 1 nanoseconds  as determined by the variable capacitor. a preloaded down counter is used to count the pulses during a fixed time period. therefore  a higher pressure  lower frequency  w i l l result in a higher number in the counter. 
　　　sensor readings from 1 to 1  which correspond to from 1 to 1 ounces of force  may be read directly. however  error in the frequency counter causes successive readings to jitter by plus and minus 1 counts. by reducing this j i t t e r with a simple digital f i l t e r   the range is extended downward to one ounce with a resolution of 1 ounces. figure 1 shows a plot of force as a function of touch sensor reading. plot a was made after the touch sensor had been idle overnight. plot b was made after several minutes of use. the differences between these plots is due to fatigue in the plastic foam. figure 1 shows the same data as figure 1 except that the log of the force is plotted. the relationship between the touch sensor reading and the force applied is approximated by: 
x = 1   ln f  - 1   
*this work was supported by the joint services electronics program  u. s. army  u. s. navy  and u. s. air force  under contract 
daab-1-c-1. 
　　　the touch sensor is used in a software servo loop to control the closing force of the csl robot manipulator hand. using this device  delicate tasks such as handling eggs and squeezing and releasing a plastic bottle without dropping i t   are possible with very l i t t l e programming effort. 

　　　
robotics-1 	: geschke 1 
