human vision paradox implicates 	lblrelaxation model* 	1 
f. s. montalvo 
computer science and applied mathematics 
lawrence berkeley laboratory berkeley  california 1 
       the dual role of edges as boundaries and as periodic groupings is supported by human experimental findings. a relaxation model  zucker  et a l .   1  based on line detectors can underlie both mechanisms. the existence of these edge operators  mubel and wiesel  1  and parallel interactions has strong neurophysiological support. 
       edges or discontinuities in intensity play two roles: 1  as outlines of boundaries between regions and 1  as uniform texture within regions. in this context  one can assume an equivalence between texture detection and spatial frequency/ orientation operators. bajcsy  1   for example  has successfully used measures of spatial frequency and directionality as a concise and complete description of texture. other approaches to texture segmentation also take into account a dual role for edges. marr's  1  terminology for the two 
ways that lines interact is in curvilinear and theta aggregations. lines grouped into boundaries rely on continuation of contour while lines grouped into uniform texture rely on similarity of orientation and spacing for their enhancement and definition. 
       in addition to having u t i l i t y in computer vision there is experimental evidence that human vision uses the dual role of edges in organizing the visual scene. an experiment by frome and levinson  1  produces opposite results depending on whether a subject is asked to adjust the shape or the spacing of a row of squares. the experiment is this. subjects look at a vertical sine-wave grating for a few minutes. then they look at a row of squares whose size and spacing  spatial frequency  is somewhat smaller  higher  than the size and spacing  spatial frequency  of the bars in the sine-wave grating. size  spatial frequency  contrast  blakemore and sutton  1  
predicts that the squares in the row w i l l appear narrower  higher in spatial frequency . however when subjects are asked to adjust the height of the row before and after adaptation to make the figures look square  the height is increased after adaptation to compensate for a wider  lower spat i a l frequency  appearance. in the same experiment  when subjects are asked to adjust the spacing  spatial frequency   the squares appear more narrowly spaced  higher spatial frequency . 
how does one resolve the paradox of wider size but higher spatial frequency  one does not have to resort to spatial frequency detectors operating independently of outline continuity detectors pre-
liminary to shape detection. all that is necessary is a distribution of edge operators of various 
*work performed under the auspices of the energy research and development administration. 
v i s i o n - 1 : 
1 
sizes and orientations and relational constraints  in relaxation network terminology  or f a c i l i t o r y connectivity  in neural network terminology  such that segments that line up to form continuous contours facilitate each other and bars of a given width  w  facilitate same-sized  parallel bars at a distance 1w away. after adaptation to a grating the interconnections for that particular spatial frequency and orientation are less strong. thus  
perception of frequencies slightly higher than the adapting frequency w i l l be biased away from the adapting frequency  toward even higher frequencies  and vertical contours w i l l be less distinct than horizontal contours. these effects are a l l in the general class of feature contrast effects modeled by montalvo  1 . if we assume that less distinct contours appear shorter  as some computational experiments  zucker  1  would indicate  then squares after adaptation to vertical contours should appear squat. human experimental evidence does show that longer contours are more easily detected  thomas  1 . the converse  however  has not yet been verified. 
　　　　in any case  if we accept such an explanation for the paradox two conclusions important to image processing can be made: 1  the intensity of contours can affect shape qualitatively  and 1  local interactions between edge operators can support two different kinds of global organization simultaneously in the same network. 
