 
　　　a f u l l y automatic lsi wire-bonding system u t i l i z i n g image processing techniques is described. the position recognition system developed is composed of measuring stations  a recognition device  a minicomputer  and cassette tape-recorders. the position of the bonding pad is found  generally in real-time  by the recognition device and computer. the computer calculates positional data of a l l bonding pads and stores them on a cassette tape for a subsequent 
wire-bonding process. the position recognition methods discussed are composed of a thresholding algorithm and a position-finding algorithm. these methods are evaluated from the viewpoint of thresholding s t a b i l i t y   recognition rate and positional accuracy. 
	1  	introduction 
　　　recognition of object position and posture has been recognized as a v i t a l technique in the 
machine perception f i e l d . many studies have been conducted to date in this field and have led to the development of practical techniques such as bolt-tightening robots l   printed-eircuit board d r i l l i n g machines 1   wheel-fitting machines 1   as well as others 1  1 . 
　　　one c r i t i c a l area in which machine perception research is expected to prove especially valuable is automated semiconductor assembly. this is because semiconductor devices have gotten steadily more sophisticated and have been miniaturized to the point where human operation is becoming increasingly problematic. along this line  success has already been realized in developing a new transistor assembly system 1   the f i r s t practical application of a groupcontrolled vision system. 
　　　this paper deals with an approach to the assembly of other semiconductor devices  especially lsi chips. it has been developed in parallel with the transistor assembly system by the same machine perception group. to date  almost a l l lsi assembly processes have already been automated  the notable exception being the position measuring station for wire-bonding. the position recognition technique in this study is designed to rectify this situation  opening the way for f u l l y automated lsi wire-bonding systems and  consequently  more reliable lsi products. 
	1. 	outline of lsi wire-bonding 
　　　an example of an lsi lead-frame prior to assembly is shown in figure 1 a . the close-up photograph in figure 1 b  shows bonding pads distributed in the peripheral portion of the lsi chip. the wire-bonding process is where gold or aluminum wires are bonded and stretched between the bonding pads on the chip and the outer leads on the lead-frame. this process is carried out by numerically-controlled high-speed wire-bonding machines at a speed of 1 seconds/wire by using previously-measured positions of bonding pads. however  the measurement is s t i l l made by operators; either by manually pointing out a typical corner of the chip on a projected image screen or by manually aligning the chip image with the two cross-lines on a magnified view. 
　　　the position recognition technique developed here uses two tv cameras to scan images of two different peripheral portions of a single lsi chip fed automatically into the measuring station. the position of a bonding pad in each f i e l d of vision is then determined approximately by a special image processing hardware and a minicomputer. the computer then calculates positional data of a l l bonding pads and records them on magnetic cassette tape for subsequent bonding. 

 a  lsi lead-frame 
	f i g   1 	lsi lead-frame and bonding pads  

vision-1: mese 

　　　i n i t i a l positional errors  due mainly to previous die-bonding processes  of +1μrn in the x and y directions and ＼1' in an angular direction are inevitable and must be tolerated at the measuring station. the position recognition technique must compensate for the above loading error. it must also have a position 
finding accuracy of less than ＼1 μm to ensure reliable wiring at a l l bonding pads. furthermore  the recognition time and recognition rate should be less than 1 seconds/chip and more than 1 %  respectively  to accommodate various production condition. 
	1. 	position recognition method 
　　　the image input system for lsi chip position recognition is shown in figure 1. in order to assure adequate resolution  two tv cameras and microscope lenses were installed above the lsi chip  which was illuminated by a lamp. shading and geometric distortions were almost completely eliminated by compensation circuitry. the size of each visual f i e l d was set to 1 urn horizontally and 1 μrn v e r t i c a l l y . for our purposes  the size of an lsi chip ranged from 1 to 1 mm square. to accommodate various lsi types and sizes  two independent xy tables were actuated to adjust the camera positions and distances whenever product changoovers  e.g. from 1 to 1 mm chips  become necessary. 
　　　in the process  a frame-feeder feeds lsi chips one by one  into the system's f i e l d of vision. an analog video signal containing target pad information can be obtained from each tv camera. the video signal from each tv camera is sampled and the effective scanning f i e l d is 
divided into 1 x 1 picture elements. thus  one picture element corresponds to 1 μm square. the image processing technique adopted here has two major functions. 
　　　one stably thresholds the analog video signal into a binary image. this thresholding is particularly important in practical image processing. this is because a very simple and high-speed image processor can be realized if stable binary video signals can be assured in spite of a wide range of illumination intens i t i e s   reflection ratio changes for different chips and other variations. 
tional data of an arbitrary pair of pads between 
	the visual fields. 	when a reasonable pair is 
found  a l l other pad positions are calculated from known geometric relations of the 
f i g . 1 image input system for p o s i t i o n  a  analog image  b  binary image recognition of lsi chip. 
	f i g . 1 	images of peripheral part of lsi chip. 
	v i s i o n - 1 : 	mese 
1 　　the other function detects the position of the bonding pad in the image with high accuracy and r e l i a b i l i t y . this position detecting algorithm consists of two successive steps i.e.  1  macroscopic and  1  microscopic. in the f i r s t step  the positions of the bonding pads are detected approximately by using 1 x 1 picture elements sampled in the x and y directions. more accurate positioning is accomplished in the second step with the original picture element resolution. finally  a geometric check is performed for the posi-

　　　the binary image obtained by the  balanced threshold method   developed here  is shown in figure 1 b . the aluminum bonding pad and other parts are discriminated clearly in the figure. 
　　the  balanced threshold method  determines a threshold by successive approximations. first  an a r b i t r a l threshold level is chosen in advance  then the average values higher and lower than the threshold level are calculated. secondly  u t i l i z i n g these average values  the threshold level is modified to a new one. this process is continued n times u n t i l an approximate equilibrium threshold level is attained; where n is a 
             this process is expressed as the following iteration equations: where f   t   is the analog video signal from a tv camera  θ n  is the n-th threshold level  Δfw n  and Δfb n  are the n-th average values higher and lower than θ n   β and 1- β are constants that relate to the weight of Δw n  and Δfθ n    and tw n  and tθ n  are time periods where the image signal is greater and less than θ m . 
　　　this algorithm can be explained more concretely by using a simple signal model to i l l u s t r a t e the meaning of these equations. a signal model with only two brightness levels  fw and fs   whose time periods are tw and tb respectively is shown in figure 1. note that those time intervals are closely related to areas of the scanned image. when f1 θ n  fw and when the second and third terms of equation  1  are rewritten as: 


if Δθ n  becomes comparatively small after several iterations  the threshold given by equation  l  approximates to the equilibrium threshold. 
f i g . 1 relation between b *' and ao  for simple signal model shown in f i g   k 
　　　the relation between 1 ~'and a1{v fot this model is illustrated in figure 1. among the values a1y   j#b   aq  and bo'  at the discontinuous points in the figure  the following equations hold: 



f i g . k 	signal model w i t h two brightness l e v e l s . 
thus  the following relation can be obtained from equation  1 : 
		 1  
therefore  1 is unique regardless of the i n i t i a l threshold value  as shown in figure 1. 
　　　however  the images of lsi chips are not as simple as the model because they usually include various brightness levels. 	suppose that the 
image of an lsi chip involves m major brightness levels. then it can be shown that  at most  m-1 equilibrium thresholds exist. 
　　　however  illumination and reflection are stable enough that the brightness of the aluminum 

v i s l o n - 1 : 	mese 

is always between an upper bound 	and a lower bound 	. 	thus the time periods tw n  and t1 n  should be changed into tw n  and t 	  where 	respectively. 
　　　in this case  the video signal for an lsi chip can be approximated by the model in figure 1. a stable binary video signal  which can cope with the various changes in practical production conditions e.g. illumination changes  reflection ratio changes for each lsi chip  sensitivity d r i f t of the tv cameras  can be obtained by the above  balanced threshold method . 
　　　in order to apply the above algorithm to this system  equations  1  and  1  are converted into sums: 
 1  
 1  

the numerators and denominators in equations  1  and  1  are easily obtained by counting picture elements as image scanning proceeds. the division and multiplication steps in equations  1    1  and  1  are executed by software within the blanking period. 

　　　an actual example of the relation between θ n  and θΔ n  for an lsi chip is shown in figure 1. here  the video signal is quantized into 1 levels and typical parameters for this case are s hown. 
　　　this thresholding method is essentially equivalent to the method which utilizes the histograrn 1  of the lsi chip brightness d i s t r i bution. however  the processing speed is much faster than that of the histogram method. 
1. position detection algorithm 
　　　the bonding pad of an lsi chip is typically 1 urn square. this corresponds to 1 x 1 picture elements in its image. adjacent to the square portion  the pad has a protruding part on one side edge that joints to inner patterns. in addition the pad usually has a scratch on its surface  as shown in figure 1  caused by the needle probe used in the previous wafer inspection process. 
　　　the position detecting algorithm should accommodate these typical features of bonding pads and stably detect the position of the pads. the algorithm consists of two parts: the macroscopic and microscopic processes. in the macroscopic process  the roughly-sampled image is used  and a pattern matching method is applied. in the microscopic  several rectangular domains are generated  and the white areas in the domains are calculated to determine the position more accurately. 
1 macroscopic processing 
　　　in the macroscopic  the binary video signal of an lsi chip is sampled every four elements to 
yield an 1 x 1 element image. in this case  a pad corresponds to a 1 x 1 element. a preprocessing noise-elimination step is performed on this roughly-sampled image. a template for this procedure is illustrated in figure 1. when the number of white picture elements among 
p1   p1   p1   . . .   p1 is less than four  p1 is regarded as black  otherwise it is regarded as white. thus a simple binary image is obtained in which uneven boundaries and isolated noises are eliminated. 

	fig. 1 	template for noise elimination. 

vision-1: mese 1 

　　　next  the position of the bonding pad is detected by a pattern matching method  as 
illustrated in figure 1. four templates kl   a1' a1 and a1 are scanned in parallel over the input image pattern to determine whether the input pattern is matched. the size of each template is 1 x 1 picture elements. its standard pattern is equal to each corner of the bonding pad to be detected. let uij be a standard pattern  dij be a  don't-care  pattern and i i j be an input pattern corresponding to a domain ak  where k = l   . . .   1   . the matching result mk is given as follows: 
		 1  
this equation means that the mk in the template ak is   1   when uij matches i i j except for dij =   l     otherwise  1 . 
	1 	microscopic processing 
　　　s t r i c t l y speaking  the macroscopic processing finds only pad candidates. this is because there can be other patterns in the image which resemble pads. 
　　　the f i r s t microscopic processing step checks and classifies the type of pads by investigating the j o i n t terminal direction of the candidate for every picture element. in the process four rectangular domains are generated around the candidate  as illustrated in figure 1 a . in the process  four rectangulrr domains are generated around the candidate. white areas s1   s1   s1   and s1 are then measured. in the example of the figure  the following conditions are checked: 
	s1  	s1  	s1 	  	sb 	  	su 	 1   
where sb 	and sw are appropriate threshold 

values. only when relation  1  holds  the candidate is accepted as a bonding pad. 
fig. 1 	position finding method by pattern 	 b  position modification of every corner. matching. 
	fig. 1 	microscopic processing. 
vision-1: mese 

　　　the second step detects the position of the pad. 	for this purpose  several minor rectangular domains are set around the corners as illustrated in figure 1 b   depending on the results of the previous step. 	thus  the x and y positions of the corners are determined by calculating the white areas in the domains at the resolution of the original picture. 	for example  when area sy 	is detected at a domain whose center position in the y direction is ymas shown in figure 1  the precise y coordinate becomes: 
		 	1	  
thus  the position of the corners  except for any missed corners  are determined. 
　　　lastly  the center of the bonding pad is calculated. here  the joint terminal and the position of the scratch inside the pad are taken into consideration. for example in figure 1  
the center coordinates  xc yc  of the bonding pad are calculated as follows: 

	fig. 1 	example of position modification. 
 1  
 1  
here  x1   y1   and  x1   y1   are coordinates of corners q1 and q1   and y1 is the y coordinate of corner q1 in the figure. the second term in equation  1  means l/1 of the pad size  in picture element. 
1. system configuration and results 
	1 	recognition system 
　　　a position detection system based on these method has been constructed  see figures 1  1 . 

f i g . 1 	general view of p o s i t i o n recognition system for lsi chips. 

　　　it consists of four measuring stations involving image input tv cameras  a recognition device  a mini-computer hitac-1 ii  1 b i t   
1 kw  and cassette tape-recorders  as shown in figure 1. a maximum of four measuring stations can be controlled in parallel by a single recognition device and the mini-computer. 
　　　in the recognition device  an integration c i r c u i t for thresholding calculates the four integrated values in the numerators and 
denominators in equations  1  and  1 . this c i r c u i t basically consists of an ad converter and four counters. the noise elimination circuit and the pattern matching c i r c u i t are the macroscopic processing circuits  and send positions of pad candidates to the computer. in the pattern matching c i r c u i t   several line memories are used to pick up a local image in the real-time mode. 
　　　in accordance with the positional data of the candidates  the computer sends several sets of rectangular domain positions to the two groups of white area counters which do the microscopic processing. the counted data are sent back to the computer  which checks the terminal direction and calculates the position of the bonding pad. these information transfers are executed by the interface circuit using direct memory access  dma  as well as multi-level interrupting functions. the selector is used to determine the appropriate measuring stations  tv cameras  and image processing circuits depending on the processing sequence. some of these are selected in parallel to enable simultaneous processing. 
　　　a time chart of the image processing is shown in figure 1. as illustrated  three fields are devoted to thresholding. pattern matching is done by one f i e l d . direction finding of the j o i n t terminal is accomplished by one f i e l d . at the same time  position adjustment of each corner is effected by one f i e l d . one field is equal to 1 ms. thus  total image processing time becomes 1 ms. in addition  however  there is some lag due to the diminishing after-image effect of the tv camera and other software computing time. therefore  overall position locating time becomes approximately 1 ms at maximum. this is well within the i n i t i a l target time of 1 ms. the results of each image processing sequence is shown in figure 1 a  to 
 d . 
	1 	test result 
　　　the recognition methods discussed here are evaluated from three points of view:  1  effectiveness of the thresholding method   1  recogni-
tion rate  and  1  positional accuracy. 
 1  in practical production lines  various disturbances must be considered  especially the effects of: 
 a  intensity changes of the illumination   b  positional change in the image f i e l d   and  c  lens focus. 

the system was tested by changing illumination ＼ 1 ＜/o from its normal intensity. to determine positional dependence  position are altered t   1μ m along both x and y directions. to investigate the effect of lens focus  the 
vertical position of the chip is varied +1μm along the optical axis. 
　　the results are shown in figure 1. each cross-sectioned region gives correct operation of the recognition algorithm as long as a threshold value in the region is adopted. thus  each median axis of the region corresponds to the threshold with the highest margin for pad recognition. as a result of the evaluation  the optimum thresholding parameters are follows: n=1  a=1  b=1  when analog video signals are quantized into 1 intensity levels. the optimum value of ft is determined to be 1 by finding the minimum standard deviation from the median axis. the relation between ft and the corresponding standard deviation is shown in pipure 1. 
 1  

 a.  illumination  b  positional change  c  lens focus μm  intensity change %  in image field  μm  
fig. 1 threshold change due to various disturbance factors. 
	vision-1: 	mesr 
1 

 1  for positional accuracy testing  three representative types of lsi chips were selected. the results are shown in table 1. the recognition accuracy was ＼1 μm  well within the i n i t i a l target of ＼ 1 urn. 
	table 1 	recognition r a t e . 

1. conclusion 
　　　position recognition methods for lsi chips were discussed  as applications of image processing techniques. the methods developed here depends on a stable thresholding algorithm and a two-step position finding algorithm. the recognition rate and accuracy for these methods were well within the targpt ranges. the completion of this system makes high-speed automatic assembly of lsi packages feasible  and avoids human errors encountered in previous positioning techniques. 
1. acknowledgment 
the authors wish to thank jun suzuki  
department manager of equipment developing 
department in semiconductor and integrated circuit division  hitachi l t d .   for his insights invaluable arrangements. thanks are also due to dr. hiroshi watanabe  general manager  dr. jun 
kawasaki  department manager  of central research laboratory  hitachi ltd.  as well as many others who contributed to the realization of this system  for their help and encouragement in carrying out this study. 
	1. 	