 
this paper describes a means by which a scene can be s p l i t into named subparts  and these subparts can interact to produce an interpretation which is a description of the objects present in the scene. the procedure is in two parts - a set of labels is assigned to each element of the scene  and these sets are decreased in size by examining the allowable relationships between named elements. an application of the procedure to the domain of surfaces produced by the ranger at edinburgh university is presented. 
1. introduction 
this paper provides an algorithm with general applications in segmentation and classification. in the recognition domain it uses explicit models of bodies occurring in laboratory-
created scenes  the models being specified by surfaces and the relations between them. in i t s operation it displays some of the features 
which have been found to be useful in analyzing naturally-occurring scenes  yakimovsky and feldman  1  . the j u s t i f i c a t i o n for presenting this approach is that it makes better use of the information available in the scene than earlier systems  and performs less search. the purpose of the system is to interpret a  scene  by attaching to each input scene element at least one  and preferably only one  name - the name of the body whose image the scene element is a part of. an example of the use of the algorithm is presented in section 
1. 
each body model is constructed from surface primitives  which may appear in many different models. relations holding between the primitives in each model serve to differentiate bodies  and play a large part in the recognition  which involves three tasks.  1  scene elements are paired with model primitives  using a matching function.  1  a set of body names is assigned to each pair  using a mapping from primitives to name sets  and establishing an i n i t i a l confidence for each assignment. 
 1  relations holding between surfaces in the scene are used to f i l t e r the sets of names to try to find a unique name for each pair  or  if this is not possible  the set of names with highest global confidence. 
the algorithm presented here has a f a i r l y broadlybased history. the use of relational structure was demonstrated by barrow and popplestone 
 1   and provided with a formal basis by barrow  ambler  and burstall  1 . 
consistency in such networks of relations is discussed by mackworth  1 . the f i l t e r i n g method of waltz  1  is a precursor  and a special case of the present algorithm. waltz provided a  sufficient  enumeration of legal relationships for a subset of line drawings under local restrictions related to their junctions  and a procedure for interpreting such drawings. he dealt only with deterministic confidences - an interpretation was either possible or impossible  and all possible interpretations were equally l i k e l y . 
the use of confidences in assigning interpretations to scenes has become more prevalent recently. 	yakimovsky and feldman  1  use bayesian statistics to analyze real scenes  while hinton  1  makes use of confidences in his relaxation method of finding the best instance of a puppet in a scene containing a 
number of overlapping transparent rectangles. relaxation labelling methods with various confidence relationships between labels and items have been treated formally by rosenfeld  hummel  and zucker  1 . 
barrow and tenenbaum  1a  1b  have independently developed a system similar to this one  but designed for analyzing natural scenes. items in the scenes are assigned a 
set of names  each with an a p r i o r i confidence. relations are then applied between items in the scene to constrain the name sets  and to 
promote the confidence of the most likely global interpretation. 
1. a real system 
a system is being implemented to recognize known bodies appearing in scenes. solutions to the problems of occlusion  shadowing  and 
multiple occurrences of a single body type which work within the greater framework of 
the algorithm are presented. 
models of the bodies are created in a learning phase  and serve as a database for recognition. the input is surface information obtained by means of the edinburgh ranging system 
 popplestone et al  1   popplestone and ambler  1  . because the system uses a triangulation technique  points in the scene 
which are not in the  line of sight  of either of the bases of the triangle are not v i s i b l e . 
the system uses primitive items which are fragments of planes or cylinders  e.g. a 1 inch square   and the relations between them to describe objects. 

v i s i o n - 1 : 	s h n e i e r 
1 

1 models 
1. 

an object to be modelled is placed on a turntable and scanned. it is then rotated to show previously hidden surfaces and scanned again. the views are merged  and a single 1-d set of surfaces is obtained  which encompasses the object. for each surface  certain parameters are calculated  e.g. curvature and extent   and used to form a description of the surface to be stored in the database. at the same time relationships holding between the surfaces are worked out  and added to the model. 
the modeller outputs three things: 
1. a set of primitives  or abstracted surfaces. these contain a description 
of the kind of surface they represent  and the names of the models they areassociated with. 
1. a set of relations. these are legal correspondences  specifying allowed relationships between the primitives  e.g. adjacency . a relation consists of a name  which should be that of an executable function  a l i s t of arguments  
which are primitive surfaces  and an expected value linked to the models for 
which it holds. 
1. a body model  consisting of a name  which is user-supplied  the primitives which 
make up the model  and  for each of these  the relations which involve it and which have been worked out. 
an item to be added to the database does not necessarily go in as a new entry. if i t s characteristics match an element already in the database  the resident element is merely 
updated to reflect any new information. for instance  a primitive may have the same form for many different models  in which case the only new information w i l l be the name of its associated body. 
1. 	recognition 
in the following  the  set of support  is a global l i s t of models which have had primitives assigned to them. 
the algorithm can be divided into three stages. 
 step 1 is concerned with scanning the scene and getting it into a form compatible with the internal representation. the second stage assigns primitives to models in steps 1 to 1 using relatively loose c r i t e r i a . if there is any doubt  a primitive w i l l be added to a candidate model rather than being l e f t out. finally  step 1 has the responsibility of weeding out less favourable assignments. it is better f i t t e d to do this because it has more complete knowledge of the situation than earlier steps. 
1. 
 1. 1. 1. 
the scene is scanned to form surface descriptions. these are matched against primitives in the database  a note being made of which surfaces are occluded or shadowed. a single surface may match  and be associated with  
several primitives  in which case the 
primitives are called linked. occluded and shadowed surfaces match a l l compatible surfaces larger than themselves. 
the surface information is associated with each matching primitive since it w i l l be needed for working out the relations. 
assign those primitive/surface pairs whose primitives appear in only one body model to that model. if two assignments to the same body model are inconsistent   i . e . do not satisfy the relational constraints  the program assumes that there are two distinct bodies with the same model in the scene  and two copies of that model are set up. these i n i t i a l assignments have zero confidence  and give rise to the original set of support. 
while there are s t i l l unassigned primitive/ surface pairs  repeat steps 1 and 1. 
one of the primitive/surface pairs which have yet to be assigned to a model is chosen. since this choice can be important to the efficiency  but not the effectiveness  of the algorithm  it must be carefully made. the pair is chosen which has among i t s candidates the model on the set of support which currently enjoys the highest confidence  should such a pair exist. otherwise  the pair whose primitive best matched with i t s surface in step 1 is chosen. 
 test the relational constraints. the new primitive has a l i s t of candidate models in which it may appear  and  for each of these  a l i s t of relations it should satisfy if it does belong to that model. the new primitive can apply a l l those relations whose other arguments are already instantiated. the actual value is the result of applying the function to the surfaces associated with the primitives. this is compared with the expected outcome  with which  for a success  it must match to within a fixed tolerance. each success enhances the confidence that the arguments belong to the models for which the relation is a constraint  whereas failure reduces confidence only in the s u i t a b i l i t y of the new primitive to these models. a relation may be appropriate to more than one model  so that results propagate without work being repeated. 

v i s i o n - 1 : 	shneier 
1 

on success  the primitive is assigned to 	the process cycles while it is s t i l l a l l models indicated by the relation. 	if 	possible to adjudicate between assignments  
necessary  a body model is activated and there being a smaller number of primitives a l l a relation's arguments are assigned at each step. to i t . 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　when a l l possible assignments have been if no relational tests succeed  assignment made  the models remaining are assumed to of a primitive to a l l models for which it be those of the bodies in the scene. 
is a component  with zero confidence  
	serves as a place marker so that a 	problems with occlusion  shadowing  and multiple 
primitive is not lost. as in step 1  appearances of the same body type are dealt with copies of some models may be needed. by a mixture of confidence ranking and f i l t e r i n g . 
                                                         once a surface has been found to be occluded or when a l l tests are completed  the models 	shadowed  it can be matched with a constrained to which the new primitive was assigned 	set of primitives larger than i t s e l f   with a 
	are added to the set of support if they 	reduced confidence. 	the linking mechanism w i l l 
	are 	not already members. 	then handle the identification in the course of 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　the algorithm. 	linking also provides a way of 1. 	apply f i l t e r i n g to the sets of models 	incorporating ambiguous descriptions. 	multiple assigned in the previous steps. 	an 	instances of models call for a s p l i t t i n g of i n i t i a l confidence in each assignment has 	primitives between copies of the models when 
been worked out  and  on the basis of this  relational tests f a i l . a way is sought to consistently reduce the number of models assigned to each the example shows some of the processes in primitive to one. 	action. 
naturally  any unique assignment should be 1 example retained  as must any whose rivals all 
have zero confidence. 	let the bodies shown in figure 1 constitute the world model and let the relation of relativewhen a l l assignments have positive 	angle be defined between the surfaces making up confidence  the situation is not ao clear. 	the bodies. 	note that while we expect the for the best global solution  the 	relation to have been defined between for consequences both of deleting and 	example surfaces a-c  a-d  and d-c in figure 1  retaining each assignment should be 	the surfaces b-d  and b-c would only coincidently followed in their contexts to a stable 	be so related if there were some body in the solution  and that  with highest overall 	database for which such a relation held. 
	confidence accepted. 	suppose the scene depicted in figure 1 has been 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　scanned from a viewpoint in front of the scene  instead of this complete tree search  the and the following l i s t of surface-primitive i n i t i a l confidence has been allowed to act matches has been made  the underlining 
	as a predictor of the final outcome in 	indicates linked primitives . 
cases where one assignment has overriding 
confidence. where confidences are    g 1   h 1   k 1   l 1   j 1   a 1  nearly equal  this is not j u s t i f i e d   and 
 c 1   c 1   b 1   e 1   d 1   d 1   f 1    
a l l assignments are considered as ambiguous identifications. 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　assigning primitives which point to only one body: clearly  deleting a primitive from a model affects the confidence of a l l 
bl gets  g 1   h 1  
	primitives related to i t . 	their confidence 
must be reduced by the amount by which the b1 gets  l 1   k 1  deleted primitive confirmed their presence 
in the model. this is the way in which since  in the scene  g-h and k-l are  as the f i l t e r i n g is accomplished  confidence expected  at 1 degrees to each other  
reductions causing further deletions else- applying tests between the two primitives where  u n t i l no further changes are assigned to the same body checks out possible. without a backtrack mechanism consistently   i f not two copies would have as described above  the best solution is been made .  l 1  and  k 1  w i l l probably not guaranteed. not match exactly  since  k 1  is occluded. 
linked primitives are treated as multiple with only b 1 and b1 already having assigned assignments for the purpose of conflict primitives  the only possible primitive to analysis  and are deleted if a better match choose next is  j 1   which has bl and b1 is found with one of their links. as candidates. a match with bl  and not with b1  causes assignment of  j 1  to b l   
	and not to b1. 	at this stage the bodies 
	vision-1: 	shneier 
1 
on the set of support  can suggest no further action  so  since not a l l primitives have been accounted for  a new choice must be made. suppose  a 1  is chosen  activating b1 and 
ba. 
there being no tests to be made  the primitive is assigned to both bodies with zero confidence  
and b1 and ba are added to the set of support. 
these bodies want a primitive of type 1 or 1  and suppose they decide on  c 1 . b1 and b1 are activated  and a match is found with b1  so b1 is deleted. note that we now have increased confidence in  a 1  as a member of 
b1. 
if the next primitive examined is  c 1  we again find a match with ba. now we have increased confidence that  a 1  belongs to b1. 
looking for another primitive  we might find 
 b 1   which activates b1 and b1  but matches with neither. an assignment is made to both with zero confidence  a second copy of b1  which t w i l l denote b1'  being set up. 
 e 1  is consistent with  b 1  belonging to b1'  and is assigned to b1'.  d 1  activates both copies of b1  and b1  matches with  c 1  and  a 1  in b1  so is added to b1. it is not added to b1  nor to b1'  since it f a i l s to 
	match. 	 f 1  matches b1' and can be assigned. 
now  d 1  is considered  and matched with ba and b1  giving the f i n a l l i s t of candidates before the f i l t e r i n g as bl b1 b1 b1' ba b1 
 the primitives assigned to more than one body are  d 1    b 1  and  a 1 . 	 d 1  has a much better match in ba than in b1  so is deleted from b1. 	as a result  the confidence that  b 1  belongs in b1 is reduced to zero. 	 b 1  now has zero confidence in b1  but has found 
a match in b1. thus  b 1  is removed from b1  which can be deleted since it has no more primitives assigned to i t .  a 1   however  has a significant confidence in both b1 and b1. it remains associated with both these bodies  pending further f i l t e r i n g . 
it is discovered that there are linked primitives in b1 and ba. the confidence levels in each 
are much the same  so nothing can be deleted  and an ambiguous result is announced. 
there being nothing else to examine  the f i n a l set of bodies recognised i s : 
bl  b1  b1  and  b1 or ba  
1. discussion 
the system described is in an advanced state of implementation. the modeller is f u l l y 
operational  while the recognizer works on simple scenes containing single objects. 
	v i s i o n - 1 : 	shneier 
1 

symmetry in bodies is handled uniformly  with only one match being found with a model  rather than a l l isomorphic matches. this is because primitives can occur only once in any model  although instances can be related to several surfaces  and can take up relationships with other instances. for example  a cube model would contain a single square plane primitive  with relations like perpendicular-to holding between some of i t s instances. 
using confidence levels rather than deterministic constraints makes reducing the size of the name sets more d i f f i c u l t . while it is easy to add new names on the basis of even the flimsiest evidence  a deletion must be strongly indicated before the risk of discarding a name can be taken. 
d. michie . 	university press  edinburgh. 
h.g. barrow and j.m. tenenbaum  1a :  msys: a system for reasoning about scenes.  sri technical note 1. 
g. hinton  1 :  using relaxation to find a puppet.  proc aisb summer conference  edinburgh. 
a.k. mackworth  1 : 	 consistency in 
networks of relations. ai journal vol 1  no 1. 
r.j. popplestone and a.p. ambler  1 : 
 forming body models from range data.  dai research report  university of edinburgh  to appear. 

the representation makes models easy to learn  and allows great f l e x i b i l i t y in the kinds of information known about individual models. relations which are useful in describing one class of bodies may be unsuitable for others  or information not directly relevant to recognition may be needed for later processing. since the model indicates which relations to apply  different models can be described in different terms  but instances w i l l s t i l l be recognized in a single scene. 
given a vision system with some mobility  it might be possible to disambiguate scenes by moving to another viewing angle  and looking again. only the particular bodies of interest need be examined  their absolute positions being known. the candidate models can be restricted to those in the ambiguous set  cutting down the amount of f i l t e r i n g needed. this a b i l i t y to 
work  top down  from the model to i t s instances is obtained by restricting the system to look 
only for primitives needed by the particular model  and only applying relations suggested by 
the model. it has applications in automatic assembly when particular parts need to be searched for. 
clearly  the method is highly dependent on the amount of information available. the more contraints that can be applied  the fewer ambiguities w i l l result. the efficiency is a function both of the number and type of constraints  and of the way they are represented. it can be conjectured that  given sufficient information  there would be no need for any search. 
