 
     this paper describes a computer-based system for consultation in the diagnosis and therapy of glaucoma. the reasoning procedures interpret the findings of a particular patient in terms of a causal-associational network  casnet  model that characterizes the pathophysiological mechanisms and clinical course of treated and untreated diseases. 
	the 	major 	new 	features 	of 	this 
casnet/glaucoma program are: a  generation of detailed and medically acceptable interpretations from a qualitative model of glaucoma; b  reasoning about detailed follow-up management of a patient; c  incorporation of alternative expert opinions about subjects under debate; and d  its testing and updating by a collaborative computer-based network of glaucoma researchers. 
introduction 
     consultation with a specialist is often sought by a practitioner who encounters a particularly complex case  or one that fails to respond to conventional courses of therapy. the consultant brings to bear detailed and up-to-date information from research and clinical practice in several principal tasks: elicitation of patient history  performance of the physical examination  selection of tests to be performed  and the subsequent interpretation of the case and recommendations for therapy. a computer consultation system that incorporates the knowledge and experience of expert clinicians can be a flexible and useful tool for providing advice in at least three of the above tasks. 
     in the past few years  artificial intelligence  ai  ideas and methods have been proposed and applied to problems of medical decision-making  1 1 1 . we have developed an approach that uses a causal-associational network  casnet  model of disease to represent the medical knowledge to be used in reasoning about a given patient  1 1 . 
  this research was supported in part by grants rr-1 of the nih biotechnology resources program  and 1-r1-mb-1 of the health resources administration  hew. 
     in this paper we report on a high performance consultation program for the diagnosis  prognosis  and therapy of glaucoma based on a casnet model. this casnet/glaucoma program provides consultation for complex clinical cases  including those with involved histories and multiple follow-up visits. our approach has  been to separate the descriptive model of disease from the decision-making strategies. although the data base of medical knowledge constantly changes to incorporate current research  the strategies of decision-making should be able to  roam over  that data base without needing change. we also wanted a model of disease that could generate strategies for explanation  question-answering  teaching  and testing as well as those for diagnoses  prognoses  and therapies. our representation is best suited for qualitative descriptions of diseases as dynamically evolving processes. we use a causal network of events to express the mechanisms of the disease. this formal framework for the prediction and assessment of the time course of the disease before and after treatment has proven to be both an efficient and realistic representation for several types of diseases. reasoning about the selection of long-term sequences of therapies based on an explicit descriptive model of disease is a characteristic feature of the casnet method  in contrast to mycin's purely normative or rule-based approach  and the concentration on diagnostic reasoning that characterizes the internist  and present illness  1  programs. pople has compared the first three approaches in terms of their inferential methods . 
     an important characteristic of our system is that it can present alternative opinions derived from different consultants. to obtain a variety of opinions we have established a national network of collaborating investigator-consultants who share in the 
development and testing of the program . this ophthalmological network  or onet  includes glaucoma researchers at the mt. sinai school of medicine  washington university  johns hopkins 
university  	the 	university of 	illinois 	at 
chicago  and the university of miami. the onet members present the computer consultation program with a variety of complex cases  and 

specialized systems-1: weiss 1 

weigh its performance against their own judgements. their subsequent suggestions are used to refine the diagnostic and therapeutic recommendations  to improve the system's assessment of signs and symptoms  and to perfect specific techniques for acquiring and displaying clinical data. a model-building and editing program for designing casnet-type models has also been developed . this facilitates the incorporation of new information into the glaucoma model or other models of disease. to establish a data base composed of the glaucoma cases presented to the system  we have designed data analysis programs  compatible with our models. these permit a review of individual cases over time  as well as the selection of groups of cases according to specified conditions. one of our goals is to develop a mechanism for the routine inclusion of significant new results from current research. because these are included in the program as they are produced by clinical researchers  they enhance the program's capabilities as a teaching tool as well as a consultant. 
description of the problem domain 
     our fundamental approach has been to develop methods for describing diseases in terms of models that incorporate current medical knowledge from a variety of sources. because we wished to include in our model a detailed description of the disease process  we restricted our initial design to a medical problem that is well-defined and circumscribed  yet important enough to elicit interest from the clinical research community. glaucoma was chosen with these constraints in mind. the eye can be adequately described in terms of relatively few anatomical structures  and glaucoma is a disease whose mechanisms are largely limited to the eye. yet  glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness in the united states  and a disease whose subtleties are often overlooked until irreparable loss of vision has occurred. 
     several prototype models of diseases other than glaucoma have been developed using the casnet representation  e.g. diabetes  anemias  thyroid .diseases . in comparing these experiences  we have obtained some insight into the advantages and limitations of the casnet modeling approach. when an understanding of the mechanisms of disease serves as a basis for decision-making  the casnet approach is most valuable. when reasoning is mostly judgmental  and based more on empirical information than knowledge of the disease mechanisms  other decision models may prove more appropriate  1 . 
     the mechanisms of glaucoma  1 are sufficiently well known that they can be used to explain most of the observed patterns of patient findings in terms of causal models  at least to a first approximation. although some aspects of the disease are as yet not well understood  those mechanisms that are known provide a rational framework for diagnostic interpretation and therapeutic planning. in glaucoma  understanding of the different alternative mechanisms and causative factors directly affects choices of therapies. a clinically useful in-depth model can thus be developed. in contrast  less well-understood diseases  such as inflammatory disorders within the eye  would be poor choices for developing a prototype model  because they follow a more varied and unpredictable course for which detailed mechanisms are as yet poorly understood. 
causal associational network  casnet  models 
     a causal-associational network is a particular type of semantic network  designed to describe: 
a  pathophysiological mechanisms by 	causal pathways  
b  external observations by an associational structure related to the pathophysiological states  
c  diseases by classifications imposed on 	the above. 
     casnet models can be used to describe many different complex processes  although we have developed them to describe pathophysiological medical events . knowledge  in our scheme  is represented by three types of data elements  corresponding to the three kinds of description outlined above. these are: observations of the patient; states of the causal net; and the diagnostic  prognostic  and therapeutic categories. observations are the direct evidence obtained about a patient. pathophysiological states are intermediate constructs that describe conditions or mechanisms that sunmarize results from many different observations. categories of disease are conceptually at the highest level of abstraction  stmmarizing both states and observations. an illustrative example is shown in figure 1. 
     typical relationships between the elements are as follows: 
a observations-to-state: 
  decreased visual acuity  and  perimetry: paracentral scotoma   -implies-   field loss  with strong confidence  level 1 . 
b state-to-state: 
 elevated 	intraocular 	pressure  	-causes-   
 field 	loss   	with 	frequency 	 often 	- level 
specializert systems-1: weiss 1 1 . 
   c state-to-disease category:  elevated intraocular pressure  and  no field loss   
-implies-   high risk glaucoma suspect  under the condition that  open angle glaucoma mechanism  has been confirmed. 
the consultation program; casnet/glaucoma 
     casnet/glaucoma is an interactive program running in 1k words of memory on the pdp-1 computer under either the tops-1 or tenex operating systems. because of speed and efficiency considerations  it is written in fortran. modifications and updating of the glaucoma model are carried out by interaction with a separate editing program   written in snobol. this program checks the model for consistency and compiles it so that it will run efficiently under casnet/glaucoma. 
diagnostic interpretation: 
     diagnosis is implemented by first interpreting the patient's observations in terms 
of their underlying pathophysiological states. a three-valued logic  confirmed  denied  undetermined  is used to summarize the truth value of each state taken as a hypothesis for the patient. the truth value is derived by setting a threshold on the confidence measures of all applicable observation-to-state mappings. diagnoses are then triggered by various configurations of confirmed and denied states within the causal network. 
     an important aspect of our approach is that we consider diagnostic interpretation to be much more than the simple assignment of a patient to some pre-specified category. evaluation of the patient's status is an on-going dynamic process. the patient's clinical status is re-evaluated on successive visits as changes in the presenting signs occur. the causal model summarizes the findings  and guides in the construction of diagnostic and prognostic hypotheses. these hypotheses may be simple hypotheses  such as  very elevated -intraocular pressure  or more complex hypotheses  composed of a set of related simple hypotheses  such as  chronic angle closure glaucoma.  all hypotheses may include modifiers that further specify a condition by its intensity  duration  progression  topographical distribution  or other characterizing features. 
     in addition  the statement of the hypothesis will often include a qualitative  verbal estimate of its degree of confirmation  e.g.  very strong likelihood of developing field loss  . thus  although several measures of confirmation are used in the computations that lead to the selection of the elements that form a hypothesis  no explicit weight has been attached to a hypothesis itself. this has been adequate for glaucoma. extensions of the casnet model approach may involve the assignment of 
weights for ranking hypotheses. 
generation of treatment recommendations 
     among the major factors affecting therapy selection  we consider current diagnostic status  past history  and the desired expected outcome for the patient. once the patient is undergoing treatment  the effectiveness of the current medication must be assessed  and new factors considered  such as side effects  complications of the disease for which the current therapy is not effective  conditions not detected at the initial visit  etc. an important aspect of our system is that it does not  freeze  past diagnoses as a permanent interpretation  though past diagnoses can be recalled. at each follow-up visit  the entire past history and set of updated findings are re-evaluated  and the possibility of a modified diagnosis considered. 
　　　the main representational elements that enter into the generation of a therapy recommendation are illustrated in figure 1. each diagnostic conclusion points to a general class of therapies  represented as a ranked preference list of specific therapy states. the glaucoma experts have been able to specify various typical sequences of treatments that they follow as the disease fails to be adequately controlled by a therapy at the previous stage. thus  the ranking within each general class reflects an increasing degree of severity in the disease and the corresponding treatment. to choose a specific therapy within a given general class  the detailed findings of the individual patient must be taken into consideration. factors that do not directly bear on the diagnostic interpretation  allergies  occupational constraints  etc.  often affect the choice of therapy. each specific therapy state is assigned a weight  derived from the observations  indicating a measure of confidence in the success of a 
　　　treatment. the treatment with the highest weight is selected from the list of treatments within a single general class. this scheme permits encoding of conditions that trigger selection of a therapy at a higher level of severity  bypassing the lower-ranked ones  indicated by transition paths in figure 1 . for example  if progression of visual field loss occurs more rapidly than expected  a higher dosage of the controlling medication is likely to be suggested. 
     if several different treatment recommendations classes are derived frocri the diagnostic conclusions a master list is 

specialized systpms-1: weiss 
1 

consulted to see if any of the tentatively recommended treatments is covered by the others and is therefore unnecessary  or if there is the possibility of drug interactions or if there is some binocular constraint that must be taken into account. such restriction rules are indicated by the arrows labelled r1 r1 r1 in figure 1. if complications arise from a treatment  or if the original diagnosis is subsequently found to be incorrect  this will lead to a new diagnostic categorization of the patient  which in turn will lead to the selection of a new general class of therapies. 
further information and research studies 
　　　there are currently over 1 possible diagnosis and therapy statements  many of which are not mutually exclusive. for most cases  more than a single statement will be appropriate. these conclusions and recommendations are often explanatory in nature  and summarize particularly significant features of a case. these statements reflect the judgement of our panel of experts and may contain alternative recommendations for diagnoses and therapies. even so  they must be concise and brief. another section of the program has been designed to amplify the conclusions in some cases. it emphasizes citations from research studies  and quotations from experts to support the program's conclusions. partial or alternative results from studies that may not yet be ready for incorporation into the logic of the model are .also included here. the diagnostic and therapy recommendations  for a patient with pigmentary glaucoma  followed over an extended period of time  are illustrated in figure 1. the additional commentary on this form of glaucoma is shown for the first visit of this patient. 
results and discussion 
     the consultation program was developed in the course of an investigation into the use of artificial intelligence approaches to the representation of disease processes for computer-based consultation. from this evolved the causal associational network  casnet  representation  with glaucoma chosen as the disease which would serve for the development of a prototype program. as work progressed  the goals became more clearly those of developing an expert consultation system  in collaboration with a network of glaucoma researchers. 
     because the program's logic is contained in general strategies that analyze the casnet model  it is relatively easy to incorporate new medical knowledge or improve existing parts of the model by increasing its depth and breadth of description. the prototype model  which covered the description of the disease in a single eye for a single visit of the patient  was succeeded by a binocular model  which in turn evolved into a model that incorporated follow-up visit information. 
　　　early in our work  we collected a sample of 1 difficult cases. initially  the program did not classify  diagnose  all cases correctly. however  as our model improved  it was soon able to diagnose the 1 cases correctly. this result demonstrated  at a relatively early stage  that our approach did provide an incremental means of improving the program's performance. we became confident that poor or inaccurate conclusions could be corrected  that cases diagnosed correctly would remain correct  and that diagnostic and therapeutic recommendations could be improved. 
　　　this first cycle of development was followed by a second stage  which began when an improved prototype of the glaucoma consultation program was presented at the annual meeting of the association for research in vision and ophthalmology in 1. interest in the program  arising from this demonstration of its capabilities  led to the collaboration with several expert glaucoma researchers. it was hoped that their advice would result in a program that could provide consultation at a 
　　　sophisticated level. another motivation for this approach was the authors' desire to test the applicability of the consultation system as a tool for clinical research. the consultation system would serve as a point of entry for difficult clinical cases. a data base of such cases would then be accumulated to test the consultation program. statistical analysis of the data might provide new insights into the disease process itself. 
　　　since 1  researchers from the five different medical centers participating in the ophthalmological network  onet  have been accessing and testing the glaucoma consulation program. each has chosen a sub-specialty of glaucoma for testing and developing the program in depth. many subtleties of description and reasoning in several types of glaucoma  primary open angle  angle closure  and the secondary glaucomas  have been added in this manner. in addition each onet member is free to enter any case of glaucoma  and is also able to review the cases entered by his colleagues. there are periodic meetings of the onet group at which opinions on the different glaucoma topics are discussed and compared. thus  the sources for alternative opinions that are incorporated into the program include: a an onet member's comments about another's cases; b suggestions by the originator of a case on alternative conclusions; c systematic review by the 

socializerl systems-1: weiss 1 

computer science group  which discovers differences in the handling of similar cases; d review of the research literature that suggests new alternatives. 
　　　although we currently have several hundred cases on f i l e   it is difficult to evaluate progran performance in a simple manner. classifying conclusions as being merely correct or incorrect is an oversimplification. the program's conclusions are presented not as single unique diagnoses but rather as cambinations of judgments about a patient's status. these may include such factors as: the type and severity of disease  evaluation of current therapy  and recommendations for future testing or therapy. in an objective evaluation of program performance  each of these elements must be considered. most of the cases selected by our clinical collaborators are complex and difficult ones requiring expert judgment. our sample of cases has thus been deliberately biased to enable us to develop an expert consultant program rather than one that merely does well in a large percentage of typical glaucoma cases. the onet members have estimated that the program arrives at reasonable and often sophisticated judgments in about 1% of the 
difficult cases of glaucoma . 
　　　the casnet/glaucoma system was subject to an intensive evaluation by a large and varied group of ophthalmologists during the 1 meeting of the american academy of ophthalmology and otolaryngology. the consultation program was used to summarize results of cases and present its recommendations  contrasting them to the opinions of a panel of experts  at the glaucoma symposium just preceding the formal opening of the academy convention. the cases had been entered into the computer in advance of the symposium  but the program's conclusions were left unaltered. the panel gave a variety of opinions about the cases  and in almost all of them the program included in its alternatives the main interpretation given by the panel. 
     we also tested the program in a more detailed manner. it was one of the scientific exhibits at the academy meeting. it was displayed and made available for testing by a l l conference attendees. evaluation questionnaires were filled out by those ophthalmologists who tested the program. forty nine responses were obtained. the results are summarized in table 
i. 
     a 1% acceptance rate for clinical proficiency in the sample questioned is high 
given the amount of unknown material presented to the consultation system by the ophthalmologists  who were encouraged to test it with their difficult cases. the two cases  1%  in which the program was judged to perform inadequately corresponded to situations in which diseases other than glaucoma formed a significant part of the diagnosis  and the appropriate information had not yet been included in the model. the 1% rate of high competence  the  expert  and  very competent  responses  ascribed to the system by this independent sample of ophthalmologists accords well with the previously cited judgement of our glaucoma collaborators. efforts currently being devoted to including alternative expert opinions in complex cases are expected to improve this performance index in the coming year. the answers to the second question listed in table i indicate the strong potential that the ophthalmologists saw in using the consultation program as a support tool for organizing clinical trials  and for summarizing and analyzing their results. 
　　　it is interesting to observe the differences between the responses to the second and third questions. clearly  the ophthalmologists see an important ultimate contribution to health care  1% for very or moderately important   but this is secondary to the applicability to glaucoma research  1% for the two top responses . 
references 
 kulikowski  c. and weiss  s.  computer- based models of glaucoma  
	computers in biomedicine 	technical 	report 
no.1. department of computer science  rutgers university  1. 
 amarel  s. and kulikowski  c  medical decision-making and computer modeling  in proc. fifth hawaii international conf. on systems science  1  1. 
 shortliffe  e.h.  axline  s.g.  buchanan  b.g.  herigan  t.c.  and cohen  s.n.  an 
artificial intelligence program to advise physicians regarding antimicrobial therapy. 
	computers in biomedical 	research 	1  	1  
1. 
 pople  h.e.  jr.  myers  j.d. and miller  r.a.  dialog: a model of diagnostic logic for internal medicine  proc. 1th ijcai; 1: 1  1. 
 rubin  a.  the role of hypotheses in medical diagnosis  proc. 1th ijcai  1: 1  1. 
 weiss  s.  a system for model-based computer-aided diagnosis and therapy. ph.d dissertation  rutgers university  1. 
 pauker  s.g.  gorry  g.a.  kassirer  j.p.  and schwartz  w.b.  towards the simulation of clinical cognition  american journal of medicine  1  1  june 1. 
 pople  h.e.  artificial intelligence approaches to computer based medical consultation  proc. ieee intercon 

specialized systens-1: weiss 
1 

conference  1. 
 kulikowski  c  weiss  s.  trigoboff  m.  safir  a.  clinical consultation and the 
	representation of disease processes: 	some 
	ai 	approaches  	proceedings 	of 	the 
conference on artificial intelligence and the simulation of behaviour  july  1  
	pp. 	1. 
 kulikowski  c. and weiss  s.  an interactive facility for the inferential 
	modeling of disease  	in 	proceedings 	1 
princeton 	conference 	on 	information sciences and systems  	p. 	1. 
 weiss  s.  kern  k.  	kulikowski  	c. 	and 
	safir  	a  	a 	system 	for 	interactive 
	analysis 	of 	a 	time-sequenced 
ophthalmological data base. proc. third illinois conference on medical information systems  1. 
 patrick  e.a.  stelmack  f.p.  and shen  l.y   review of pattern recognition in 
medical diagnosis and consulting relative to a new system model  ieee trans.  smc-1  1 . 
 kolker  a.e. and hetherington  j .   becker-snaffer's diagnosis and therapy of the glaucomas  c.v. mosby co. 1rd 
edition  1. 
 duke-elder  s.  systems of ophthalmology  vol.1  c.v.mosby co.  st. louis  1. 
 woods  w.  wnat's in a link  foundations for semantic networks  in representation and understanding   bobrow and collins  eds.  academic press  1. 
 kass  	m.  	wilensky 	j .   	personal communications. 

specialized systems-1: welss 
1 

*diagnosis and therapy* 
*****visit 1: 
	  right eye: 	* 
 1  present diagnostic status: 
	pigmentary 	glaucoma. 	open 	angle 	glaucoma  
characteristic 	visual 	field 	loss 	with corresponding disc changes. 	early field loss. 
 1  treatment recommendations: 
pilocarpine 1% qid. 
****research studies**** 
alternative 	interpretations 	of 	pigmentary glaucoma: 
.secondary glaucoma 
　　　.primary open angle glaucoma 