 
       an approach to the use of machine generated contextual knowledge for the analysis of diagnostic behavior in medicine has been developed. the approach is illustrated by reference to examiner  a system whose contextual knowledge is derived through use of the internist data base and diagnostic system l . examiner acquires a user's characterization of a medical case in light of this contextual knowledge and analyzes it to generate commentary regarding notable aspects of the user's characterization. 
	1. 	introduction 
1 	task domain 
       until 1 one section of the medical board examinations for internal medicine required a candidate to investigate actual cases and to present his analysis of the cases to a medical examiner. the candidate could ask the examiner for information regarding laboratory findings and other information pertinent to the case. similarly the examiner would ask questions to get at aspects of the candidates behavior about which he was unclear. in evaluating the candidate  the examiner would be concerned about such questions as  how well does the candidate get the pertinent information     how well does he use the information that he does get     is the candidate able to put together an adquate global description of the case  . in his written evaluation the examiner would describe critical incidents in the candidate's analysis of the case  and he would indicate the conclusions with respect to the candidate's competence that he had drawn on the basis of these incidents and the candidate's behavior in general.  in the process of carrying out this examination  the examiner used his knowledge of medicine  his knowledge of the principles of good diagnostic behavior  his perception of the case under consideration  and his understanding of the candidate's view of the case. 
       it might reasonably be expected that a machine-based system intended to provide an evaluation similar to that made by the examiner also requires knowledge of medicine  knowledge of the principles of good diagnostic practice  a perception of the case under consideration  and an understanding of the candidate's view of the case. in this paper we present an approach to the representation and use of these parcels of knowledge by describing a rudimentary system which embodies the approach in order to provide evaluative commentary about a user's diagnostic characterization of a case in internal medicine. 
       after a brief discussion of the challenging aspects of this task domain  descriptions of the system's external behavior  data structures  and evaluation process are presented. 	finally a sample case run is presented to illustrate the system's behavior. 
1. 	characteristics of the problem 
       in order for a machine-based representation of the above mentioned parcels of knowledge to be effective as a basis for evaluation  the following concerns seem critical: 
       1. it must be possible to represent a characterization of the case in such a way that the medical person can express his view of it in adequate detail. this may include general and specific indications of the primary and related problems as well as indications of the findings for which these individual diseases may be expected to account. he should be able to express alternatives to any of the diseases he suggests. and he should be able to indicate his characterization in whatever level of detail he considers appropriate. 
       1. the principles of diagnosis must be represented in such a way that some process may apply them to these characterizations so as to allow conclusions regarding the value of the characterization with respect to the principles. an example of such a principle is the idea that a simple diagnosis should be preferred to a complicated one provided the two are equivalent in explanatory power. 
       1. medical knowledge  both relational and algorithmic  must be available in order to provide a medical context within which the user's characterization of a case can be interpreted. 
       the manner in which examiner addresses these requirements is the subject of the description which follows. 
	1. 	implement at ion 
1. format 
specialized systems-1: oleson 
1      as presently configured  the observable behavior of the examiner system manifests itself in three discrete processes. 	the first process specifies the manifestations from a case in 
internal medicine. the second process e l i c i t s from the user his characterization of the disease processes present in the case. the t h i r d process presents the analysis in the form of commentary regarding the characterization. 
1.1. 	case specification 
　　　the specification of the medical information from the case to be analyzed may occur in one of two modes. the f i r s t provides cases with which the user has had no previous experience. these cases have been defined by medical people who have access to a l l information regarding the case. a program which e l i c i t s and stores this information in machine readable form is used. when the case is selected for use  it is brought into core and the relevant findings of the case are indicated to the user. 
　　　the second mode allows the user to specify a case with which he is familiar. the positive and negative findings from the case are entered by the user and used as the basis for analysis. 
1.1. 	character!zat i on 
　　　the characterization phase requires the user to indicate his perception of the important aspects of the case. the process generates a data structure to be used by the next phase. 
　　　a number of types of information were found to be of interest in the characterization of a 
　　　case and primitives were developed to allow the user to express the information he considered c r i t i c a l without burdening him with undue detail. a description of the meanings of these primitives is now given: 
　　　the primary-problem primitive is used to indicate the disease or type of disease which is considered to be the likely cause of the important aspects of the case. if alternatives are considered equally l i k e l y   they may be specified by the or primitive here and elsewhere. 
　　　if any of the diseases indicated are generic disease  the specific disease or diseases considered most likely may be indicated by the primitive specifically. 
　　　the related-possibility primitive is used to indicate diseases which are considered by the user to be possibly present and which are linked to diseases already indicated as possible in the case. the related possibilities should include those diseases which are linked to other mentioned diseases either causally  systemically  or by simple co-occurence. 
　　　mother-independent-problem is a primitive used to indicate a disease process which appears to have no connection to the primary problem or other previously mentioned problems. 
　　　accounting-for is the primitive used to specify manifestations which the antecedent disease explains. 
　　　through use of these primitives  the user is expected to indicate his perception of the case. the representation of this characterization then serves as the basis for the analysis that is undertaken. 
1.1. 	comment ary 
　　　the commentary is made in the form of scripts relating to the observations attendant upon the user's characterization. indications of the manifestations and diseases pertinent to the comment are put out as appropriate inserts in the context of the scripts. 
1 repre sentation 
　　　the four types of data requiring special representation in the system are now described. 
　　　the medical case: a pre-stored case is represented as a l i s t of positive and negative findings. these are printed for the user and 
kept in core for use by the analysis programs. 
　　　similarly with user defined cases  the truth values for the known manifestations are specified by the user and stored as l i s t s for use by the programs. 
　　　static medical knowledge: a large data base of medical knowledge is accessable for use by the system. this is the internist data base. itcontains bidirectional pointers between the diseases and manifestations in the domain of internal medicine as described in   
　　　characterization of a case: the representation of a characterization of a case uses the structure developed by pople  to specify the general disease processes of a case  their competitors  and the manifestations for which each might account. in addition internal  structures represent whether individual processes are medically related to one another or independent. the individual processes are represented as co-routines and the co-routines are associated according to certain relations   e.g. type-of  complement-of  link-of  alternative-of etc. . the characterization structure is used to accomodate the user's characterization as well as the alternatives to it generated by the system. an example of the generation and use of these characterizations is given in section 1..1. 
　　　maxim-predicates: the principles of internal medicine  called maxims by the system  are represented as lisp functions which take the various data structures as arguments and return values with respect to the case and the knowledge embodied by the maxim. the maxims include principles confined solely to fixed medical knowledge  e.g. the user should associate manifestations with diseases which are medically related   principles confined to the case and the user's characterization of it  e.g. the 

specialized systens-1: oleson 
1 

important manifestations should be accounted for by the user's characterization of the case   and principles which depend upon comparison between the user's characterization and alternative characterizations of the case  e.g. if there is a characterization which is simpler than the user's characterization  it should be considered a better explanation of the case . the maxims are identi f i e d through recognition of the principles inherent in the internist system and by analyzing c r i t i q u e s of it and other examples of diagnostic behavior which are provided by myers  and other expert practitioners in i n t e r n a l medicine. 
1 	process 
       given the maxim-predicates  the evaluation algorithm is simple: apply the maxim-predicates to the user's characterization of the case. each of the maxim-predicates involves a separate algorithm. but certain general types of behavior are i d e n t i f i a b l e as used by many of the maximpredicates. these types of behavior may be considered under the generic heading:  processes 
which make use of the medical data base.  
       the f i r s t of these types of process makes direct use of the data base. this is often done to check the v a l i d i t y of assertions. for instance  it may be asserted that hepatic congestion is a type of l i v e r disease or that proteinuria occurs in pneumonia. these tasks require only simple processing  but they are often required in the specification of more complex processes. 
       another type of process makes inference based upon a user's characterization of a case by invoking simplifying assumptions about the user's characterization. this approach is often used when the system is taking a  best f i t   or  benefit of the doubt  approach to the user's characterization. for instance  if the user has made no indication of the correlation between the manifestations of the case and the diseases which he has specified  the system may infer associations based on best p o t e n t i a l coverage and then evaluate the characterization on those terms for some of i t s predicate-maxims. 
       the t h i r d common type of process generates alternative characterizations of the case on the basis of some specified c r i t e r i a . the specified c r i t e r i a are intended to induce characteristics 
which are in some sense optimal. 	these a l t e r native characterizations are then used as a basis for comparison. 	they are generated by the internist diagnostic process using the medical data base. 
1 	an example of system performance 
1.1 	case run 
j examiner  
test case  nejmv1t1 
age 1 to 1 
sex male 
dyspnea exertional 
heart output decreased 
heart catheterization left ventricle end diastolic pressure increased 
heart failure congestive hx 
pressure arterial systolic less than 1 
thrombophlebitis 
liver enlarged moderate 
ekg premature atrial contraction  s  ekg premature ventricular contraction  s  
ekg heart block first degree 
ekg left bundle branch block 
ekg low voltage 
ekg atrial fibrillation cough 
tachycardia 
pressure venous central gtr than 1 pressure venous increased inspection 
rhonchi diffuse 
heart sound  s  summation gallop left ventricular 
heart percussion left border lateral displacement heart impulse apical forceful 
abdomen tenderness right upper quadrant 
heart xray left ventricle enlargement 
heart xray right ventricle enlargement 
wbc 1 to 1 
platelet'  s  1 to 1 
chest xray lung  s  congested 
chest xray pleural effusion  s  
urine output less than 1 cc per day 
urea nitrogen blood 1 to 1 
bilirubin conjugated blood increased 
sg1t gtr than 1 
ldh blood increased 
cpk blood increased 
abdomen flank  s  bulging bilateral 
abdomen flank  s  heavy bilateral 
abdomen dullness shifting 
prothrombin time increased calcium blood decreased 
phosphate blood increased 
electrophoresis serum albumin decreased 
alkaline phosphatase increased up to 1 times normal 
urine sediment rbc 
 characterization  
primary-problem 
 cardiovascular disease 
related-possibility 
 hepatic congestion 
acc1unting-f1r 
 abdomen tenderness right upper quadrant 
 liver enlarged moderate 
 alkaline phosphatase increased up to 1 times 
normal 
 sg1t gtr than 1 
 electrophoresis serum albumin decreased 
*platelet  s  1 to 1 
 chest xray pleural effusion  s  
 go 
specialized 	systers-1: oloson 
1 done 
 commentary  
1: while hepatic congestion does explain: 
abdomen tenderness right upper quadrant 
liver enlarged moderate 
alkaline phosphatase increased up to 1 times normal 
sgot gtr than 1oo 
   electrophoresis serum albumin decreased it is not known to account for: 
platelet  s  1 to 1 
chest xray pleural effusion  s  1: it would seem that cardiovascular disease 
could be indicated more specifically since 
the following are quite specific for heart failure: 
heart catheterization left ventricle end 
diastolic pressure increased 
heart sound  s  summation gallop left 
ventricular 
pressure venous central gtr than 1 1: an alternative characterization of the case involving a kidney disease component might 
seem preferable since the following are not 
accounted for by the original characterization: 
urea nitrogen blood 1 to 1 
phosphate blood increased 
urine sediment rbc 1.1. 	discussion 
the maxim-predicate which generated the f i r s t comment above simply checked the relationship 
between hepatic congestion and the indicated manifestations against the corresponding r e l a t i o n ship in the medical data base. the results of that comparison were then output in the context of the s c r i p t format. 
       the maxim-predicate giving rise to the second comment is somewhat more complicated. it involves determining which manifestations from the case can be assigned to the cardiovascular problem. within t h i s subset  the predicate evaluates the manifestations for s p e c i f i c i t y and finds that a number of the manifestations are quite specific for heart f a i l u r e . since heart f a i l u r e is also rather strongly supported by the other findings  the comment is made. 
       the maxim-predicate associated with the t h i r d 
       comment requires that determination be made of the set of manifestations which could not be explained by the user's characterization. this set was then evaluated to determine whether some disease process seemed indicated. since many of the unexplained manifestations indicated renal dysf u n c t i o n   a complementary renal component was suggested as an additional active component of the characterization. 
       figures 1 and 1 indicate the user's characterization and the alternative machine generated characterization of the case respectively. when the user indicated cardiovascular disease  the eharacterizer set up a cardiovascular coroutine to represent the problem. 	the 


specialized 	systems-1: oleson 1 

 related-possibilities  command caused a second complementary co-routine to be generated and a link-of relation to be asserted. the  accountingfor command caused the ensuing manifestation l i s t to be associated with hepatic congestion. 
       the system's characterization was developed in somewhat greater detail. 	it set up a cardio-
vascular co-routine as well  but the characterizer then further specified the problem by setting up conjunctive co-routines to represent heart failure and myocardial disease. it also specified the .liver problem  but here it indicated a disjunctive choice between hepatic congestion and cardiac cirrhosis. lastly the system recognized 
the need for the renal component and set it up as an additional co-routine. 
1. summary 
       we have presented an approach to the problem of analyzing a person's diagnostic behavior. the approach entails the development of specialized structures for the purpose of representing a person's view of a complex environment. the approach requires the use of sophisticated tools of representation and process taken from the internist system to provide accurate medical knowledge. the approach also requires that the methodological principles which distinguish good diagnostic behavior from bad be represented in such a way that they can be used to evaluate a user's behavior in light of the medical knowledge. although much remains to be learned regarding implementation of this approach - especially with respect to the representation of the principles of diagnosis; we hope our description and examples have demonstrated that the approach may be capable of producing interesting behaviors. 
       the work described here only sets the stage for a system capable of interactive investigations of the type described in the opening paragraph. many issues involved in the implementation of such a system have not been addressed. critical 
among these is the issue of how to direct an interactive investigation. methods which generate expectations on the basis of the user's i n i t i a l behavior and then interact with the goal of confirming or disconfirming the expectations seem potentially f r u i t f u l here. but time w i l l t o l l . these issues are the subject of the ongoing work with respect to the system. 
