 
　　　　the locus model of search is a non-backtracking  deterministic search technique in which a beam of near-miss alternatives around the best path are extended in parallel for graph searching problems. in this paper we formulate image interpretation as a giaph searching problem and show bow the locus model provides a near-optimal minimal effort solution. the structure of the model is illustrated using a detailed example. the relationship of the present approach to earlier attempts at image interpretation are discussed 
introduction 
       the central problem in image understanding is the representation and use of all the available sources of knowledge in the interpretation and description of an image. the problem of representation is complicated by the diversity of the sources of knowledge. converting knowledge into effective algorithms in the presence of error and uncertainty further complicates the issue. in this paper we present a 
       specific framework for representation and use of knowledge which appears to be both sufficient and efficient for a wide variety of image interpretation tasks. 
       the framework for image interpretation presented here is based on the locus model successfully used in speed  understanding research  lowerre and reddy  1 . the locus model is a non-backtracking  non-iterative  deterministic search technique in which a beam of near-miss alternatives around the best path are extended to determine the near-optimal description of the image. 
　　　　this technique is being applied to several tasks which together exhibit a wide range of image source variability  sensor characteristics  and noise characteristics. the three tasks currently under exploration are: interpretation of uncontrived arbitrary images representing different views of downtown pittsburgh  1-d world ; location of a landmark or identification of an image from satellite and aerial images of the washington  d.c. area  1-d world ; detection of changes in an image using symbolic techniques. the downtown 
pittsburgh task involves several interesting subtasks: scenetype identification  indoor  outdoor  office  ...   camera position identification  scale  location and orientation aspects of the image ; image structure understanding  relative positions of buildings ; and image detail understanding  detect cars  bushes  people walking after the larger context of a  road  is established . 
       in the following sections we will outline the structure of the model  illustrate its use by a simple but detailed example  and discuss the relationship of the present approach to earlier attempts at image interpretation. a detailed description of the model as applied to the image interpretation task will be given in rubin  1 . a more complete discussion of the strengths and limitations of the 
	this 	work 	was 	supported 	by 	the 	defense 	advanced 
research projects agency  f1-c-1  and is monitored by the air force office of scientific research. model and its relationship to the other approaches to knowledge representation and search are given in reddy 
 1 . 
image understanding as search 
       the basic premise underlying the locus model is that the problem of image interpretation can be viewed as a problem of search. given a specific knowledge representation paradigm and a specific signal-to-symbol transformation paradigm  a highly efficient search can be used to obtain a near optimal global solution satisfying as many of the constraints of the world model as possiblele. 
       the principal requirement of the locus model is in the area of knowledge representation. most approaches to image recognition assume the existence  and availability  of a world model in terms of some internal symbolic description. the world model usually consists of knowledge which defines the structure and elationship among objects in all scenes that are interpretable by the world model. by iteratively redefining higher level structures in terms of simpler objects one can generate a hierarthieal network  or possibly a relational semantic network . 
       the particular knowledge representation paradigm we have adopted in locus is to attempt to represent all images that are admissible by the world model in terms of a graph structure whose nodes are primitive picture elements  ppls . a pre is chosen so that all pixels belonging to a given pre class shaie the same properties in the feature space  or signal space . thus a ppl might sometimes represent an entue object as in the cast1 of sky  river  or road  or represent a small subpart of an object such as a segment with similar textural properties. as an example  the table below lists the ppls that have been identified in a typical scene of downtown pittsburgh. note that the ppls are chosen for their structural uniqueness as well as their visual uniqueness. 
	hitton awning roof 	pittsburgh pror.o plajrn roof 
	hilton awning  side 	pittsburgh prosy plaza side ; 
	hilton man roof 	state office mam tower roof 
	hilton main structure wallt; 	stat*  office main tower walls 
	hilton elevator shaft roof 	state office office building roof 
	hilton elevator shaft wells 	style office office building walls 
	hilton conference area roof 	allegheny river 
	hilton conference area walls 	gateway towers roof 
	gateway 1 man roof 	gateway towers walls 
	gateway 1 walls 	gateway towers elevator shaft roof 
	gateway 1  c levator shaft walls 	gateway towers elevator shaft walls 
	gateway 1 mam roof 	commonwealth place 
	gateway 1 walls 	liberty ave fnr.t 
	gateway    c levator shaft walls 	liberty ave west 
	gateway 1 main roof 	rlvcl of the allies 
	gatoway 1 walls 	point park rood a 
	gateway 1 elevator shaft walls 	point park road b 
	jenkins arcade walls 	point park a 
	homos main arpa roof 	point pork 1 
	homes secondary-area walls 	point park c 
	hornos tertiary-area roof 	point park d 
	homes tertiary-area walls 	liberty ave island a 
	homes smoke stack 	liborty ave island b 
	pittsburgh press roof 	mountains to north of city 
	pittsburgh press walls 	sky 

vision- 1: rubin 
1 

       the above set of ppes are primarily intended for use in the detail understanding sub-task of the downtown pittsburgh imago interpretation task. these are by no means uniqvin and are given here purely to illustrate the type of detail that can be applied. however  at other levels of understanding  such as scene understanding or viewpoint understanding  the numbei of ppl s needed can be substantially smaller  for example  on the scene understanding task  we plan to use only b ppes: sky  mountains  buildings  river  and park. 
       we assume that a set of ppes are available which can be used to compose any image that is admissible by the world model  further we assume that most  if not all  of the constraints about object structure  size  shape  location  and orientation are expressible in terms of the graph structure containing only the ppes. it is obvious that this type of knowledge representahon is likely to be expensive in terms of spare fur all except the most trivial problems but it appears to be whal is needed for an efficient solution. baker  1b  and lowerre   1  show how diffeient types of knowledge and constraints can be combined into a single gt aph st i i ic i ure. 
       let us consider an example. the task is the labeling of a 1 scene we will assume that ibis scene consists of three objects  pprs; called a  b  and 1. figure 1 shows the possible relationships that are allowed between a  b  c  and the scene edge. the arrows indicate the adjacency relationships between the objects and the boundaries. note that either a or b may be adjacent to the left  top  and bottom boundaries and that only c is permitted next to the right boundary. 

figure 	1 	legal 	rolationships  	between the threo ppes and the scene edge 
note thnt utate a in optional hpcmuc uule b may border the top and left 
bides 

figure 1 lef.nl lahol assi nmentr* of 1 ppl   to the 1 scene points of the 1 im i ;e urinfi ndwurk constromtr. from figure 1 note that only 1 of the pm.mhlo 1 p.-ithw jirr ipg;.! 
these 1 labeling  can be seen graphically in figure 1 winch shows the possible network paths that can be traversed while searching from the initial state to the final state. this is an unpruned recognition tree. it appears as a graph because some of i lie nodes have boon combined to indicate the independence of the path from the prior context. the nodes at positions      ''       1   and {   1  have states arriving from the top and eeet. this is the normal case for most ppt. s in a larger image since the average point is not along  the top or left side. note that for real pictures with real constraints  the complexity of the networks and the number of legal label assignments is significantly higher. 
si nn a i -1 o - sym b o i . match i ng 
       matching the symbolic elements of the network to the signal requires a signal-to-symbol transformation technique by means of winch one can estimate the likelihood that a given ppe is present at  or around  a pixel location. this basically requires the availability of a pattern template for each ppe and a distance metric for matching the unknown signal with the ppe templates. 
       figure 1 shows the values at each position in the sensed image for our example. our task is to assign a label  a  u  or c  to each pixel. suppose the expected value  templates  of ppt objects are: a-1  b=1  and c=1. then the question is which of the 1 possible interpretations given in figures 1 and 1 best represent the signal. 


the only relationships used in this network are horizontal and vertical. it is possible to employ more contextual information such as diagonal relationships  but this simple network is adequate for our examples 
       in the absence of any constraints  the optimal assignment of ppes to pixels can be obtained by selecting the best ppe label in each pixel neighborhood. however  given the semantic  syntactic  structural  and segmental properties of scenes that are acceptable within the world model  one wishes to choose  those assignments of ppes to pixels that are both globally optimal and consistent with the model. 
       in our example  each point in the 1 scene can be labeled arbitrarily from the three ppes  allowing 1 possible interpretations. given the network constraints  this reduces to only 1 possible labelings  shown below in figure 1: 
figure 1 	sensed datit for each position in the sample image 
for simplicity  let us assume that the distance metric is: aij = 1 - | i - j | / 1   yielding the following statistical matches for as  bs  and cs: 

v ston-1: rubin 1 


figure 1 likelihood values of each ppe to the points in the sensod image for example  the point  1  1  has a 1 likplihood of being ppe b because 1 is normatty 1 and point  1  1  is 1 - |1j/1 - 1 a 
the locus model 
       given a ppe graph structure representation of the world model and a signal-to-symbol transformation technique  the problem of interpreting an unknown image can be viewed as finding the optimal path through the graph  i.e.  finding a sequence of ppes which best describe each of the pixel neighborhoods of the unknown image  subject to constraints defined by the knowledge sources represented by the graph. in our example  figures 1 and 1 provide two different representations of the constraint and illustrate the power of knowledge sources in reducing the number of alternatives. 
       finding the optimal path through the graph is a 
       classical search problem with many possible alternative search strategies  nilsson  1 . in this paper we propose and use a search strategy called locus which appears to be effective in perceptual problem solving. locus is a beam search heuristic in which all except a beam of near-miss alternatives around the best path are pruned from the search tree at each pixel  or segmental  decision point. this contains the exponential growth of nodes in the path without requiring backtracking and non-deterministic search. 
       the locus search proceeds as follows: 1  a forward pass calculates path likelihoods and inter-node connections  and 1  a backtrace uses the inter-node connections to determine the components of the near-optimal network path. as the forward pass search progresses through the network  unpromising alternatives arc pruned and the interconnections along the beam are saved until the end of the network is reached. at this point  a backtrace of the connections is made to select a path through the network. note that this path is expected to lie in the beam that was carved out by the forward pass. by delaying the decision making process until ail of the network nodes have been examined  locus obtains the globally near-optimal path through the network. this is because the calculation of a node's likelihood hinges on all previous nodes that led up to it. thus  during the backtrace  each node decision is guaranteed against degeneration because its likelihood is supported by all nodes before it. this means that the selection of an object label in one corner of the scene can affect the labeling in the opposite corner. consideration of all of the near-miss alternatives removes the need for backtracking  and thus removes the problem of whether to search by depth or breadth. 
       before we can define the search strategy for finding the optimal path we need to define the term path likelihood in a ppe network. path likelihood is defined incrementally in terms of the nodes it traverses and uses three pieces of information to calculate a likelihood: the statistical match of the signal to the symbol; the likelihoods of previous network nodes; and the transition likelihoods of arriving from those previous network nodes. formally: 

where pij : is the likelihood of being in network state i at position j of the sensed data; aij is the statistical match of the ppe symbol represented by state i to the signal at position j; e  d  is the state adjacency function which offsets the current state  j  to the previous state  j+d d   in direction d; and tk i d is the transition likelihood of traveling from state k to state i in direction d. for image processing  the position  j  is an  x  y  vector. the maximum k in the above equation is saved as the best previous state and identifies the best path to take during the backtrace. note that the likelihood values are not needed during the backtrace: they accumulate on the forward pass only. the back pointers are calculated on the forward pass using the likelihood information  so they reflect all node transitions to that point. the backtrace uses only the best previous node for each state as it quickly steps through the network and selects a path. no search is performed in this pass: it is pure look-up. 
       going back to our example  figure 1 shows the states that were examined in the forward pass. note that this is simply a pruned version of the recognition tree in figure 1. the numbers above each node arc the likelihoods calculated for that point on the forward pass. the first number is the forward pass likelihood winch is calculated for each node at a given position. the second number is the normalized forward pass likelihood which is calculated after each node at the position has been examined. the normalization is necessary to keep the likelihoods from degenerating as the network is traversed  discussed below . note that nodes are pruned from the beam when their un-normalized likelihood drops to 
1 or below. 
let us look at the likelihood calculations for the point 
 1  1  in figure 1  the two squares in the third column . the bottom point is a c  and it is on the path which selects labelings number 1 through 1  see figure 1 . there are two paths from the top and left that contribute to the likelihood calculations. tor simplicity  the transition likelihoods in this example will always be 1 when legal. thus  if a transition appears in figure 1  it's likelihood is 1. looking at the left context  the point at     1  has a normalized likelihood value of 1. since this is the only node in that direction  it is the maximum node in that direction  see equation 1  and so the likelihood from the left is 1. from the top  the likelihood of being at point  1  1  is also 1. taking the average gives 1 and multiplying this by 1  the statistical from figure 1  match yields an un-normalized likelihood of 1 for this state. 
       the other node at position  1  1  is a b on the path which includes labelings 1 through 1. the statistical match of that point to ppe b is 1. since there are two previous nodes to the left  calculation of the likelihood from the left involves finding the best previous node in that direction. in this case  the b in position  1  1  is stronger with a likelihood of 1. since the likelihood from the top is 1  the average likelihood for that state is 1. when multiplied by the statistical match for that ppe  the un-normalized likelihood of that node becomes 1. 
       once all node likelihoods are calculated  they are normalized so that the largest likelihood becomes 1 and the others increase proportionately. for this reason  the top node expands to 1. the ppe for c at position  1  1  is pruned because it's un-normalized likelihood is 1. note that the back-pointers which are saved here tell which previous node is the best. the back-pointer for the top node at point  1  1  selects the b at point  1  from the top and the b at position  1  1  from the left. the selection of the node to the left is done because that node had the greatest previous node likelihood. 

v slon-1: rubin 1 

       the calculation of node likelihoods proceeds in a raster and fu  1 . the approach presented in this paper manner. this means that the order of calculation is  1   principally differs from the above in how the network  j      1    1    1    1      1    1 . when all of the representation is to he used. it rejects the notion that image 
likelihoods have been calculated on the forward pass  the recognition is best viewed as a problem in parsing. given the backtrace makes a quick pass of the back-pointers to error and uncertainty associated with the decisions  the 
determine the global path. this backtrace proceeds in a problem tends to be not one of deciding whether a given reverse raster manner and follows the back-pointers left by pattern is parsahl'e but rather one of search  i.e.  deciding the forward pass. rc fering to figure 1 again  you can see which of the many acceptable alternalivc paths represents that the 1 at point  1  1  is the first point chosen for the the near-optimal interpretation. 
global path. from there  two points are suggested to the top the view that the problem of image recognition is one and left: the c at  1  1  and the b at  1  1 . the next point in of constraint satisfying search has been gaining increasing the backtrace is the b at  1  1  which was indicated from the acceptance  waltz  1; tenenbaum and barrow  1; c to its right. it indicates the b in  1  1  and the b in  1  1 . rosenfeld  hummel and zucker  1 . this paper also the backtrace looks very simple but occasionally runs into subscribes to this viewpoint and differs mainly from the other snags. in this example  there is a conflict of back-pointers at efforts in the representation of constraints and the method of position  1  1 . the state to its right is a c and indicates that search. 
 1  1  should be a c. the state below it is a b and indicates the realization that one needs to introduce some that  1  should be a 1. although conflict resolution is very measure of the degree of uncertainty into the interpretation 
difficult and not fully solved  the solution here is obvious. process is reflected in the papers by fischler and elschlager 
the network does not allow a c at  1  1  to exist above a d  1   feldman and yakimovsky  1   and the probabilistic at  1  1  and the b has already been chosen. therefore the b al  1  1  is chosen because it docs not contradict any network constraints. once the b at  1  1  is selected  the rest of the backtrace proceeds smoothly and path 1 is identified as the 
correct labeling. 
       this example shows an interesting property of the locus search: error correcting without backtracking. notice that the strongest path  from the start  is the one which leads to labeling 1. this is based on the weak assumption that the point  1  1  is a c. in truth  it could be any ppe  but the network rules out a. of the remaining choices  c is statistically better than b  so the forward pass prefers c. on a global basis  however  b is better because path 1 is more 
globally consistent with the sensed data. this is because the point  1  1  is strongly favored to he a b over a c  and it is not until the global pat!  is assembled from the back-pointers that the mistake is corrected. if this data were run through a backtracking system which employed a best-first search  the incorrect path would be selected because of the search technique's inability to bring global context to bear on local labeling. if some way of detecting the error were found  the system would have to back up before continuing. in this example  locus provides a better solution in the same amount of time while in other cases  we can reduce the search time without sacrificing accuracy. relaxation methods under development at sri and maryland. the method proposed here is able to handle search in the presence of error and uncertainty in a natural and straightforward manner provided all knowledge and constraints are represented in terms of a ppe graph structure. 
       constraint satisfying search in the presence of uncertainty is also a central problem in other areas of al  in particular in speech understanding systems research. several techniques developed for use in the speech area such as representation of knowledge sources as cooperating independent processes  roddy et al  1; lesser et al.  
1; erman et al.  1   island driven search  woods et al.  1; erman et al.  1   and network representations of knowledge  baker  1; l.owerre  1  also appear to be relevant to other knowledge based systems research  including vision. the locus model presented here was first 
developed for use in the harpy connected speech recognition system. though the basic ideas remain the same  the model had to be revised substantially to make it useful in image recognition. 
       the best-first search given by the a* algorithm  nilsson  1  and the breadth-first graph search of the dynamic programming algorithms  levine  1; bellman  1  provide alternative approaches to optimal graph search problems. the beam search technique of the locus model provides a minimal effort near-optimal solution and appears discussion 
       the model presented in this paper has been used to interpret ohlanderv  city scene  demonstrating the initial validity and usefulness of the model. we plan to use the model to interpret arbitrary views of downtown pittsburgh  a 1-d world   and different satellite views of the washington  d.c. area  a 1-d world . representation of the knowledge about 1-d and 1-d world models in terms ppe graph structure requires the development of several preprocessing programs  the ppe graph for ohlander's city scene was generated manually . in this section we will discuss the relationship of this model to other approaches in image recognition research  and our present views of the strengths and limitations of this approach. 
       the graph structure representation proposed here is a natural outgrowth of work in languages  aho and ullman  
1    graph representations  harlow  1   and syntax directedpattern recognition  narasimhan  1; clowes  1; to be effective in cases where the evaluation function is a function of an external signal source and where a large number of decisions arc related to each other in that they are all attempting to provide alternative interpretations of 
the same signal segment. 
       occasionally  the heuristics associated with the beam search lead to the elimination of the optimal path. this need not be cause for major concern because a good path will always be chosen. since the match likelihoods are less than accurate  attempting to find the optimal path at great cost and effort leads to little or no improvement in performance. 
       the success of beam searching is highly dependent on the choice of the  near miss  threshold that defines the width of the beam. if the threshold is too small  the resulting narrow beam of alternatives could lead to the pruning of the correct path. on the other hand  many unproductive paths will be examined if the threshold is too large. in our present system  the threshold is chosen large enough so as to make it vision-1: rubin 
1 

immune to local errors in the assignment of likelihood values to symbols horn the signal. 
       a significant featuie of the locus model of search is its linearity. because locus prunes all but a narrow beam of alternatives  its search time is linear with respect to the size of the input signal and is essentially independent of the symbol space size. thus  locus searching controls the combinatorial explosion that occurs in most graph searching techniques. note  however  that the size of the beam expands and contracts during the search as the connectivity between symbols in the graph increases and with the degree of uncertainty of the decisions. 
       the order of search in locus is a subtle issue that appears to be a problem but upon closer inspection turns out to be unimportant. when using locus in speech understanding  there is one independent dimension of time which can be used to order the search. in image processing with static pictures  there are two dimensions  so a raster scan is used. this might appear to cause continuity problems especially at the end of a scan line. however  locus requires only the local context for a point and it propagates the global context regardless of search or dor. thus  any search pattern can be used as long as it is reversed on the backtrace. note also that the raster scan has the advantage of allowing the use of context for horizontally  vertically  and diagonally adjacent states. 
       a main concern with the finite state networks is that not all relational constraints are easily representable within that framework. we have not found this to be a problem in the 1  and   d worlds we have considered so far  although the representations tend to be expensive in terms of the space  memory  required. we expect to use a post-pass to apply constraints that are not easily incorporated into the network. 
       knowledge such as shape  size  orientation  and location of objects is different from spectral properties of objects such as color and texture information. this type of knowledge cannot be included directly as part of the signalto-symbol match. such supra-segmental knowledge can however be incorporated into the network in several different ways  rubin  1 . 
       the example given in this paper shows how the locus model can be used in the interpretation of the image on a pixel by pixel basis. the technique is equally useful with pre-segmented data. in fact  segmentation improves accuracy and leads to substantial speedup in matching and search. while extra segments do not cause any problem  missing segments cannot be accomodated within the present scheme without additional'computational effort. this is because the graph representation permits self-transitions in the ppe network but does not  at present  permit skipping ppe nodes. 
conclusion 
       this paper provides a framework for knowledge representation and search for image recognition tasks  leading to an easily implementable total systems framework within which one can explore the relative merits of different types of knowledge. one still has to decide what knowledge is available  how to acquire and define it  how to select an adequate set of primitive picture elements  ppe  for a given task  and how to match symbols  ppes  to the signal. however  each of these subtasks look much more manageable to us than the original image interpretation task. 
acknowledgcments 
the authors would like to thank larry davis  david 
mckeown  and john kender whose comments were helpful in the preparation of this paper. 
appondix: .a roal example 
       this appendix shows the locus model as it has actually been programmed at carnegie-mellon university. the program which uses locus is called argos and this example is direct output from the system. the scene that we are using is the downtown pittsburgh image shown in figure 1: the most complex image used by ohlandcr  1 . the image was broken down into 1 ppes shown below: 

figure 1 shows the labelings that were generated for the picture in figure 1. the letters correspond to the ppe letters in the above list. although this is not a perfect labeling by any means  it is an improvement over un-guided labeling and shows that locus is effective for image interpretation. 
references 
aho  a. v. and ullman  j. d.  1/! . 	the theory of  parsing 
translation  and compiling  prentice-hall  englewood cliffs  n.j. 
baker  j. k.  1 .  1 he dragon system-an overview   iefe teans acoust.  spcech  signal processing  vol. 
assp-1  1  feb.  
bellman  	p. 	and 	dreyfus  	s. 	 1 . 	applied 	dynamic 
peogeamming  princeton liniv. press  princeton  n.j. 
clowes  m. c.  1 .  pictorial relationships - a syntactic approach   in machine intelligence iv  meltzer and michie  eds.   american elsevier  new york. 
erman  l. d.  et 	al.  1 . 	the hcarsay-ii 	system   in preparation . 
feldman  j. a. and yakimovsky  y.  1 .  decision theory and artificial intelligence: i. a semantics based region analyzer   artificial intelligence; vol 1  pp. 1. 
fischler  	m. 	a. 	and 	eschlager  	r. 	a. 	 1 . 	 the 
representation and matching of pictorial structures   ieee transactions on computers  january. 
fu  k. s.  1 .  syntactic pattern recognition   in digital pattern recognition  fu  eel.   springer verlag  new york. 
harlow  c. a.  1 .  image analysis and graphs   tr ial-tr 
1  image analysis laboratory  university of missouricolumbia  september. 
vfsfon-1: ruhfn 1 levine  m. d.  1 .  a knowledge-based computer vision system   workshop on computer vision systems  vol. ii  university of massachusetts  amherst  mass.  june  1. 
lessor  v. r.  fennell  r. d.  erman  l. d.  and reddy  d. r. 1 .  organization of the hearsay-ii speech 
understanding system   iefe trans. hum. factors peclroa  vol. assp- 1  j 1. 
loweire  b. t.  1 .  i he harpy speech recognition system    ph.d. thesis  carnegie-mellon university   tech. report  computer science department  carnegie-mellon university  pittsburgh  pa. 
lowerro  1. t.  and roddy  d. r. 1 .  representation and 
search in the harpy connected speech recognition system   paper to bo published. 
narasimhan  r  1 .  syntax-directed interpretation of classes of pictures   communications of the acm  vol. 1  no. 1  march. 
nilsson  n.  1 . problem sqjvinn methods in artificial lnjriji gence  mc graw hill. 
ohtander  r. b.  1b .  analysis of natural scenes    ph.d. 
	thesis  	carnegie-mellon 	university   	tech. 	report  
	computer 	science 	department  	carnegie-mellon 
university  
roddy  d. r.  1 .  aspects of representation and search in perceptual problem solving    in preparation . 
redely  d. r  errnan  l d.  and neely  r. b.  1 .  a model and a system for machine recognition of speech   iefe 
trans audio electioacoust.  vol. au-1  1. 
rosenfcld  a.  hummel  r. a. and zucker  s. w.  1 .  scene 

figuro 1 path of locus search on reconmtion tree shown in figure 1 numbers separated by a slash are the un-normnlized and normalized nodo likelihoods  respectively the arrown indicate pathr. that were saved for global path re-construction and the dotted lines indicate alternative paths that were examined in the forward pess but not selected for the final recognition tree because of low likelihood values see text for more explanation. 

labelling by relaxation operations   ieee trans. syst.  man  cybcrn . smc-1  1. 

steps towards the representation 
of complex three-dimensional objects 
ruzena k. bajcsy and barry i. soroka 
dept of computer s information science 
moore school of electrical engineering 
university of pennsylvania / d1 philadelphia pa 1 
introduction 
　　　we are investigating the description of complex three-dimensional objects in terms of three-dimensional primitives and composition relations between them. our input is a description of an arbitrary three-space in the form of gray-levels assigned to the points of a cubic lattice. sequential tomograms are one source of input data  as are serial light and 
* electron micrographs. 
　　　our 	approach 	is 	motivated 	by 	the observation that a primitive can give rise to only a small number 	of region types on a plane 	which cuts i t . 	by 	inverting the process we can reason 	from a region found on 	a slice 	back to 	the primitives 	from which it 	might have 	been cut. 	when the sliced 	object 	is composed 	from 	several primitives  the regions cut by planes w i l l reflect 	the 	joints 	and 	containment relations between the primitives involved. an example 
　　　let us briefly consider right circular cylinders  which are sliced into circles  ellipses  possibly truncated   and rectangles. an ellipse suggests two possible cylinders. the next step in completing the description of space w i l l be to determine which of the suggested cylinders is present  both may be!  and the length of the cylinder axis. this would involve looking at another slice some moderate distance away from the current one. 
design considerations 
	we 	are 	constructing 	 in 	lisp 	and 
fortran  	a 	processor with 	three 	useful features: 
　　　cd primitives can be added or changed by altering the function which maps regions into possible primitives. thus  to add  blocks  to the system  we would add the rules which t e l l us  for instance  that a triangular region is cut from a corner of a block. 
　　　 1  the strategy for obtaining a complete description of space may be systematically varied. what should the processor do when it discovers two disjoint regions on a single slice  should it pursue the hypothesised primitives sequentially or in parallel  furthermore  we would like to incorporate a mechanism which would mimic human abilities to perceive a gestalt. 
　　　 1  the 	system 	should 	be interruptible so that at any moment we may stop the processor and ask questions like: 
what do you 	know at this point  	what are you going 	to do next  	what w i l l 	it t e l l you  
our interest in cognitive issues like 
 1  and  1  has led us to reject holistic approaches  such as the symmetric axis transform  in favor of a more heuristic approach. 
information flow. 
　　　if the system hypothesises the existence of a cylinder  then it may request a slice somewhere out along the axis in order to binary-search for the length of the axis. this request may be performed immediately or it may be enqueued with other requests  depending on the search strategy selected. in either case  the outcome of the request must be returned to the requesting hypothesis for evaluation. we store a deductive pattern  if-then-else  on the property-list of the requestor so that the deduction may be performed as soon as the requested information becomes available. 
       some slices are a priori more informative than others. the most reasonable i n i t i a l slice to examine is one through the center of space. similarly  examining one slice devalues the slices immediately adjacent to i t . 
       a region may affect dormant hypotheses  those waiting for unanswered requests . thus  regions must be able to index into the set of current hypotheses and activate those potentially affected. a hypothesis may be both dormant and active! 
criteria for evaluating performance 
　　　we have been unable to find evidence of experiments into human competence and performance on the task our system w i l l handle. our system should be able to mimic human behavior in interpreting slices of three-space. further  our model of hypothesis formation should account for interpolati on given two slices  
moderately separated  what is happening in the space between them  
conclsion 
　　　we have raised here some questions appropriate to the task of developing descriptions of three-spaces from slices. we have set forth design considerations for a processor currently under development. further answers and details w i l l be presented at the conference. 
references 
general references for this work are given in: b.i.soroka and r.k.bajcsy  generalized cylinders from serial sections. proc 1rd i n t l jt conf patternrecognition  coronado ca  november 1. 
this research 	was supported by 	grant mcs 
1 	of 	the 	national 	science 
foundation. 

vision-1: bajcsy 1 

a  recognition cone  perceptual system: brief test results* 
leonard uhr  robert douglass  university of wisconsin 
　　　this paper presents some preliminary test results of a  recognition cone  vision system.  see 1 for f u l l e r descriptions . a recognition cone uses a parallel-serial layered architecture that successively reduces the image as each layer processes i t . each layer contains a set of probabilistic  transforms  that combine diverse sources of contextually related information. each transform looks at specified regions of the array and  if the combined weights of information found exceed the transform's threshold  then the transform implies a set of names and transforms to apply. 
　　　a number of variant systems have been coded in snobol  to explore perception of binocular images  motion over time  and learning by discovery and induction. the long-term goal is to develop a relatively general model of l i v i n g perceptual systems  one that perceives a variety of different kinds of scenes. the present results were obtained with a simula-fortran program that made possible tests with large input arrays. test results  see 1  
　　　a 1-layer cone was used to process a 1 by 1 color tv picture  a house screened by trees  see 1 for the o r i g i n a l   . 
　　　transforms were iterated throughout each layer  to assess the following information: layer 1: averages; 	1: hue  saturation  intensity; 1: gradients; 	1: short edges  texture; 	1: long edges  compounds; 1: higher-level compounds; 1: 
still-higher-level compounds; 	1 averages. 
　　　figures 1 indicate some of the descriptive labels achieved. 
　　　figure 1 shows the single most highly implied thing output to each c e l l by layer 1  f = window  g = grass  h = house  s = sky  t = tree  w = wall . 

*this research was p a r t i a l l y supported by the national science foundation  grant mcs1  and the university of wisconsin graduate school. 
　　　figure 1 shows those cells into which house was most highly implied by layer 1. 	note how higher-level compounds have turned many of the 

sub-set of the transforms in layers 1 and 1 was used to describe 1 by 1 line drawings of placesettings of forks  knives  spoons and plates  where objects sometimes touched and overlapped. the system was also used to recognize letters and symbols that were severely distorted by rotations  rubber sheet stretchings and large gaps. 
discussion 
　　　this kind of system can be evaluated only by far more extensive tests. but the use of many configurational transforms  each sensitive to contextually interrelated information seems appropriate for handling a variety of unanticipated types of scenes. the use of weights means that parts can be gapped  distorted or missing. the layering gives speed and efficiency. it allows hierarchies of transforms to be b u i l t from common simpler transforms  as when edges build to angles to windows to walls to houses. 
　　　these transforms can easily be added  r e placed  reweighted  adjusted and learned  without hurting the larger program. so it should be possible to make continuing improvements. the transforms are reminiscent of synapsing neurons  and the serial layering of many parallel processes reflects the overall structure of l i v i n g visual 
systems. 
