a model for motor control and learning 
by marc raibert 
artificial intelligence laboratory 
massachusetts institute of technology cambridge  massachusetts 1 
     the human motor system acquires control of each limb in the body  adapts to mechanical and sensory changes  performs coordinate transformations from visual space to motor space  and uses limbs interchangeably in executing motor programs. it is supposed that any flexible motor control system  biological or otherwise  can be viewed in terms of high- and low-level processes which accomplish these tasks; high-level processes generate descriptions of desired trajectories without considering the mechanical properties of any one effector system  and lowlevel mechanisms  tailored to the kinematic and dynamic properties of a particular effector system  translate these descriptions into motor plans. i propose a controller which uses an 'internal inverse dynamic model' to perform these low-level translations for a mechanical arm  raibert 1 . 
     the translator employs a form of the equations of motion that allows a tabular representation of a manipulator's state dependent mechanical behavior. the table  actually a multidimensional memory organized by state variables  is supplied with data derived from the analysis of 'practice' movements. when a movement is practiced  accelerations and actuator torques are estimated and stored in a temporary buffer until analysis can be performed. during analysis sets of acceleration estimates  made while the manipulator was near a single state  are inverted in order to find constants of mechanical description. this procedure is quite simple and does not employ iterative error correction techniques  as do other learning schemes described in the literature  albus 1  tsypkin 1 . since iterative methods are avoided problems involving local minima are not encountered. once the analysis is performed  the resultant mechanical constants are stored in the state-space memory in weighted combination with previously stored data. 
     when presented with explicit descriptions of desired trajectories  the translator uses the tabular equations of motion in conjunction with the state-space memory to produce motor plans. a controller that operates in this way should have a number of desireable properties: 
1. the non-linear dynamic properties of the arm are controlled. 
1. the quality of control improves with practice. 
1. the controller adapts to mechanical changes. 
1. practice generalizes between similar movements. 
1. trajectories may be specified in any one of a variety of coordinate systems. 
     three joints of the mit-scheinman arm  each powered by a dc torque motor and provided with position and velocity sensors  were used to implement the controller and assess its properties  raibert 1 each joint is completely backdrivable  allowing for the type of interactions that characterize the manipulator control problem. a pdp-1 was used to perform all information processing and real-time functions required by the model. to date i have demonstrated the controller's ability to acquire usable mechanical descriptions of the manipulator from practice data  to adapt to mechanical disturbances  inertial and elastic loads   and to generalize information derived from the practice of one movement to the execution of other similar movements.  see fig. 1.  preliminary data also show that desired trajectories may be specified in any of a large class of coordinate systems  provided practice measurements are available in that system. 

fie. 1 these learning curves show the controller's ability to acquire new movements and adapt to mechanical disturbances. the initial learning  left  was produced by executing 1 practice trials. after every block of 1 trials a test movement was made and the performance index  root mean square position error  was applied to the movements of all joints. after initial acquisition loads were applied to the manipulator  discontinuity . the two learning curves on the right show the system adapting to the new mechanical situations caused by attaching: a  a weight to the third link of the arm  b  a spring from link 1 of the arm to ground. see  raibert 1  for more details. 
