 plans  and higher-level programming techniques  one can accomplish anything in a pre-planned series of small steps. 
none of this is meant to suggest that all early agents are similar to one another; quite the contrary. agents in different parts of the early brain surely use a variety of different representation and memory structures. in fact  we would expect distantly-related families to use physically separate memory systems. the price: agents concerned with very different jobs will not be able to communicate directly across their  social boundaries . 
the figure below suggests an anatomical hierarchy of differentiation in which spatially different sub-societies emerge with connections through higher levels. at the top of this hierarchy are a very special few units - of the very earliest genesis - that serve to coordinate the largest divisions of the whole society. these units  we speculate  lie at the root of many cognitive  linguistic  and other psychological phenomena. 
communication cells and the  specificity gradient : we imagine the brain to contain a vast ensemble of  agents  connected by communication channels in a manner suggested by this example: 

invited papers-1: mfnsky 1 


each agent connects with a few near-by channels ~ we'll call them c-lines. the diagram barely hints at the magnitude of the system - we see the c-lines as forming the vast network of the brain's white matter  with the agents forming the cortex. descending  the structure divides and branches and  at lower levels  the agents become segregated into smaller and smaller subsocieties. they communicate within  but not between  those divisions. as in any highly developed society  effective communication with the outside  or between the largest subdivisions  usually must pass through the top levels. but see note 1. 
in the diagram a  high-level  agent b  for builder  shares some terminals with another  p  for put   and also with yet another  w  for wrecker . p shares some terminals with a lower-level agent t  for trajectory   which has none in common with b. then b and w might be equivalent for some jobs  i.e.  what should i do with this tower   but not others. deeper in the network  sub-sub-specialists can communicate directly only within localized communities. we will use the term specificity gradient for this gradual decentralization. 
each high-level channel must be a major resource  because it extends over a substantial portion of the brain and agents in many communities can interact through it. there cannot be very many of them  and their establishment is a major developmental influence. 
neuroloeical speculations: the  laminar hypothesis:  we identify this concept with the gross anatomy of the brain but with no pretense that there is any solid evidence for it. we suppose that many  innate  functions are genetically established by shaping the gross architecture of neural tracts - great parallel  multiple bundles of pathways. we suppose that in infancy these functions are initially realized in these grossly redundant bundles  with the same computations duplicated in many  nearly parallel  layers. in the early stages these multiple systems act like single units  we speculate  because their components are functionally tied together by some form of  crosstalk  provided for this purpose. later  these redundant layers - we'll call them  laminae  - slowly differentiate  as the crosstalk interaction is reduced under genetic control.  note 1  then agents in nearby laminae can begin to function independently as influenced by progressively more specific trigger conditions. this differentiation might proceed partly along the lines of winston's learning paradigm - in which clear  specific  differences  cause specific modifications within a differentiated agent - and partly along the lines of a complementary process   concept-leaf separation  - in which agents within a family become competitive or mutually exclusive  each representing a different  sense  of the same  concept .  note 1  
both the communication paths and the attached masses of potential agents undergo the same sort of evolution together. at first  genetic control enables only large bundles to function as units. the community of agents of infancy would use these to build simple  basic  representations of objects  actions  obstacles  goals  and other essential symbolic entities. early cognitive life would center around them. once reliable uses of  toplevel  agencies are established  we can begin to differentiate out families of variant sub-specialists that share local data-lines because of their common origins. 
members of different lower-level families  even at the same level  cannot communicate sideways -- for two reasons  functional and anatomical. anatomically  we know that on a local scale the fibres of bundles tend to lie parallel  but on a larger scale they divide and branch. this pattern repeats over many orders of scale. functionally  as we proceed further into specialization  the data-variables that concern processes also become more local. sub-processes concerned with specialized sub-problems  or with different views of parts of a problem  need fewer common global symbols. 
genetics and connections of agents: a typical agent or process  we suppose  uses c-lines on perhaps two or three adjacent levels. as jobs become more specific  their computations  descend  into progressively specialized brain regions. cross-communications must be relayed up and down again through overlapping agencies. 
the tree-structure of the c-diagram oversimplifies the situation in the brain. the divisions are not arbitrary and senseless  but under the most intricate genetic control. for example  if agents dealing with motions of the arm and hand are localized in one area  we would expect genetics to provide some common c-lines to an area concerned with visual recognition and scene analysis. after an early period of sensori-motor development 

invited papers-1: minsky 1 

these might be superceded by more  general  connections. if these general principles are on the right track  then the gross functional neuroanatomy should embody the basic principles of our early innate developmental predispositions  and finer details of the  genetic program  are expressed in the small details of how the regions are interconnected. it goes without saying that this is true also at the most microscopic levels  at which the genetic programs establish the different properties of agents in different  specialized  areas. 
in infancy  connections to the top-level  common channels are made to simple production-like agents through relatively short path-chains. these learn to augment innate  specific  instinctual mechanisms by adding situation recognizers and motor patterns selected by internal motivational events; these become ingredients for later representations. 
overall coordination of the whole system needs an elaborate and reliable instinctual structure - and we like the general ideas of the cross-linked hierarchical model proposed by tinbergen  note 1  for animal behavior. in that system  the different behaviors associated with different  basic  motivational drives employ substantially separate agencies  with coordination based on a priority-intensity selection scheme. tinbergen's  modules  have an interesting provision for what is  in effect  heuristic search - the  appetitive  connections in the hierarchy. later  more coherent  knowledge-based ego-structures must emerge to supervise the system. 
so we imagine the system beginning life  with a simplified skeleton of a later system  but not the final one . each special area  with its mass of potential agents is connected internally and externally by gross bundles that first function as units. as development proceeds  the simple sensory-~ common-- motor connections elaborate into the stratified  hierarchical structure pictured above. 
communication: how should agents read and write onto the communication lines; what symbols should they use  from a point of view in which the agents are so simple that  meanings  are inaccessible  does it make sense to read or write anything at all  when this problem was 
first faced in the early work of newell  shaw  and simon  it became clear that in a very low-level symbolmanipulation system one had to reduce the concept of  reading  to operations of matching and testing  not of  meaning . 
agents of any family related closely enough to share many terminals would tend to have common origins and related competences. they would usually constitute a  frame-system  or a  branch of concept-leaves   in which the choice of which branch or leaf gets control can often be made on the basis of local context. we suggested above that agents take inputs from several nearby levels. the highest of these could be seen as addresses  enabling groups of perhaps competitive agents. middle levels could be seen as  context  for which of these has priority  and lowest levels as data. agents whose outputs are above their inputs are useful in analytic recognition  e.g.  parsing or scene-analysis. agents with outputs below are  method  or  effector-like   activativating lower-level sub-processes. 
how are connections learned  probably symbols are represented as parallel patterns recognized by simple  perceptron-like detectors. these are attractive because of the simple training algorithms available; local perceptrons share some features with hash-coding. in particular  the surface representation can be meaningless. while perceptrons are not good at complex tasks  they seem appropriate for local symbol and coincidence learning jobs.  note 1  
temporary storage  and recursion: al workers following the tradition of recursive pursuit of subgoals  often consider theories in which  when an expert passes control  temporarily  to another  stm memory is pushed onto a stack and its contents reassigned. 
given at least some access back to the push-down stack  this makes the full power of the intelligent machine available for the pursuit of subgoals. adults ultimately find ways to focus  almost full attention  on subproblems  without completely losing track of the main problem  note 1 . 
in younger people  though  this is probably not the way; full attention to a subproblem may leave no road back. but  long before a person is able to put one problem entirely aside  work on another  and return to the first  note 1   he must develop more limited schemes for withstanding brief interruptions. we will propose a mechanism for this; it has two components: 
persistence-memory: the c-lines  or the agents driving them  have a tendency to restore recent sustained states -- that is  that they have a slower persistence-memory  so that when a transient disturbance is removed the preceding activity tends to be restored 
transient case-shift: we will also assume a mechanism for  shifting  patterns  upward  from at least some levels of the c-line hierarchy  on command from special agents that control these  later-maturing  pathways between the layers. 
the persistence memory means that if the child's attention is drawn to another subject  his present commitments are suppressed  for the moment  while a new society is assembled. at the end of the diversion  interruption  or sub-job  the passive persistence memory restores the previous society - which then must readjust to whatever changes have been made. for 

invited papers- 1: minsky 1 

infantile problem-solving even just one such level would suffice for refocussing transiently on some kinds of subproblems. 
would data so crudely shifted remain meaningful  only to the extent that adjacent levels have similar structure. this would be only approximate and many agents will get inappropriate messages. our c-diagram does not illustrate this idea very well; there would have to be similar layers at each level. i should add that this caseshift idea seems physiologically unnatural to me. its motivation and power will be seen below in  minitheory 1   but something about it bothers me and it is proposed more as an exercise than as a strong conjecture. 
general memory: in later life we need larger  more 
 general purpose  memories. as the system matures  new families of memory agents could become actively attached to the c-lines. we need a concept of how they are addressed  and the issues there seem very similar to those of communication. it would seem plausible to have some sort of 
adjacent-context addressing: a memory unit is evoked by a pattern on one c-line level and remembers the contents of c-lines of an adjacent level. recall activates  competitively  the memory agent that best matches the current address pattern. 
use of the upper level as the address makes the system suitable for activating sub-agents; use of the lower level as address is useful for reporting  e.g.  for agents that recognize complex things by relations between their parts. there is a deep question about whether the same knowledge-bearing agents can be used in both ways - as  antecedent  and as  consequent  directed  to use hewitt's distinction. do we use the identical grammar agents both for talking and for listening  more generally  do we share the same agents for explaining and for predicting  who knows. in  minsky  1   i suggested a two-way process in which  frames  would try to connect up by matching at both levels. i still don't understand the issues very well. 
in any case  in this arrangement the memory units have the same kind of  split-level  connections as do other agents. are they different from other kinds of agents at all  probably one could construct a  unified theory . but  in the brain  such economy seems inappropriate: surely memory is important enough for a few genes of its own! perhaps memory agents are even complex enough to sense differences and make simple changes of the winston sort  within simple semantic networks. 
it seems useless to propose too many details at this level. for  once the system has facilities for long-term memory - that is  for restoring some parts of the csystem to a semblance of an earlier state  the  mind  is capable  at least in principle  of constructing within itself new ways to learn  and to  think  about what it is doing. it can go on to build for itself more powerful and more general capabilities. at this point the mechanisms of higher thought become decoupled from basic computational principles  and from basic gross anatomical features  and the methodology of correlating structure 
with function begins to fail. 
emergence of cognitive  universals : do all people think the same way  how is it possible for them to communicate  are important features of thought and language determined in precise detail by genetics  or only through broad developmental principles  all natural languages  we are told  have much the same kinds of nouns  verbs  adjectives  cases  and even  it is said  some invariances of word-order. they certainly all have words. is this because of a highly-structured  innate 
linguistic mechanism  
the question is important  but not so much for the theory of syntax as for the theory of thinking in general. one possibility is that detailed syntactic restrictions are genetically encoded  directly  into our brains; this raises problems about the connections with meaning and the representation of knowledge. another possibility is that there are uniformities in early cognitive structure that affect the evolution of languages  both in the individual  and circularly  through the culture. in the social evolution of child-raising  cultures learn what is easy for children to learn; early language cannot say what young children cannot  mean   to use halliday's expression. and much of what children  mean  develops before overt natural language  within the high-level internal c-lines of our theory. the rest of this paper pursues what this might imply about pre-linguistic meaning. 
it would seem inevitable that some early high-level representations  developing in the first year or so  would be concerned with the  objects  of attention - the  things  that natural languages later represent as nouns. here we would indeed suspect genetic pre-structuring  within sensory systems designed to partition and aggregate their inputs into data for representing  things  further  we would need systems with elementary operations for constructing  and comparing descriptions. we pursue this by returning to the action put: what is required of such an agent  setting aside possible conceptions far outside the present framework  let us agree that put needs access to c-lines for origin  green block  and destination  tower-top . 
what  in turn  does it mean for there to be origin clines  in the introduction  we pointed out that different sub-agents of put will need to know different things about the origin; move will need location-of-origin and grasp will need size-of-origin. consider a model in which the description is simply a property-list in which the value of a property is a symbol  in binary  on a bundle of c-lines. 

invited paners-1: minsky 1 

min1the1ry 1: somewhere there is an agent  g  with access to the property list of green-block. the agent g knows - or controls subordinates who can find out - some things like color  size  shape and location when we say that  green block  is the value of origin  we mean that the activity pattern on the origin c-lines somehow activate this g to give it dominance over potential competitors at its own level. 
activation of g  in this infantile minitheory  simply enables it  or its subordinates  to place property-value symbols onto certain other c-lines  e.g.  on c-color-oforigin  c-size-of-origin  etc. this makes the description available to other agents like put. but is it reasonable to suppose a distinct c-line for every distinct  known  property of the subject  
for adults  this would seem extravagant. for an infant  it seems no problem -- he's lucky to have any properties at all. later in development  though  there will be other  conceptual foci  -- let's call them conceptual cases in analogy with linguistic cases - such as object  instrument  indirect-object  and so forth. will we have to reduplicate the whole property structure all over again for each of these  
what might these  cases  be  one theory is that we begin with a single object or noun-like case which later splits into two or more  used to represent goals and effects of actions. the actions --  verb-like  structures - could remain implicit in the agents till later. we will consider other possibilities shortly; for the moment we will carry on as though there are just a few similar noun-case structures. but if they are very similar  the proliferation could be stemmed by creating a more general kind of noun-agent to take care of such matters. we can imagine two somewhat opposite approaches to this. 
minitheory 1: we create a noun-agent who functions as a general-purpose property-selector. it has just two input c-lines and one output c-line.  in fact  it is just the lisp function  getprop  

by providing just one of these for each functional nouncase  we are saved from duplicating each c-line for each property. unfortunately  there are some serious objections to this scheme. 
having only one property available at a times makes difficulties for  recognition agents . as in  production system  or  planner-like  models  our agents do not usually specifically designate their sub-agents; rather  they  enable  whole subfamilies  whose members select one of themselves to respond on the basis of other data  e.g  recognition of important combinations of properties. in serial computers this would be no problem  but here the system would have to scan through all the properties. 
a more subtle but more serious problem: the specificity of the c-lines has been lost. the same c-line sometimes means size  sometimes location  and so forth. the poor agents will find most of their inputs totally meaningless. we have lost  homogeneity of symbol-type  
minitheory 1: 	let's agree instead to tolerate 
minitheory l's set of distinct c-lines for each property 
- these would be indispensible in infancy. then the recognition agents could be simple  one-layer perceptrons.  note 1  but  we don't want to duplicate all the agents  too  for each case. imagine that the several cases all differentiate from a one primordial case  as a linear sequence with specificity gradient; 
noun1 -n1un1 -n1un1 - n1un1  
kind 	kind kind 	kind loc 	loc loc 	loc size 	size size 	- origin 	origin 	- 	- shape 	shape - 	- destination - destination support support - - purpose - - - color - - - etc. 
a huge advantage of this is that agents can have access to several objects at once  so that they can recognize differences and other relations between objects. this makes it possible to learn simple forms of  means-ends  analysis  etc. 
the most highly developed case has the best-developed description structure while the others have progressively smaller  and somewhat different  more specialized  to embody the  case-shifter  descussed earlier we can 
arrange the c-lines for the different caso-symbols so that a case-shift mechanism can move their contents into better-developed case-slots. 
now we can move  transiently or permanently  any nounsymbol chosen as the focus of attention  into a more principal case-position. then a more detailed description of the selected object of attention appears on the property c-lines of the  more principal  case. there are substantial advantages to this arrangement: 
it preserves homogeneity of type. each c-line always carries the same  sort  of information  so that the problems for sub-agent recognition are vastly simplified 

tnvftad papers-1: minsky 1 

the different case-systems provide different descriptions of the same object. 
the stratification of the case structure is very plausible  developmentally. the infant conception evolves from a single object focus -- neither subject or object  but just it. 
the linear layout of the diagram suggests that the whole sequence might be shifted at once. if this were true  it suggests a prediction that there might be a preferred ordering of cases in natural language when it later appears. suppose that object  assuming  arbitrarily  it to be the  second  case  is shifted into subject  the  first  case. then some certain  third  case will  by default  usually shift to replace the object. is there a linguistic regularity  in early language development  anything like this  if so  it might reflect a remnant of this primordial ordering. 
are the cognitive cases  universal   we just passed over a vital question  in assuming that the functional cases are the same from one person  or culture  to the next! the original it represents the central object of attention in the infant. when it later splits into two  these might be used for finding differences  as suggested above   or they might be involved in describing things as wholes made of parts -- the beginnings of true description. another possibility is that they are first involved in before-after or have-want representations of actions and of goals. is there a distinct  early  agent case -- and how is it involved with the infant's representation of himself as different from the rest of the world  and what comes next  is it an active-agent - passive patient distinction  an object-action distinction  an instrument-object distinction  or what  it seems to me that this question of whether there are genetic or computational reasons for one structure or another to first appear should be a central issue in the theory of human intelligence. perhaps the study of earliest language features can help here. 
minitheory 1 still leaves serious problems  if we want to probe more deeply into descriptions. for example  the concept  inside   say  of a box  should yield another object - not merely a property. is inside a property  obviously  the idea of description as property-list itself has limitations  and we cannot simply continue forever to add more and more properties  with dedicated c-lines. concepts like contents-of  opposite-of  supported-by  or a-little-to-the-left-of presumably involve relations between cognitive cases. and what about scenes in which there are rows of rows  arches of arches  etc. as our descriptive power increases  so must that of the agencies employing the descriptions  and simple  uniform solutions like the case-shift mechanism will not suffice. 
i see little use in trying to attack such problems by further naive psychophysiological speculation. this is a job for artificial intelligence! one approach is to find ways such systems could uniform and universal solutions. thus  one might look for ways to make some agents to embody the primitive operations of lisp  while others learn to embody representations of lisp programs. or  perhaps  one might apply a similar plan to some adequate logical formalism. 
another approach is to search  basic  or  primitive  operations that  while perhaps less elegant and uniform  seem more lifelike. for example  mental activity surely needs processes that can: 
compare two descriptions. 
describe the result of a proposed action. 
find an action that will reduce a difference. 
yet another approach is to search for a coherent basis of  conceptual  relationships  or  dependencies   as schank has put it. here one might focus on the representation issue first  and hope that the procedural issues will clarify themselves. 
at some point in each of these plans  the strategy should turn toward seeking some developmental uniformity. i would expect the  final  true  scheme to turn out to seem wildly ad hoc on the surface. imagine trying to account for the stick-insect  without understanding its evolutionary origin. 
description and language: about the simplest kind of verbal description is that of noun plus adjective. minitheory 1 can represent any particular such description  e.g.  size-of-subject  in an ad hoc fashion  by creating a specific c-line for it. through a connection to such a cline a child could learn   by rote  or whatever  to respond to such an object with a  pseudo-syntactic  verbal form like  large block . the syntax would be  pseudo  for lack of a systematic way to construct - or understand -- other such forms. a truly syntactic development would be the ability to attach any available adjective to any noun-case object. with minitheory 1  on the other hand  one could imagine fragments of true syntax emerging after completion of fragments of the attention-focus case-shifter  for this would provide at least the rudiments of appropriately meaningful deep structure. 
but i don't think it plausible to expect complex verbal behavior to follow so closely on the heels of barely completed cognitive machinery. for one thing  it isn't true in real life; the development of internal representations seems much further ahead in the first two years. and we'll propose a hint of a possible theoretical problem in a moment. 
in any event  more elaborate  actions    frames  and 
 scenarios  surely become mental objects after the first few months. we wish we knew a way to tell whether these in fact take the form of cross-cultural  cognitive universals   in the sense that there are comparatively 

invited papers-1: minsky 1 

similar representations between one child and another. there seems no question that elements which seem necessary to summarize the simplest real-life episodes bear compelling likenesses to familiar linguistic structures. thus  specification of the instrument of the action   by- or  with    the purpose   for    the trajectory if provided   from - to   and so forth  seem essential. it can hardly be a coincidence that these entities  which appear later in language  resemble so the ingredients that seem earlier needed for what we might call  cognitive syntax . or - gloomy possibility -perhaps this is just an illusion that stems from cognitive contamination by the structure of one's own natural language!  note 1  
when the time finally comes for learning grammatical speech  those  cognitive cases  that have high-level crepresentations should be relatively easy to encode into external symbols  because the  deep structures   along with some means for manipulating them  already exist as central elements of internal communication. that is  the child already uses something like syntactic structure in his internal manipulations of descriptions. in fact  let us reverse the usual question about how early children learn to talk grammatically. perhaps we need a theory of why do children take so long to learn to talk grammatically! 
the phenomenal suddenness with which many a child acquires substantial grammatical ability  around his second year  certainly cries out for explanation. but why not sooner if  internally  he already uses something as complex  conjecture: it is a matter of a different kind of computational complexity - of converting from one sort of data-structure to another. for  if we admit an earlier  non-natural internal language  of a sort  then learning language is really learning to translate between languages! 
well  what could cause a sudden growth in computational power  conjecture: it is not until somewhere in his second year that his computational development takes some important additional step along the road to the  full  computation power that makes  almost anything  possible. we know a great deal of theory about such matters  not in cognition  but in the theory of computation. and there we are used to seeing how very simple changes can make large surface differences --
e.g.  in adding another level of approximation to recursion. so the answer to our question might lie partly in that other arena  wherein the addition of an inconspicuous new computational facility makes a dramatic  but now non-mysterious  increase in symbolmanipulative competence. in any case  the discovery and study of  linguistic universal  promises to provide us with deep and important suggestions about the structure of internal communication. 
this leads  i think  to the following position about  innate vs. acquired  in language: the internal communication mechanisms in the infant mind  at least at the higher levels  may have enough uniformities to compel society  in subtle ways  to certain conformities  if social communication is to engage young children. while the fine details of mature linguistic syntax could be substantially arbitrary  because they develop comparatively late and can exploit more powerful computational mechanisms   they probably are not so  because the cognitive entities that early language is concerned with are probably much more rigidly and uniformly defined in infancy. 
notes 
note 1. the present paper is in part a sequel to my paper  minsky 1  and partly some speculations about the brain that depend on a theory being pursued in collaboration with seymour papert in that theory  which we call  the society of minds   papert and i try to combine methods from developmental  dynamic  and cognitive psychological theories with ideas from al and computational theories. freud and piaget play important roles. in this theory  mental abilities  both  intellectual  and  affective   and we ultimately reject the distinction  emerge from interactions between  agents  organized into local  quasi-political hierarchies. overall coherency of personality finally emerges  not from any clear and simple cybernetic principles  but from the interactions  under elaborate genetic control  of communities of doers   critics  and  censors   culminating in almost freudian agencies for self-discipline that compare one's behavior with fragments of  self-images  acquired at earlier stages of development. the play episode that begins the present paper hints briefly at the workings of such an internal society under the surface of a child's behavior. we hope to publish the whole theory within the next year or so  but it still has rough spots. 
note 1. because  1  wrecker was the primary goal and  1  his job is easier than builders's in the limited timeframe and  1  it satisfies some more remote goal which is angry at hunger's subversion of play and  1  the consummatory act that closes the episode leaves less unfinished business and conflict. 
note 1. we do not mean to preclude the use of natural language for internal purposes. everyone agrees that it happens all the time. but these are not conversations between simple agents  but emerge from interactions among vast  organized societies. a developed personality is an enormous structure that has constructed for itself fantastic facilities  in which some parts can send verbal messages  and other  structured representations  to other parts of itself - or even to future  contingent activations of itself. 
note 1. it is natural to wonder why we tolerate so much ambiguity as we do in natural language. conjecture: we hardly notice it because we have developed such powerful methods for dealing with ambiguity in other 

invited papers-1: minsky 1 

mental forms. the forthcoming work with papert will propose  as a main thesis  that thoughts themselves are ambiguous in an important sense. then the  disambiguation  of natural-language expressions is  child's play  compared to other conceptual representation problems. 
note 1. we conjecture that there is a general mechanism through which the neurological structures responsible for learning pass from early stages in which collections of cells act as units to later stages in which 
their components become mutually cross-inhibitory. that is  they move toward an  exclusive-or  mode of operation in which only one component at a time can get control of a group's shared output ports. such families might resemble the form described in the  synthesis  diagram in chap.v of tinbergen's a study of instinct; both the agents for  real-time  and for for long term memory might derive from modifications of such structures. 
note 1. a main theme of the work mentioned in note 1 is the idea that  learning  often involves a choice of whether to try to modify an old concept to a new purpose  or to split it into two variants. winston's  near miss  technique tries to make a single representation accomodate to new problems. when this doesn't work  we conjecture  the representation splits into two or more  leaves  of a competitive family. 
note 1. the  recursive  use of mental facilities  easily 
 simulated  with programming languages like lisp is probably an illusion  an artifact of our description of what we observe ourselves doing. a recursive function call is just one  extremely clean and simple way to separate the local variables from one  invocation  of a process to another. the infantile schemes proposed in this paper lie at another extreme. presumably  as people mature they construct other intermediate forms with various features and bugs. a problem is that we don't have enough technical names of theories for other  approximate  schemes for  context maintenance .  comment suggested by g. j. sussman.  see for example   mcdermott & sussman  
note 1. the formal limitations of simple perceptrons should not be troublesome  here  because we can assume that each input c-line carries a comparatively meaningful information symbol from some other welldeveloped system. in such circumstances  the perceptron learning algorithm   on tap  not on top   could have immense value since  conceivably  it could be embodied in just one or a few brain cells. 
note 1. no moral is intended in this analogy. just as in human societies  there are surely important ways in which low-level agents cross gross boundaries  and these may have vital neurological functions. however  the analogy is poor because human individuals can know and understand more than their social superiors; this can hardly happen in the nervous system  in which all the agents are equally mindless. 
