compound: a program that undkrstands noun compounds 
david r. mcdonald* 
department of computer science  carnegie-mellon university  pittsburgh  pennsylvania  1. 
　　
　　compound is a program that accepts a noun compound of arbitrary length and attempts to construct a meaning for it. a noun compound is a sequence of two or more nouns used to describe a single referent. compound was designed to function as a part of a natural language understanding system. some of the knowledge  e.g.. context  necessary to understand some compounds must come from sources that a natural language understanding system could provide compound produces meanings for compounds such as  water meter cover adjustment screw    glass wine glass    golf club   and  computer maintenance . the first example is fairly straightforward and provides no difficulty for the program. in the second example  the word  glass  has two meanings  i.e.  one as a container from which people drink liquids  and the other as a clear material made from silicon dioxide . the context provided by the compound itself is sufficient to disambiguate which meaning of  glass  is meant in both cases. in the  golf club  example  the word  club  has two meanings  i.e.. as an organization  and as a 
　　stick used in games  the compound  golf club  also has two meanings  one as an organization that provides golfing facilities  and the other as the stick used in the game of golf. the context in which the compound occurs can provide sufficient information to disambiguate it. for example  consider the two sentences: 
1. the golf club hit the ball. 
1. the golf club fired its manager. 
　　the last compound.  computer maintenance   seems straightforward  as most people assume it describes a  maintenance  action in which a computer is maintained. however  the phrase  computer maintenance of a data base  brings out a second possible meaning. 
　　compound uses the semantic network systcn. nftl  developed by lahlman  i  as its underlying knowledge representation system. knowledge about the meanings of words  as well as other real-word knowledge is stored in the netl network. compound accesses this network to find all the possible relationships between the nouns of a compound that could be the basis of an interpretation. if no interpretations are found. compound reports this to the user. if one interpretation is found  it checks with the user before adding it to netl.'s data base. if more than one interpretation is found  it invokes several heuristics to attempt to select the best 
this research was sponsored in part by the defense advanced 
projects agency  dod . arpa order no. 1. monitored by the 
air force avionics laboratory under contract f1-c1  and in part by the national research council of canada. the views and conclusions contained in this document arc those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies cither expressed or implied  of the defense advanced research projects agency  the us government  or the national research council of canada. 
interpretations for the compound. the current heuristics include: 
　　1 context: the context in which a compound occurs often disambiguates it. 
　　1. cognates: a meaning for the compound may already exist in netl's data base. 
　　1. instances of an interpretation: instances of a proposed meaning of the compound may exist in netl's data base. 
　　1 similar compounds: there may exist in nktl's data base meanings of compounds that are similar to an interpretation for the compound under consideration. for example  the meanings of  car maintenance  and  truck maintenance  arc similar to the meaning of  computer maintenance  where a  computer  is the thing maintained  since all arc machines  this heuristic prefers this meaning  rather than the one where a  computer  does the maintenance  as in  computer maintenance of a data base . 
　　1. occurrences: the number of times an interpretation has occurcd gives a weak indication of how good an interpretation is. 
　　once compound selects and ranks the interpretations it considers best  it asks the user to make a final selection of the meaning to be added to netl's data base. the interpretations stored in netl's data base are used by the similar compounds heuristic to help disambiguate subsequent compounds. through this mechanism  the program's performance improves over time  a simple but effective form of learning. 
　　compound is written in maclisp and runs on a dkc pop 1 under tops-1. it takes a few seconds of cpu time to produce meanings for most compounds. it may take more time  if ambiguities exist 
reference 
 1j fahlman  s. e.  netl: a system for representing and using real-world knowledge cambridge: mit press  1. 
　　
1 
