 
　　　a direct-drive robotic manipulator  cmu dd arm  is being developed at carnegie-mellon university. this paper describes the design concept and theory of this new mechanical arm based on the direct-drive method using rare-earth dc torque motors. because these motors have high torque  light weight and compact size  we can construct robots with far better performance than those presently available. for example  we can eliminate all the transmission mechanisms between the motors and their loads  such as reducers and chain belts  and construct a simple mechanism  direct-drive  where the arm links are directly coupled to the motor rotors and stators. this elimination can lead to excellent performance: no backlash  low fraction  low inertia  low compliance and high reliability. 
1. introduction 
     present electrically powered manipulators are still far inferior to human arms and unsatisfactory for many applications in terms of speed. accuracy and versatility. one of the reasons for this poor performance comes from the transmission mechanisms  such as gear trains  lead screws  steel belts  chains and linkages  which are used to transmit power from the motors to the load and to increase the driving torque. the following problems result from having complicated transmission mechanisms: 
  dynamic response is poor because of the heavy weight and/or high compliance of the transmission. 
  fine movements and pure torque control arc difficult because of the relatively large friction and backlash at the transmission. 
  additional complicated mechanisms for minimizing the backlash are necessary and they need careful adjustment and regular maintenance. 
     one of the main reasons for using a transmission mechanism with a nigh gear reduction ratio is that the conventional servo motors provide rather small torque and high speed. recently  however  high-torque and low-speed motors using new rare-earth magnetic materials  eg. samarium cobalt  have been developed and are becoming available for industrial use   1 . since the maximum magnetic energy product is 1 to 1 times larger than with a conventional ferrite or alnico magnet  the rare-earth dc motors have a high output torque  low speed  light weight and compact body. they arc suited for the manipulator drive and will allow elimination of the transmission mechanism. 
     in this paper  we discuss a manipulator where all the joint axes are directly coupled to rotors of rare-earth magnet ix torque motors. first a 
     basic configuration of direct-drive manipulators is shown. second  we present a design theory for direct drive manipulators by using a simple kinematic model. we then find an arm structure most suitable for direct drive. finally  we describe a direct-drive manipulator developed at carnegie-mellon university  and verify the theoretical result 
1. configuration of direct-drive manipulators 
　　　basically  a direct-drive manipulator consists of a series of active joints whose typical construction is shown in figure 1. the inner and outer cases arc connected to the other joints by connecting links. the motor illustrated is a dc torque motor which consists of a rotor  a stator and a brush ring. the stator and the brush ring are installed in the inner case  while the rotor is directly coupled to the outer case without any transmission mechanism. some variations are possible in the joint mechanism. for example  the stator can be attached to the outer case  and the rotor to the inner case. also  the joint axis can be parallel to the connecting links. in any case  the joint has a simple structure with all the components attached directly to the inner and outer cases. 
     since the direct drive method eliminates all the transmission mechanisms and since the load is directly coupled to the actuator output  a direct-drive manipulator is essentially free from the problems which have been caused by the transmission mechanisms: backlash is essentially removed  and compliance is almost zero except at the connecting links. slight coulomb friction can exist  but only at the bearings supporting the joint axis. because of its simple structure  a direct-drive manipulator is composed of a much smaller number of mechanical parts. this is another important advantage of direct drive  because it potentially contributes to improve the reliability of the manipulator and to make it free from 
complex maintenance or readjustment 


1 




1 

mm/t ratio is reduced to 1. also  we noticed that the larger-diameter 	 	ojima  t.  tomizawa  d.  ct.al. 
motors have the smaller mm/t ratio. the extra large alnico magnet magnetic properties of a new type of rare-karth cobalt motor has a mm/t ratio as small as that of the medium size rare-earth 
magnets. 
motors. 	ieee transactions on magnetics mag-1 1  1. 
1. cmu dd arm 
   a direct-drive manipulator  cmu dd arm  was designed based on the above design theory  and is being developed at carnegie-mellon university  1|. for joints 1 through 1 we selected motors with rare-earth cobalt permanent magnet and for others alnico magnet motors with a 
large diameter. the basic design specifications of the cmu dd arm are: 
  degrees of freedom: 
  joint structure: 
  pivot: 
  rotation: 
  total length: 
  maximum load: 
  maximum speed: 1  option 1  
p-r-p-r-p-r 
1＜ 
1＜ 
1 m 
1 kg  1 kg  
1 m/sec at the tip 1. conclusion 
　　　the direct-drive manipulators have potentially a number of excellent features that the present electrically powered robotic manipulators do not nave. however  the development of a practical manipulator requires powerful active joints with light weight we analyzed required torques for a scries of active joints by introducing the m/t ratio  ratio of mass to peak torque  of active joints. wc also found that the suitable kinematic structures for the direct drive are p-r-p-r-p-r 
and r-p-r-p-p-r in the case of robots with 1 degrees of freedom. 
     the cmu direct-drive arm was designed according to these theoretical concepts also taking into account of motors presently available on the markets. however  the practical implementation requires investigation of another problem : heat dissipation. each joint housing requires a light weight and strong structure with the property of good heat dissipation. this improvement in joint housings as well as more powerful motors will allow us to have robots of lighter weight and higher performance than currently available. 
acknowledgements 
     the authors wish to express their gratitude to raj reddy for his constant encouragement and enthusiasm on this project. ed kurts  kasturi rangan and phil spano provided assistance in designing and constructing the cmu arm. 
