 
　when used with physically handicapped and learning disabled children  computer-based logo activities can serve diagnostic and therapeutic purposes  as well as provide insights into theories of knowledge representation and cognitive functioning in general. the impact of logo flows from the active role taken by the students in initiating and controlling their activities; from the specifically spatial geometric emphasis of these activities: from the ready availability of problem-solution paths for scrutiny by the. student and by the teacher  and from the prosthetic value of the computer in providing a means for the expression of otherwise trapped intelligence in this population. 
1. introduction 
 the logo learning environment  i  provides a versatile tool for diagnostic  instructional and remedial use with children who have special educational needs  ii 1 1 . weir  has described the successful use of logo with severely physically handicapped but mentally alert cerebral palsy' adolescents at the cotting school for handicapped children. the educational impact has been substantial. it is our belief that the flavor of the work has been influenced by the a.i. setting which spawned it. themes which arise include an emphasis on process rather than product: a concern for the varjety of types of knowledge involved in solving a problem; the learner as model builder: and the specificity/generality issue - how specific are the computational mechanisms underlying cognitive processes  
 observing children with disabilities offers a magnified and slowed down view of familiar processes. although we do not know how many unusual and deviant. mechanisms have been invoked in these children  it is instructive to explore their behavior as a source of evidence for possible cognitive mechanisms 
ii. models and processes 
 to the extent that sensorimotor activity contributes to the full development of the cognitive structures underlying spatial understanding  individuals with severe motoric restrictions suffer from a reduced opportunity for such learning. hence they are at 
 i. cerebral palsy is a disorder of movement and posture resulting from   permanent  non-progressive defect or lesion in the brain occurring before the end of the first year of life. 
risk in regard to the development of a deficit in spatial competence as a result of the restricted manipulatory experience available to them. an exposure to logo has provided a source of spatial manipulatory activities for these individuals. the logo theme of 
the  learner as model builder  takes on a poignant significance  since lines on the graphics screen can become models of objects  as-if objects   and producing an effect on such graphics objects can become highly significant actions for a severely handicapped person. this has had a dramatic effect on the cerebral palsy victims with whom we have worked  both on their academic progress and on the level of self confidence they demonstrate  see section vi . 
　performance tests are notoriously difficult to administer to this group. the very motor handicap that leads us to suspect a deficit in spatial cognition  renders the ascertainment of that deficit very difficult. measures of visual perception in cerebral palsy yield progressively lower scores as the motor component of the test used increases . cerebral palsy children who fail on the block-design reproduction task of the wechsler intelligence scale for children  can succeed  most of the time  on a task which requires them to choose the one correct design out of three presented block designs  however  turning assessment tasks into a multiple choice format in this way gives a somewhat impoverished setting  since all information on how the task is performed is lost. 
　in contrast  exploiting the possibilities of an interactive graphics situation can generate a significantly novel way of assessing motorically restricted persons. we have developed an extension of the standard logo system which allows the use of screen versions of assessment tasks  thus reducing the motor component of the task to a minimum.  using these  we have found deficits in spatial reasoning in some cerebral palsied subjects when they are asked to perform tasks involving ordering by length  shape recognition  spatial localization and mental rotation  1 1 . 
　the computer places constraints on the execution of a task that emphasizes the intermediate steps of the task. this results in a wealth of detail in the protocols of both handicapped and non-handicapped controls. we recommend a more widespread use of this approach as an adjunct to more standard recognition  sorting and copying tasks  where end results tend to predominate over evidence of the problem-solving process. it is of course possible to emphasize process without a computer  but the computer does facilitate this  and provides all kinds of other perks like automatic records of the actions performed and automatic timing. 
1 
hi. specificity of computational mechanisms 
 there is a theoretical as well as a practical interest in exploring the patterns of disruption displayed by persons with these unusual experiences. are  there dissociations - a pattern of spared and impaired competencies such as spatial excellence coupled with marked language deficits  this would lend support to the view  gaining ground among cognitive scientists  that some computational mechanisms at least are quite specific to the domain and level of processing involved in the particular problem being solved. 
　it is difficult to obtain good data on subjects with gross limitation of expressive power -- restricted or absent speech  and/or inability to write or derform other manipulations. text-editinc facilities provide a way for motorically restricted intellectuals to keep notes in the form of computer files  and to engage in problem-solving at a high level without having to do it alt in the head  by using the computer as a scratchpad 
 combining information from a variety of logo activities provides a powerful way of making fine-grain analyses of performance in spatial  numerical and writing domains. very clear dissociations are exhibited. 
dissociation in an fourteen year old quadriplegic 
　ja's favorite project was the production of a newspaper  in which he showed his ability to plan his activity. he first generated the section headings  and then went back to fill in details  taking each section heading and expanding it  beginning with the easiest and not with the first -- an example of top-down planning. in contrast  his spatial ability was very poor. he programmed a simple drawing of a car step-by-step and painfully slowly. he failed on a mental rotation task  1  that five year-olds can do. he could not seriate six micks -- neither using real sticks  1 . nor in the graphics screen version of the piagetian task . he could seriate four screen  sticks  but not four real sticks. he could not insert new sticks into an ordered row of four sticks  graphic or real. 
　hi* performance on piaget's village  topographical  task  was revealing. in this task  the child and the experimenter each have identical drawings of a scene. the experimenter places a doll successively at different locations in the drawing  and  for each placement of the doll  the child is required to place his doll in the same positions on his own drawing. the first time round  the drawings of experimenter and subject are in the same north-south orientation. then the experimenter's drawing is rotated 1 degrees while the child's drawing is left at the same upright orientation. in our version of the task  each of these parts is done first with physical models of the scene  and then with the child's scene drawn on the screen  using the cursor as doll. ja's strategy in the  real  task was to copy the physical movement of the experimenter  thus getting the wrong placements   score 1 . in the computer task he began describing the position of the doll in words and achieved a score of 1 correct placements. he succeeded in turning the computer version of the task into a linguistic task which he could do. when he performed the  real  task  the underdeveloped state of his place-finding skill led him to use a less successful copying strategy. 
 ja.'s work with numbers was far below age-level  and idiosyncratic. there are many places in his work with turtle geometry where he started with 1  which is his age  as the argument for a turtle command  and then continued along the number sequence regardless of whether he was instructing the turtle to turn right  to go forward or .to go back  and regardless of the needs of the problem. 
　the contrast between ja's skill in the linguistic domain and his weakness in spatial and number-handling areas leads us to reject the proposal that he has a  general sequencing  problem  as suggested by his clinicians  since he can order letters very skillfully. instead we hypothesize a domain-specific problem involving inadequate development of appropriate mental representations for spatial knowledge datastructures and operations 
on them; spatial metaknowledge . 
iv. varieties of knowledge 
　many of our subjects give the impression of having small local packets of knowledge  without the appropriate procedural metaknowledge regarding how to fit these into any particular solution path. this is illustrated by their behavior in the missile game. to give ja. and other students a sense of a number as a quantity  in this case as something which does a particular amount of work  we set up a target game  in which the student was required to estimate the number needed to move the missile to the target - a hit was rewarded with an explosion. a second cerebral palsy subject  kst  the same age and with similarly poor spatial ability and good verbal skills as ja  showed an even stronger tendency to step through the number sequence when playing this target game. she went  1 ii 1 1  to hit the first target at 1;  1 1 1  to get the next target at 1  and so on. her use of the successor function was without error  but inappropriately inflexible for a fourteen-vear old. 
　her problem would appear to be not so much that she did not have a given schema  but that she did not know when to activate it or how to choose the most useful of several possible schemata she did not have the flexibility which accompanies efficient metaknowledge. this is illustrated further by her performance when required to face the turtle in particular direction  and drive it to a given destination.. she always stopped short  and made no midcourse correction even though the wrong direction she had taken took her way past the locality involved. the experimenter found that if he took the driver's seat and asked the appropriate questions after each step -- is the turtle facing the right way   -this was sufficient  most of the time  for her to  solve  the problem. when the appropriate invocation of schemata was facilitated by embedding the game in a linguistic context -- driving the turtle around the screen was expressed as successive visits to depicted characters in a story -- her aim became more accurate  and she readily made appropriate mid-course direction corrections without any prompting. when the problem took the form of a linguistic task  she showed appropriate invocation of schemata. 
a detour; spatial giftedncss 
　dissociation between the development of spatial and linguistic ability can go the other way - spatial excellence in the presence of linguistic deficits. evidence is accumulating for the existence of a group of children who in fact are spatially gifted. such children 
1 

turn up in the specific learning disability category of school-children whose reading skills are below expected level. they have difficulty with language use. and since schools do not provide an opportunity for them to display their superior spatial skill in any formal way  they lose out. we have begun working with such children and find the predicted excellence at logo  1 
 1 . for example  one eleven-year-old dyslexic boy at a local school for the learning disabled demonstrated more skill at logo turtle geometry in the first half hour than any other child of that age we have encountered: and it was easy to detect the clever heuristics he adopted spontaneously  e.g.  constructing his own  unit  and  yardstick  appropriate to his needs. our explanation is that his success rests on highly developed metaknowledge in the spatial domain. stories about such children have accumulated in the logo community  1 1   and there is independent neuropsychological evidence for the existence of such a category among learning disabled children  1 . 
 the question arises as to whether one can do anything with this finding in practical terms  i.e.  how it can affect decisions about the education of such children. research on individual differences in aptitude in relation to instructional variables has shown that aptitude-treatment interactions do occur  but that these relate more to general mental ability rather than to the contrast between verbal and non-verbal ability  1 . inconsistent results are reported on the use of pictorial materials to enhance the learning of those students who score high on the visualization dimension. however  the figural enhancements of instructional materials used up till now have taken the form of graphs and diagrams -- a rather static form. notice the assumption that learning consists of the acquisition of facts - a diagram is a perfectly appropriate visual enhancement of factual acquisition. this approach does not take account of the need to know when and how to deploy a fact in a problem-solving situation - crucial procedural components of metaknowledge. 
　using a computer  it is now possible to introduce a more dynamic approach by making a substantial proportion of the formal school subjects available in spatial mode on a graphics screen. most importantly from a pedagogic point of view  we can arrange for computer-based spatial learning to be procedural and constructive in nature  as is the case with logo  with all the advantages which flow from this. 
 providing an opportunity for spatial problem-solving in a formal setting  in addition to the more usual places like the playing fields and the artist's drawing board is essential to the healthy academic growth of some people - future engineers  computer programmers -- allowing them to exploit their spatial facility to acauire academic skills. 
 the excellence we have been talking about has been shown to have a physiological counterpart  in that it is related to maturational rate . neuro-anatomical issues arise when interpreting the significance of the finding of a spatial deficit in cerebral palsy subjects. we return to the main topic of physically handicapped children and their spatial deficits. 
v. an ambiguity. 
brain damage vs lack of experience 
　while there has undoubtedly been a restriction in motor activity  there has also undoubtedly been brain damage in these subjects. although motor dysfunction is the predominant  defining characteristic of this group  the various etiological agents of cerebral palsy do not as a rule recognize functional boundaries; a pure motor disorder is rare. in particular  the original insult  be it vascular  mechanical  infectious or whatever  can affect those areas in the brain which recent research has shown to be concerned with spatial understanding  reviewed in  . thus  in any particular case  the spatial deficit in question may have resulted either from direct damage to the neural substrate which supports such activity in the undamaged brain  or indirectly from damage to motor areas  the dysfunctional consequences of which  namely  restricted manipulatory experience  have led to the spatial defect under consideration. 
　we hope to cast some light on the matter by observing the effect of intensive spatial problem-solving on the degree of spatial deficit shown by our subjects. to the extent that we can produce an improvement in performance so would we be inclined to attribute the deficit to the lack of experience. 
an example from the linguistic domain 
　disambiguating brain damage and lack of experience arises in the area of language production. we have not yet worked with non-vocal individuals  but some of our students have never before written anything whatsoever  because their handicap is severe enough to prevent them from holding and using a pencil. the standard procedure here is for an adult to act as scribe  and in the process  insert all those  minor   trivial  markers etc.  whose presence or absence is of such interest. 
　if severely handicapped individuals are to hold down a job  the quality of their writing is important. for many o  these students  this is the first opportunity to generate their own text  without the intervention of an adult. their output can be used in diagnostic mode  to establish patterns of expressive language disability  and  where required  as a remedial tool for language re-education. 
　we show such a sample of writing produced by ma.  a quadriplegic cerebral palsied student. he was 1 years old when he started logo  and his programming and math achievements have confirmed his high intelligence. he has now been admitted to the university of massachusetts boston campus as a computer science student. this is the first piece of writing he produced. 
 i ment dr. sileva where  jose valente and gary drescher on october 1  1 at 1 : 1 : 1 am. which the computer i was so excized it like being it a waitting & maternace room at a hospiltal whiting to fine if oot's a boy or a grail. 
we had a and we whont you to do it fist for us i am logo number   i   ginny pig. when they get a new idse they say to hel  michalel we had a and we whont you to do it fist for us like a nice guy i do if i wont to or not. i do and then i give my por and con on the idse. i tell them why i came up for a allturative. why you mite ask  becose i know how the person on the arther end feel. becose i am the middle man betwee m.i.t. and handcap people. 
i also teach five stundts. no tow lean at rate. some ask then i know they are intered in leaning about logo. then the one that take for granted. i can tell. 
when 1 teach i lean form my standt. as well or bedter then form a book. i call that on the job training. 
my fist and every day e.xperreance with the compuer when it cash and it lost but it keep on losting all that i have tort it but keep no teaching it overy and overy agian when i bring back to live  

this looks like spoken english which has been written down. 
there i  much phonetic spelling  omission of words and letters  as well 1 letter reversals and a curious construction for present tense verbs. how much is this due to lack of experience and how much to damage to the relevant brain area  are the errors random  resulting from inaccurate typing  thinking faster than he is able to type  lack of spelling experience  and the like  or is there tvidence for particular patterns seen in patients with known lesions  e.g. the type of disturbance associated with a lesion in the anterior portion of the dominant hemisphere  broca's expressive aphasia . in this type of lesion  inflectional markers for plurals  possessives. and third person singular /s/ are affected differentially 
 
we can see errors with tense markers in the above passage: 
 feel   feels ;  handicap   handicapped ;  take*  takes ;  cash   crashed ;  keep   kept . 
however  these errors could conceivably be due to his misperception of the spoken words  upon which he is basing his spelling  notice fine  instead of  find  . misperception could cover the instances of letter omissions which occur  especially  f  before a consonant  which is not sounded: 
 fist   first ;  lean   learn . 
either haste and/or lack of experience  or brain lesion  could conceivably account for the numerous omission of words: it  was  like being in; we had a  idea : no tow lean at  same  rate. and the reversal of letter order: 
 grail   girl ;  idse'  idea ;  por   pro ;  stundts   students ;  tow   two ;  form   from :  no   on . 
　in order to investigate and treat this problem we have set up a focal remedial program. all his english lessons take place in the computer room  using the text editor  instead of a scribe whose activities were masking the true situation. he writes his own book reviews  essays and the like  on the computer; in addition  and  in collaboration with his english teacher  we have instituted a series of remedial writing sessions involving specific exercises based on weaknesses shown in his writing  in order to assess how much improvement we can achieve. early indications are that a great deal of improvement can be achieved  a very necessary step for his college career. he recently wrote this letter in response to a query about logo from another victim of cerebral palsy. 
1 second street 
medford  mass. 1 
february 1  1 
mr. neville anderson bush farm 
1 acacia rd 
greenfield  n.c. 1 
dear nick  
   my name is michael murphy. i am the person whom your mother saw on  i'm magazine . i attend the cotting school in boston mass. i have been work with the compuers for about two and a half years. the name of the system is  logo . it has open many new doors for me. now i can draw picture on a cheen ane write letter like this one. 
   i was the first c.p. person in the u.s. to tired the  logo  system. enclose i will send some of my work. 
                                               sincerely yours  michael j. murphy jr. p.s. i would be greatful if you could send me a piece of your art. 
vi. socio affective issues: 
effect of participation in the process 
　severely handicapped persons cannot engage in the motor activities which ordinarily support the acquisition of cognitive structures. what is missing from their lives is the explicit confrontation between the actions they perform and the consequences of such actions in the physical world  an experience taken for granted in normal development. 
　this logo experience is often the first in which these students have had an opportunity to participate in the process of tackling problems where they are required to initiate solutions  try them out  decide when to change track and when to persist  respond to feedback - all those things which tend not to happen in the usual dependent  adult-dominated situations which characterize their lives. 
　it is characteristic of the logo system to seek to promote a close association between a child's cognitive development and an environment where he or she takes the active role in his or her learning. this aspect becomes especially important in work with special needs children  e.g.  with an autistic child  1 ; with the learning-disabled child  1 : and  most poignantly  with the cerebral palsy child  where a particularly debilitating consequence of the gross physical handicap is the dependent  passive role it imposes on its victims. a profound lesson has to be learned  one which is taken for granted in  normal  development. a handicapped individual has to learn to believe that an action he takes can have an effect on his environment. the uncompromising way in which logo places initiative and control in the hands pf the  user and gives the user a chance to know what she knows  means that she may now engage in sustained  independent activity and be her own critic. the resulting enjoyment and sense of personal fulfillment can greatly enhance their general sense of personal worth and competence  and could have important effects on the members of this disadvantaged section of society  not the least of which is the creation of a high degree of motivation which can then form the basis for significant learning in formal subjects. 
　there is much evidence of increased motivation among the participants  as reflected in an intense competition for the use of machines -- coming in an hour before school and skipping half the lunch break to work on the computer  - and the frequency of animated discussion about various computer projects represents a new experience for the school. the school authorities have been so impressed by all this that they have raised s1 to equip a computer center. computer programming has become an integral part of the school curriculum and 1 out of 1 senior students have opted to take computing. all 1 of the seniors involved in our project have changed their career plans to computer programming. three of these have been accepted into the 
1 

computer science course at university of massachusetts boston campus. increased  vocational access -  the possibility of independent living - is the great advantage accruing from the computer activities. 
 the versatility of the system supports a wide range of cognitive styles and levels of ability . allowing a student to carve out an area in which he feels comfortable - a microworld -- in which to work. the teacher can aim for a balance between working with strengths and exercizing weaknesses. individual case studies reveal the range of reactions to the introduction to logo  the preferred activities of different students  differences in styles of debugging  styles of working  amount of risk-taking  response to the anxiety of a new subject and so on. 
　as an illustrative example  we quote the subject who handled the devastation of failure by denial. ja. was always ready to change his purpose to fit his latest error. it was a great step forward when he learned to tolerate making an error and allowed himself to benefit from the process of debugging that error. another subject  aged seventeen  was so uncertain  shy and lacking in self confidence that she had the reputation of making no intellectual progress whatsoever. the virtues of logo applied particularly to her  and she has moved from a totally dependent situation  where she made no move on her own. and looked for reassurance after each command she typed  to one in which she works on her own for long periods of time and initiates her own quite sophisticated projects. 
　we believe that a major element in the improvement we see in motivation and in the positive affect generated by logo activity has to do with issues of who is in control of the activity. we have only scratched the surface of what is possible. 
acknowledgements 
the work reported here was supported by the bureau of 
education of the handicapped under grant number cfda 
1. it was carried out with the cooperation and support of seymour papert  the director of the logo laboratory  by the members of the cerebral palsy project: syvia weir  jose valente  gary drescher. and linda laatsch. 
