 
     polyhedra of minimal surface area are suggested as natural candidates for object models. the problem of computing such a polyhedron from a set of 1d points that are its vertices is explored. an approximate algorithm is suggested  and results of a preliminary implementation are discussed. 
1. introduction 
     ullman's  structure from motion theorem   and similar schemes    enable the three dimensional  1d  coordinates of corresponded points on the surface of a rigid object to be extracted from a sequence of images. after the 1d coordinates of a set of points has been found  a natural next step is to form a 1d object model for the set of points  . the object model could then be used for prediction and verification in later frames of the image sequence  or for recognition purposes  or for shape analysis. 
     let us ignore the other information that might be extracted from the images  and ask the following question: what is the most reasonable 1d object model for a set of 1d points  posed in this stark form  there is surely no best answer for all applications. first  there are a large variety of representations for solid objects   and second  there are a variety of definitions of  most reasonable  for each representation 
     this paper explores one possible object model: polyhedra. it is proposed that a polyhedron of minimal surface area is the most  natural  polyhedral model for a given set of points. this concept is explored theoretically  and an algorithm for computing an approximation to this polyhedron is described. preliminary results of an implementation of the algorithm are presented. 
1. polyhedra of minimal surface area 
     we will say that a simple polyhedron* p is a minimal surface area polyhedron for a set of 1d points s iff  a  the set of vertices of p is identical to 1  and  b  no other simple polyhedron whose vertex set is precisely s has a smaller surface area. 
     one could also define polyhedra of maximal volume  but these seem to be less  natural  than polyhedra of minimal surface area. a well-known fact from elementary physics may partially explain the naturalness of minimal area surfaces: the tension in in certain surfaces  e.g.  soap bubble films  is proportional to their area  so that they tend to form the surface of minimal area wherever they have free movement. 
     the idea that maximizing the volume or minimizing the surface area may result in natural polyhedral shapes is not new. keppel  interpolated triangular faces between parallel slices by maximizing the sandwiched volume  and puchs et al  attacked the same problem by minimizing an arbitrary function of the tiles  for example  the surface area. the fact that only a single cylindrical band of faces have to be computed makes the interpolation problem far more tractable than the general case under consideration here. 
　　a few basic properties of minimal area polyhedra are claimed here without proof: 
 1  a minimal area polyhedron exists for every set of 1 or more 1d points that are not all cop lunar. 
 1  for a given set of 1d points  a minimal area polyhedron is not necessarily unique. 
 1  the convex hull is a minimal surface area polyhedron for the set of hull vertices  since the convex hull is the onty simple polyhedron for its vertices. 
 1  the computation of the 1d analog of the minimal area polyhedron  the minimal perimeter polygon for a set of 1d points  is np-hard  i conjecture that the 1d problem is nphard as well. 
the reason that the 1d problem is np-hard is that the minimal perimeter polygon is identical to the euclidean traveling salesperson path  and the computation of this has been shown to be np-hard   1. 
     if the computation of the minimal area polyhedron is in fact a fundamentally intractable problem  heuristics and sub-optimal algorithms are inevitable. a number of traveling salesperson problem  tsp  heuristics are known   but it is not clear how these may be directly applied to the 1d problem. however  their sense may be mimicked  and in the next section  an algorithm is proposed for computing an approximation to the polyhedron of minimal surface area via a type a  greedy  algorithm. 
1. algorithm: shrinking from the hull 
　　that the convex hull is a minimal area polyhedron for its vertices   1  above  suggests that it be used as the starting point of an 
algorithm that systematically modifies a given polyhedron to include new points. the assumption is that most objects encountered in the real world have large convex sections that coincide with the hull  and so an algorithm which starts with the convex hull will be fast and accurate on these objects. 
     the two dimensional convex hull is sometimes explained as the shape that a rubber band would take were it to encompass a set of pegs placed at the point locations. the physical analogy can be extended to non-convex three dimensional shapes: there is a type of electronic plastic shielding that shrinks to conform to whatever shape it encloses when heated  t this is roughly the behavior intended for the algorithm below. 

the notion of    simple polyhedron  may be made precise by   combinatorial topology definition  eg.  1 . we intend the definition to require that the surface have genus 1  i.e there are no holes. 

f
 this analogy was suggested to me by bernd neumann. 
1 

compute the convex hull; while  there are internal points  do begin 
 1  choose a point internal to the hull; 
 1  modify the current polyhedron 1 include it; 
 1  make local adjustments to the polyhedron in the vicinity of the modified region. 
end 
the internal point chosen in step  t  is the one that is the  host  in the following sense each internal point is associated with the closest face that it orthogonally projects into  or jusi the closest face if it projects into none. an area stretch factor is computed for each point as the ratio of the area that would result if the closest face were modified as in step  1  to the area of the closest face. the best  internal point is the one with the smallest stretch factor. the modification in step  1  consists of removing the face of the polyhedron closest to the chosen point  and replacing it with a number of faces that reach in towards the point and include it as a 
vertex  see figure 1 . 
closest 
face 

figure 1. shrinking in one polyhedron face to include an internal point. 
this modification essentially puts a dent into the polyhedron  and it is quite possible that i* will disturb the minimality of the surface area in the neighborhood of the dent. step  1  of the algorithm is intended to improve the polyhedron in the vicinity of the alteration via a simple local transformation  called here a flip transformation  see figure 1 . 

　figure 1. the flip transformation deletes the front faces arc and acd  and replaces them with the back faces abd and bcd. 
the flip transformation should only be performed if it  improves* the surface. currently the improvement is measured by a heuristic mix of three terms:  a  the area reduction   b  the perimeter reduc tion  and  c  the reduction in the sharpness of the face angles if it /s performed  then the neighboring faces should be considered for the flip operation also  and so on  recursively the cascading is guaranteed to halt eventually  since only inward flips are permitted 
     note that the algorithm is essentially a  best-first  or  nearest neighbor  algorithm  but with local improvements after each greedy step. 

figure 1. 1 points: 1 forming the cylinder end caps  and 1 distributed on a spherical dent. 
     a preliminary version of the algorithm has been implc mented  and three samples of its performance are shown in figures 1  1  and 1 in each of the examples  the convex hull of the input point set is a 1 point cylinder determined by two 1 point rings plus a point in the center of each cap. the examples differ in the number and placement of the points internal to the hull. in figure 1  1 internal points form a spherical dent in the side of the cylinder. the 1 internal points in figure 1 are distributed in 1 rings about the cylinder axis  the middle one having a smaller radius than its symmetrically placed neighbors. figure 1's 1 inter nal points lie on the surfaces of two intersecting hemispheres in all three examples  the algorithm has produced a surface close to the  natural  one  although some minor quirks are evident in the surface shown in figure 1. 

figure 1. 1 points: 1 forming the cylinder end caps  and 1 arranged in three rings. 

1 
1. discussion 	