 1-d affine trantformation whose parameters depend on the position of mass center of that texel in the picture. then we  a new method to obtain surface orientation of textural plane under perspective projection is described. firstly  we derive a 1-d affine transformation which approximates the distortion of texel patterns under perspective projection. then we present a method to obtain the vanishing line of the plane from the area of texels propose a method to obtain the oriention or a 1-d plane from 
the distortion of texel patterns drawn on it. this method is more general than those of kender's and kitahashi's because it does not demand the existence of parallel lines or edges in the texture. furthermore  it is very robust to noise. 　　　
in the picture. it can obtain a vanishing point from an arbitrary pair of texels; when n texels exist  c1  vanishing points can be obtained. an algorithm to solve the 1-d affine matrix between two patterns is also presented. it reinforces the method to be applicable to a texture which is constituted from more than two kinds of texel patterns. experiments are performed by using artificially generated textures. 
1. introduction 
　　　the recovery of three dimensional  1-d  scene information from a two dimensional  1-d  picture is an important task in image understanding. horn  horn  1  reported a method to obtain surface orientation from intensity information recorded in a picture. in stead of intensity  it is possible to use textures as a cue for surface orientation. 
　　　a texture is constituted by the repetition of small patterns which are called texels  texture elements . the shape of a 
　　　pattern drawn on a 1-d surface is distorted by the projection onto a 1-d picture. under orthographic projection  the distortion depends only on the orientation of the 1-d surface. this means that it is rather easy to obtain surface orientation from the distortion of texel patterns under orthographic projection  kender  1; kender & kanade  1; ikeuchi  1 . 
　　　it is well known that the imaging process of a camera is perspective transformation; parallel lines in the 1-d scene are mapped onto lines in a 1-d picture which intersect at a point called vanishing point. this simple property can be utilized to obtain the orientation of a 1-d plane surface from the images of parallel edges drawn on it  kender  1; kitahashi  1 . the distortion of texel patterns under perspective projection  on the other hand  is not so simple as that under orthographic projection and it is not intuitive to use them as a cue for 1-d surface orientation. 
　　　in this paper  we propose a way to approximate the distortion of a texel pattern under perspective projection by a in section 1  we explain the method to analyze the distortion of texel patterns under perspective projection by approximating perspective transformation with 1-d affine transformation. in section 1  we derive a simple relation between the vanishing line of a plane and the distortion of the texel patterns drawn on it. this relation is utilized to obtain the surface orientation of the plane. section 1 presents an algorithm to solve the 1-d affine matrix between two patterns. when a 
　　　pair of texel patterns are given  the algorithm decides whether one of which is a 1-d affine transformation of the other. in that case  a 1 affine matrix is obtained as the solution. the algorithm reinforces the method described in section 1 to be applicable to a texture which is constituted from more than two kinds of texel patterns. experiments are performed by using artificially generated textures and the results are described in section 1. 
1. approximation of perspective transformation by 1-d affine transformation 
　　　in this chapter  we propose a way to approximate the distortion of a texel pattern under perspective projection by 1-d affine transformation whose parameters depend on the position of mass center of that texel in the picture. 
　　　figure 1 illustrates a model of perspective projection. the image of each point in the texel drawn on the object surface is determined by the intersection of the image plane with the projecting ray defined by that point and the lens center. the central projecting ray is a projecting ray which goes through the mass center of the texel. the image center is determined by the intersection of the image plane with the optical axis. the optical axis is perpendicular to the image plane. the origin of the coordinate system is the lens center and the negative z-axis is alligned with the optical axis. let assume the distance from the lens center to the image plane is one  then the equation of the image plane is -z-1. x and y coordinates of the intersection of 
1 
　　　

the image plane with the  central  projecting ray  whose direction is  p  q  -1   is p and q  respectively. the surface normal of the small plane  -z-px+qy+c  on which the texel is drawn is  p  q  1 . if let -d be the z coordinate of the mass center of the texel  or the intersection of the small plane with the central projecting ray   then clearly 
	d-c/ l-pp-qq  	 1  
       figure 1  a  shows an image obtained by perspective transformation of a texture which is generated by the repetition of small squares. the surface normal  p  q  1  of the textural plane was set to p-1 and q 1. the distortion of each texel 
differs to those of the others. 
　　　we think the distortion of texels under perspective transformation is the composition of the following four factors. 
1  when the -z coordinate of the  object  texel is greater than 1  i.e.  d l in fig. 1   the  image  texel is reduced. 
1  when the small plane  on which the  object  texel is drawn  is not parallel to the image plane  the  image  texel is distorted. 
1  when the mass center of the  image  texel is not identical to the image center  the texel is distorted. 
1  because the projecting rays for the points in the texel are not identical to the central projecting ray of that texel  the  image  texel is distorted. 
the distortion caused by the fourth factor is negligible when the size of  image  texel is small. figure 1  b  illustrates the image to be obtained when the fourth factor is neglected. our approximation for perspective transformation is equivalent to neglecting the distortion caused by the fourth factor. 
　　　under perspective projection  as described before  a point on the object surface is projected onto the image plane by a 

projecting ray defined by that point and the lens center. our approximation is done by dividing the process into two steps. figure 1 illustrates the cross-sectional view of the projection process sliced by a plane which includes the central projecting ray and is perpendicular to x-z plane. the steps are as follows. 
step 1: the  object  texel is projected onto the plane 
w which is parallel to the image plane and includes the mass center of the texel. this projection is performed by using the rays which are parallel to the central projecting ray.  when the central projecting ray is perpendicular to plane w  this projection is the orthographic one.   
step 1: the image on the plane w is perspectively projected onto the image plane. because plane w is parallel to the image plane  the perspective transformation under this projection is a simple reduction. the scaling factor is 1/d. 
　　　
1 
　　　
　　　　it must be noted that the relation represented by eq.  1  is not the point-by-point projection but the area-by-area one; it is the relation between two 1-d patterns  one is  n 1-d space and the other is its image on the image plane. 
1. vanishing line of object plane from areas of texels 
　　　in this chapter  using the relation of eq.  1   we derive an interesting property with areas of texels under perspective projection. then we propose a powerful scheme to obtain the vanishing line of a textural plane. 
　　　the vanishing line of a 1-d object plane is an important concept in perspective projection. it is defined as the intersection of the image plane with a plane which includes the lens center and is parallel to the object plane. in fig. 1  the equation of the vanishing line is given as px+qy=1. when the vanishing line is determined on the image plane  we can know the p and q of the surface normal of the object plane. 
　　　　　it is well known that the determinant of a 1-d affine matrix is equal to ratio of the areas of two patterns before and after the transformation. from eqs.  1  and  1   we obtain 
1 

1 
　　　
computed. 
step 1: an offset angle needed to make one sequence of angles match to the other is determined. a rotation matrix a1 is computed for the offset angle. the affine matrix a to transform pattern-1 onto pattern-1 is computed as a-a1 a1. by using the matrix a ' the contour of pattern-1 is mapped onto pattern-1 to examine the exact matching. 
　　　when this algorithm is applied to a pair of patterns which are not affine-transformable  the offset angle cannot be determined or the final matching does not succeed. so  by using this algorithm  it is possible to detect the pairs which are not affine-transformable patterns. 
　　　determination of the offset angles is a neccessary condition for affine-transformable patterns. the a-ellipse  however  provides a new feature to make a more powerful neccessary condition. we call this feature  de-parameter. as 
1. experiments 
　　　we have applied the method so far described  to artificially generated textures. 
　　　figure 1 shows a texture with circular texels. the surface normal of the 1-d object plane on which the texels are drawn was set to  1  1  1 . there are 1 texels in fig. 1. in order to avoid noisy vanishing points  only the pair of texels whose area ratio is greater than 1 was used to determine a vanishing point. as a result  1 vanishing points have been obtained. the vanishing points within the picture frame are dotted in the upper right corner of the frame. a line was fit to the set of vanishing points as the vanishing line  p and q obtained from the equation of the vanishing line are 1 and 1  respectively. 
　　　figure 1 v a  is a texture which is constituted from five kinds of texel patterns. 1 texels exist in the picture. the surface normal of the 1-d object plane was set to  1  1  1 . 
1 
　　　

e algorithm described in section 1 was used to examine ether a pair of texels have originally a same pattern in 1-d ace. as a whole  1 pairs were selected and used to termine vanishing points  p and q  thus obtained  are 1 and 1  respectively. figure 1  b  shows a front view of the object ane constructed from fig. 1  a  based on the p and q. 
1. concluding remarks 
　　we have proposed a method to analyze the distortion of vel patterns under perspective projection by approximating e perspective transformation with 1-d affine transformation. a suit of the analysis was applied to obtain surface orientation a textural plane. 
the method of the approximation combined with the 

algorithm to solve the 1-d affine matrix provides a lot of cues for surface orientation under perspective projection. further work is being done to obtain the orientation of a curved surface. 
acknowledgement 
　　　the authors thank takeo kanade for having many stimulating discussions while he was working with us at kyoto university. 
