 
image 	understanding 	 i.u.  	shares 
intelligence the need for mechanisms of using knowledge to control computation. in i.u.  this knowledge takes the form of prior knowledge about objects and knowledge gained from doing the computations themselves. this paper presents an approach to the general i.u. problem and a specific program for locating buildings in aerial photographs. prior knowledge is stored as an appearance model  which represents the appearances of possible buildings. a three stage program generates operator and parameter sequences to achieve recognition. each level uses partial results from below to 1  search parameters for the best match  1  infer obscuring image conditions and deal with them  and 1  infer high-level conditions such as the presence of occluding objects. this use of partial 

results is a kind of  metaknowledge   enabling the program to evaluate its progress and change hypotheses and computations accordingly. 
introduction 
image understanding  i.u.  shares many problems with the field of artificial intelligence  a.i. . the use of knowledge to control processing is one such general problem. in an i.u. domain  this can be formulated as the problem of using both prior knowledge about the task domain  and knowledge acquired as processing proceeds  to choose a sequence of computations which will achieve recognition and location of the desired objects. 
it is a tenet of this research that a program to do this must be prepared to use partial results  such as parual matches  
to change the sequence of operators and their parameters. in doing so  it must be able to evaluate the results of its processing and be prepared to infer  at several levels  what image conditions are impeding recognition of the desired objects. 
this paper describes a program to locate buildings in aerial photographs using the above approach. the program has three parts  shown in figure 1  each of which embodies different levels of knowledge and inference ability. 
an appearance model expert chooses subgraphs of the building appearance model. a region description is derived from this sub-model and passed to the operator expert. this expert chooses operators to compute candidate regions and calls other operators to try to match the region characteristics with the region description. one kind of operator is an adaptive operator  which can vary a single parameter to optimize the match with a specific value or range of a feature. the operator expert can infer the existance of a possible image problem and take appropriate action. the appearance model expert can infer high-level conditions and check spatial relations between regions to recognize buildings complexes. 
appearance models and the appearance model expert 
an appearance model is a data structure encoding the expected appearances of a class of objects. this model could be derived by a  smart  modeller from many sources of prior knowledge such as a light model  a camera model  and a 1d domain model. the  appearance primitive  in our model is a region. 
our appearance model for buildings is a hierarchical graph encoding building properties and relations between buildings and other entities  such as roads or shadows. the model also stores verified and candidate regions in appropriate places. the hierarchy allows the appearance model expert to choose a subgraph  representing the current hypothesised building type  on the basis of accumulated region evidence as well as knowledge of the appearance model itself.. from that subgraph  a region 
1 

description is created by combining all the region property values from that subgraph. this region description is a representation of the desired object in terms of expected region properties  and is passed to the operator and image problem expert. 
operator expert 
the operator and image problem expert is given a 
region description from the appearance model expert  and attempts to locate a region with the desired properties. to do this  it uses knowledge to invoke appropriate operators to generate candidate regions  and calls adaptive operators to try to achieve good matches on specific properties. 
adaptive operators 
an adaptive operator is a program that is given a candidate region and a desired range of property values for a single property. this represents a goal to the operator of computing a derived region from the candidate with its property as close to the desired range as possible. each adaptive operator has knowledge of the effects of varying a single parameter of a single operator. an adaptive operator uses this knowledge to vary the parameter  creating derived regions from the candidate  to gel a region that is the best match possible. 
eor example  adaptive-match-on-size knows that for a 
dark region created by thresholding  raising that threshold will shrink the size of the region  and lowering it will increase the size. it uses that knowledge to get the region size as close as possible to a given size range. other adaptive operators include one that maximizes region contrast  one that adaptively finds the best polygonal representation for a region  and one that maximizes the  liny-ness   or percentage of a region boundary that is made up of line segments. 
evaluations and meta-knowledge 
each level in this system uses evaluations to do reasoning. 
these evaluations judge the match between the region description of the desired region and the current candidate region in various ways. metaknowledge in each level enables that level to make hypotheses about the image and object under consideration. these hypotheses further affect processing by indicating different operators and different location strategies. 
adaptive operators use evaluations of a single region property to change a single operator parameter. the operator expert uses evaluations  indications of either full or partial failure of a particular adaptive operator  to make hypotheses about the object. infered hypotheses can be global  like hypothesising noise in the image  or local  like hypothesising a merging condition of the desired object with a neighboring one. these hypotheses then guide further processing by generating new constraints and indicating new operators. 


this candidate is now the right size. adaptive-rectangle attempts to see this region as a rectangle  and it succeeds. this result is passed to the appearance model expert  which now tries to find the shadow  generating the following region description: 
	region description: 	dark 
1   size   1 
attention: 1  1  1  1 
the last attribute indicates to look in a rectangle around the located building. the operator expert calls adaptivematch-on-size and again succeeds. the adjacency condition is checkea  ana succeeds as well. the two regions  corresponding to the located building and shadow  are shown here: 

discussion 
the example above illustrates two features of our system. 
first  it shows as adaptive operator at work generating derived regions to satisfy some criterion  region size . second  it shows the appearance model expert locating an object by parts  using a constraint  adjacency of parts  to limit search for the second part. it does not illustrate a current ability of the operator expert: the detection of random noise and its application of an operator  local averaging  to alleviate it. 
other workers in this domain have written programs embodying some of the approachs of our program  and have achieved some good results l  1  1  1 . the analog of our appearance model is usually encoded as a fixed set of region properties  rather than a graph of different alternatives amenable to intelligent interpretation l  1 . information from located objects is used in  1  1  to refine a property table  which can result in a new segmentation. however  little use of partial matches is made  and none with the flexibility of our system. 
the most novel feature of our approach is the use of adaptive operators. while the hill-climbing techniques they embody are classic  indeed  amoung the oldest in a.i.   their application to an i.u. domain is new  as is their use in a framework of our kind. it is important to recognize that adaptive techniques  as all other computation  must be used in conjunction with an appropriate control structure. 
the framework of our program provides a flexible rulebased system that applies operators when needed and relies on the adaptive operators to fine tune candidate regions. each level in our program can evaluate and use the results from the level below  and deal with partial 
successes in a manner appropriate to that level. this metaknowledge enables each level  and the program as a whole  to adapt to unknown and unexpected image and object conditions in a robust way. 
conclusion 
our program is currently being run on large  1 by 1    aerial photographs of various complexity. further details will be presented in . 
