 
　　logic modelling is presented as an approach for exploring cognitive reasoning. the notion of mental construction and execution of propositional models is introduced. a model is constructed through inclusions and exclusions of assertions and assumptions about the task. a constructed model is executed in a logical control structure. formal rules of inference are argued to be an essential feature of this architecture. a few examples are given for purpose of illustration. 
1. introduction 
　　in this paper we present and discuss elements of a logic modelling framework for the study of human reasoning. there are three assumptions involved in developing logic modelling. firstly  by using the concept of modelling we want to emphasize the computational hypothesis about cognitive processing. also  computational studies of deductive reasoning are seldom seen  though such studies might throw further light on issues both in ai and cognitive psychology. secondly  as denoted by using the concept of logic we intend to study and analyze cognitive reasoning in a computational framework which is close to formal logic. thus  we use logic as a modelling language. thirdly  we assume that reasoning is a rational process. this is a controversial hypothesis. 
　　basically  there are three competing hypotheses about the relation between logic and human reasoning | l | . they rest on different interpretations of the following observation. suppose we have a set of premises  {p1 ...  pm . we give the set to a theorem-prover which generates an inference  s1. we also give the set to a subject who generates another inference  i1. suppose i1 implies that i1 is false. this might indicate that the subject has understood the task  but uses a faulty reasoning strategy  1  1 . this is the  ill-logical  hypothesis  1 . alternatively  the subject may not use valid rules of inference at all. in this interpretation  the subject is  non-logical   1  1  the third interpretation means that i1 is made because the subject's understanding is different  l  1 . thus  the inference is perfectly valid  but generated from another set of premises  {p1 ...  pm}. 
　　as pointed out by smedslund  it is impossible to tell whether or not a subject is  logical  without assuming that he/she has understood the task correctly  and vice versa. we know fairly well what it means to be logical  but  what does it mean to understand correctly  as mentioned  it means that i'i and i1 both are valid only if they were derived from different sets of premises. if the sets were identical  then the subject's  logic  is  ill  or possibly not there at all. 
　　in our view  understanding means to construct a mental set of the external premises as they are perceived and interpreted. obviously  such a construction might not be a direct one-to-one mapping of the external premises. thus  a model might be  incorrect  in the sense of not being a mapping  but  correct  in the sense of being consistent to the reasoner's knowledge. 
 the research reported herein was sponsored by the swedish board for technical development  stu . 
　　
1 g. hagert and a. hansson 

　　an obvious solution to this decision problem is simply to execute all the instantiations in parallel. however  this is not very realistic from a cognitive point of view. we assume a control that  i  uses unification   ii  is basically forward driven and  iii  executes a model in a depth-first manner. 
　　let us continue the examples. as can be verified  our example models  1 and 1  can conclude that the blue block is to the left of the white. even though the models differ markedly  they can conclude the very same thing. it is trivial that two rcasoners can make the same conclusion with or without the same understanding. 
　　suppose we give another goal. it the red block to the left of the green block  using a forward inference strategy or some combination  it can be verified that model 1 and 1 will succeed and conclude that it is true that the red block is to the left of the green block. the second model cannot resolve the goal and will conclude the negation of the statement by failure to prove. naturally  this outcome means that the understanding is quite different. however  and most important  the inferences are all valid. 
　　this discussion puts the issue about logic and reasoning in yet another perspective. for example  suppose that two subjects construct isomorphic models. their answers to abstract questions  e.g.  it there a relation between the red and the green block   should then be isomorphic too. if they are not  we can conclude that at least one of them cannot be modelled by logic. however  it is not clear how we can study such a perspective. let us start by analyzing reasoning tasks that have been empirically studied. 
1. form and content in reasoning about a rule 
　　a classical task in studies of deductive reasoning is the fourcard problem invented by wason  1| and also extensively investigated by others. several versions have been studied  but we focus on the following two. 
you are presented with four cards showing  respectively  a  d  1  
1  and you know from previous experience that every card  of which these are a subset  has a letter on one side and a number on the other side. you are then given this rule about the four cards in front of you: // a card hat a vowel on one tide  then it hat an even number on the other tide. you are told that the task is to tell which of the cards that 
need to be turned over in order to find out whether the rule is true or false. the most frequent answers are  a and 1  and  only a . in one study only 1 out of 1 subjects gave the answer a and 1 which is regarded as the correct answer.  1 . 
　　in another version the objects are four envelopes: a sealed  an unsealed  an envelope with a 1p stamp  and an envelope with a 1p stamp. the task is to test the rule: // an envelope it sealed  then it hat a 1p stamp on it. in one study  1 out of 1 subjects picked the sealed envelope and the envelope with a 1p stamp on it  which is considered to be the correct answer |1|. thus  the results are in sharp contrast. 
　　if the two tasks are isomorphic  the result might  on the surface  indicate that human reasoners do not use rules of inference  but only domain-specific operators. in the following we try to show how the results could be interpreted in a logic modelling framework. 
　　let cara x y  denote an object in the  card  task with z as the perceived symbol or value and with y as the hidden symbol. let env{z y  be the corresponding proposition for the  envelope  task. thus  we can represent the  card  task as composed of four reasoning objects  e.g.  cara a turn a  . the  envelope  task can be represented analogously  e.g.  env sealed turn{sealed    where turn is a function that gives the hidden value in both cases. 
　　suppose instead that we represent a card as  card z y z   where z is the perceived value on the side y  that is shown  and z is the hidden value on the other side. likewise  env x  y  z  could represent the objects in the  envelope  task. for example  env sealed  reverse  turn sealed   represents the envelope which has its reverse side turned up. there is no ambiguity in this representation since every reasoner knows that to see if an envelope is sealed one has to get the reverse side. similarly  stamps are always placed on the frontside. consider now the  card  task. should we represent the a as cara a  front  turn{a    cara a  back turn a    card a  front  turn{f ront    etc.! thus  it is possible to argue that this representation shows that the two tasks do not share the same form since we would have  
	 1  
　　in order to analyze the rules to be tested we choose the first representation which makes the tasks isomorphic. the rules in the tasks can be expressed as follows  
 1      
 1  
 1  
　　the rules in  1  and  1  represent those cases in which the reasoner has to think of possible hidden values. a reasoner who only chooses to turn a might have excluded  1  from his/her model. if a reasoner chooses to introduce the following rule instead of  1  he/she will turn a and 1  
	 1  
　　in the  envelope  task the relevant assumptions are more easily introduced because of the natural relation between the values of each object. in other words  knowledge about the domain facilitate the introduction of propositions. for example  an envelope can only be sealed or unsealed but not both. if there is a 1p.stamp it does not matter whether it is sealed or not. thus  it is straight-forward to recognize that if it is not a 1p.stamp on it  then it must not be sealed  
　　　　　　　 1  this assumption is equivalent to  1  but expressed as a contrapositive and it is straight-forward to apply. in contrast  the contrapositive to  1  is not easy to recognize. it might be easier to introduce th converse premise as shown in  1 . 
　　
g. hagert and a. hansson 1 
