 
kl-one lets one define and use a class of descriptive terms called 
concepts  where each concept denotes a set of objects a subsumption relation between concepts is defined which is related to set inclusion by way of a semantics for concepts. this subsumption relation defines a partial order on concepts  and kl-one organizes all concepts into a 
taxonomy that reflects this partial order. classification is a process that takes a new concept and determines other concepts that either subsume it or that it subsumes  thereby determining the location for the new concept within a given taxonomy. we discuss these issues and demonstrate some uses of the classification algorithm. 
kl-one is a knowledge representation system developed at 
bolt beranek and newman over the past few years  see  brachman 1  brachman 1  schmolze 1. sidner 1    that grew out of semantic network formalisms. the primary unit of information in kl-one is called a concept  which denotes a set of objects. a concept has a set of  syntactic  components  each denoting a property that must be true of each member of the set denoted by the concept.1 in particular  one type of component is a roleset which is analogous to a  slot ' in a  frame-like  language. for example  we can construct a concept denoting the set of all people where each person has a birth-date: 
person is a concept and has a roleset birthdate 1 
　unlike early semantic networks  domain dependent relations are not represented as links  but as concepts and rolesets there is but a small number of types of links in kl-one  each corresponding to a concept-forming or roleset-forming operator. due to space limitations  we cannot describe the language in detail and instead will offer examples of kl-one concepts. we also sketch a semantics for kl-one the interested reader is referred to  brachman 1  and  schmolze 1 . 
this research was supported in part by the defense advanced research 
projects agency under contracts n1-c-1 at bbn and mda1 c-1 at isi views and conclusions contained in this paper are the authors' and should not be interpreted as representing the official opinion or policy of darpa. the u s government or any person or agency connected with them 
1 
　　we extend the usual notion of property to include situations where an object must stand in some relation to another object 
　　in this paper  we will name concepts after the elements of the set they denote all concept names will be in upper-case  bold-face letters all roleset names will be capitalized and bold-face 
thomas a. lipkis 
usc/lnformation sciences institute 
1 admiralty way 
marina del rey  ca 1 - usa 
   we define a relation between concepts called subsumption such that concept a subsumes concept b only if the set denoted by a necessarily includes the set denoted by b. for example  if one wants to represent that all dogs are necessarily mammals then one specifies that the concept denoting mammals subsumes the concept denoting dogs. in a kl-one network.1 we represent subsumption by a link between concepts called  for historical reasons  superconcept 
   since set inclusion is transitive  reflexive and anti-symmetric  we define subsumption correspondingly such that it determines a partial order on concepts kl-one maintains a taxonomy of concepts that explicitly represents this partial order. the taxonomy has a top; concept named thing  which is defined to subsume every other concept however  there is no corresponding bottom concept 
   subsumption is actually an out-growth of the  isa  link of early semantic networks  and as with  isa . concepts inherit components from their subsumers by this we mean that each member of the set denoted by a concept has the properties that are specified by the components of the concepts subsumers  as well as the components of the concept itself . thus  our dog concept inherits all of the components 1f mammal  which means that each dog has all of the properties specified for mammals 
   in our example  we stated explicitly that mammals necessarily include dogs however  there are cases where one can deduce that the set denoted by some concept necessarily includes the set denoted by a second concept  but where no subsumption relation between the concepts was explicitly entered. classification is a process that discovers these latter subsumption relations between concepts and  in such cases  establishes superconcept links between them. thus  we say that classification automatically places a concept at its proper location in a kl-one taxonomy because it establishes the appropriate superconcept links between it and other concepts 
some uses of classification 
   many al programs use taxonomically structured knowledge bases for modeling dynamic environments  and therefore require automatic classification of new knowledge as it is obtained. automatic classification also provides a means of enforcing network semantics and checking consistency of descriptions  and is therefore a superior alternative to manual construction of static 
taxonomies. 
   we will use the words  network  and  taxonomy  interchangeably with respect to kl-one 
　classification is also useful for generalized search. if one forms a search pattern into a concept  call it pattern   classification will discover other concepts that pattern subsumes. if the target of the search is also described by some concept  call it target   and if the pattern matches the target  then pattern will subsume target. hence  the first phase of a search process will be accomplished by using classification to restrict the search space of possible target descriptions. 
the kl-one language and a semantics via some examples 
we now introduce the kl-one language and a semantics for it. 
for pedagogical reasons  and because of space limitations  we do so via simple examples. note that this demonstrates only a fraction of the kl-one language. 
in order to complete our example  we re-specify the concept 
person such that person is a primitive concept denoting the set of all persons. primitive concepts are interpreted as having essentially incomplete definitions  and thus  all concepts denoting  natural kinds   e.g.  people  elephants  chairs  are primitive. person is a primitive concept  is subsumed by mammal  and has a roleset birthdate with: a number restriction of exactly one. and a value description of date. 
　by this specification  we mean that each person is a mammal and has exactly one birth-date that must be a date  we let mammal and date be primitive concepts . when specifying that a roleset is a component of a concept  one must also state: 
＊ the number restriction for the roleset  which specifies constraints on the number of fillers  
- and the value description  which specifies constraints on the type of each filler. 
　non-primitive concepts are interpreted as being completely defined. an example is parent. 
parent is a non-primitive concept  is subsumed by person  and has a roleset child with: a number restriction of one or more  and a value description of person. 
this specification defines a parent to be a person who has at least one child who is a person. 
　we specify our semantics for kl-one concepts by a mapping from kl-one concepts into the language of informal set theory. others have chosen a different specification  particularly in  israel 1    but ours suffices for demonstrating the properties needed to explain the behavior of the classifier. as stated earlier  each concept denotes a set. each roleset denotes a set of ordered pairs whose domain and co-domain include the sets denoted by the concept with which the roleset is associated and the value description  respectively. 
the set denoted by parent has been defined to be just: 
{x | x is a person and 
 by   y is a child of x and y is a person } 
	j. schmolze and t. lipkis 	1 
grandparent is a non-primitive concept  is subsumed by person  and has a roleset child with: a number restriction of one or more  and a value description of parent. 
this defines a grandparent as a person who has at least one child who is a parent. the set denoted by grandparent is defined to be: 
{x | x is a person and 
 by   y is a child of x and y is a parent } 
note that the specification of grandparent did not include 
parent as a subsumer. however  we can deduce that every grandparent must also be a parent. thus  we have discovered an additional subsumer of grandparent  namely. parent. this is a simple example of a deduction made during classification 
the algorithm for classification 
the primary component of the classifier is a function  called 
subsumesp  that compares two concepts and decides whether or not the first subsumes the second. since a kl-one taxonomy is organized by the partial ordering of concepts under subsumption  the classifier can find the proper location for a concept by using subsumesp to compare it to all other concepts in the taxonomy  and deduce subsumption relationships  the issue of completeness is discussed in the next section . actually  it usually needs to search only a small fraction of the taxonomy. 
　we only have space to sketch the portions of the subsumesp algorithm that apply to our example. a complete discussion of the classification algorithm is presented in  lipkis 1 . 
given concepts a and b. we wish to know whether a subsumes 
b. our test performs a piece-by-piece comparison of the components of a with those of b. including inherited components. as an example  we will show the results of testing subsumesp parent grandparent  subsumesp a.b  is true if and only if: 
- all primitive concepts that subsume a also subsume b  both person and grandparent have the same primitive subsumers  namely  person and mammal.  
- for each roleset of a  some roleset of b denotes the same relation  both parent and grandparent have just 1 rolesets  birthdate and child   and for 
those corresponding rolesets: 
* the number restriction for as roleset includes that of b's.  for the birthdate roleset  both parent and grandparent have the same number restriction  namely  exactly one. the same applies to child  namely  each has a least one.  
* the value description of as roleset subsumes that of b's.  for the birthdate roleset. both parent and grandparent have the same value description  namely. date. for child. parent's value description subsumes 
grandparent's  i.e.. person subsumes parent.  

our last example is that of grandparent. 	thus  subsumesp parent grandparent  is true. 

	1 	j. schmolze and t. lipkis 
properties of subsumesp 
　we are interested in whether subsumesp has the following properties  where a and b are concepts: 
 soundness: subsumesp a.b  implies that the set denoted by a necessarily includes the set denoted by b 
＊ completeness: that the set denoted by a necessarily includes the set denoted by b implies that subsumesp a.b . 
- totality: subsumesp always terminates  and returns either true or fail . 
　if we could show that subsumesp satisfied these properties  then concept subsumption would be wholly decidable in other words  we could then state that if subsumesp a.b  returns true  then as set necessarily includes b s set. and if subsumesp a.b  returns fail  then as set does not necessarily include b s set thus. fail would be equivalent to false. 
for the current implementation  we have informally shown 
 though not here  that subsumesp is both sound and total 
however  we have not shown it to be complete thus  if subsumesp a.b  returns fail  we are not certain whether or not 
a subsumes b in our studies  however  we have not discovered any case where subsumesp a.b  will return fail when  in fact  true would have been correct  i.e.. as set necessarily included 
b's set . in our application programs  we have treated fail as equivalent to false without any ill effects. in the near future  we hope to show that subsumesp actually is complete and also to show soundness and totality formally 
   certain characteristics of kl-one allow for the possibility of such a decision procedure for example  cancellation  for which no clear semantic account has been offered  see  brachman 1. israel 1    is not allowed. also  the language of kl-one has less expressive power than a standard first-order language  where no decision procedure exists moreover  for this first phase of our research on the completeness of subsumesp we have not studied cycles  i.e.. sets of concepts that are specified in terms of each other.  note that the language of kl-one allows cyclic specifications and we believe that the classification algorithm  which is not completely described in this paper  finds appropriate subsumption relations involving such concepts.  
conclusion 
   the kl-one system and the classifier have been used for several years as representational and inferential components of several artificial intelligence systems  see  brachman 1  sidner 1  mark 1. zdybel 1  . recently  we have attempted a formal specification of the semantics of kl-one  and of the relation of the classifier to these semantics. the classifier determines subsumption relationships between concepts  where subsumption denotes necessary set inclusion between the sets denoted by the concepts. we are confident that the classifier is sound and totally defined  and we hope to show it is complete. 
　similar work that combines a knowledge representation system with a decision procedure is being done by brachman. fikes and levesque  brachman  fikes and levesque 1  with their krypton system. we are currently re-designing the kl-one system  and to some extent  the language of kl-one  an important consideration has been the decidability of classification. in fact  our decision to include certain new language constructs hinges on showing that they do not preclude decidability. 
acknowledgments 
　there are many other contributors to this research  including r.j. brachman. r.j. bobrow  r. fikes. d.j. israel. h. levesque. w. mark  and w.a. woods. many  many thanks go to david israel for his efforts and ideas regarding this paper. 
