 
　　　work in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence on knowledge based technology has produced a variety of practical applications while data management systems are used in almost every commercial enterprise of any significant size. despite the advances in both data base and knowledge base technologies there is s t i l l a large gap between the capabilities of these tools and the  paperwork and information explosion  that faces modern society. concern with this information access problem in the united states has lead to the creation of the new field of information resources management and to federal laws and executive orders aimed at reducing paperwork and promoting more effective management of information. 
　　　in this paper we outline the nature of this information management problem and describe certain ai and database technology that may help to close this information access gap. we introduce the notion of  intelligent assistants  for information resources management irm  and describe how work on current approaches to  knowledge management  may lead to the technology necessary for the eventual creation of such intelligent assistants. 
	ii 	the need 
a. 	information resources management 
　　　during the past 1 years considerable interest has arisen in managing information as a resource of large organizations. generally the analogy is drawn with managing other  more traditional resources such as people  money  or f a c i l i ties. just as we plan  budget  and monitor the acquisition and disposition of those resources  so too should we manage the resources involved with collecting  storing  processing  transmitting  and using information. as a result  a new discipline of information resources management  irm  has appeared 1l- many large organizations in government and industry are establishing corporate irm programs to monitor information-related expenditures  including system development efforts  and to identify ways to improve the overall corporate position with regard to information resources. 
　　　in 1 the u.s. congress enacted the paperwork reduction act of 1  p.l. 1  which embraces the irm concept openly and mandates that every federal agency adopt the irm approach. as a result  in attempting to implement the provisions of the act  the federal government is beginning to grapple with some d i f f i c u l t management issues such as developing techniques for costing and valuing information  dealing with questions of data owner-
ship  and locating potentially relevant information from vast data holdings collected by different parts of the organization for different purposes. 
　　　several tools are under development to assist organizations in managing their information resources. the u.s. office of management and budget is constructing a federal information locator system  fils  to serve as a central directory of information holdings throughout the federal government   1   . other agencies and corporations are developing information resource directories which maintain pertinent data about the data elements  f i l e s   data bases  programs  systems  hardware  communication networks  people  funds  and other resources related to information  1 1 1 . metadata bases such as these are the f i r s t steps in the potentially long process of providing support to the newly appointed information resources manager. 
　　　concurrent with the development of the irm approach  and in large part responsible for i t   has been the development of distributed information systems and the decentralization of the systems development function. 
b. intelligent information resources assistant 
　　　the irm movement  in i t s relative infancy  has begun to address the need to identify and catalog the various information flows in helping the end-
user identify what information is available. but providing assistance in understanding how to use the various resources effectively is a new problem which the irm field has yet to address. tools and mechanisms are needed to provide the user with a consistent  intelligent interface to the disparate information resources at hand. an intelligent information resources assistant  iira  is required to serve as librarian  research assistant  secretary  and staff member with regard to using infor-
mation resources. the iira would help the end-user find relevant information  select suitable processing mechanisms  restructure the data for the selected processors  and combine the results from various sources or processes into meaningful information. 

c. kellog 	1 


the current version of our knowledge manager  km-1  prototype is illustrated in figure 1. km-1 is composed of a logic-based deductive engine realized on a lisp machine that plans and executes strategies for solution of deductive  database search  and compute problems related to answering a user's request for information. km-1 can simultaneously access an external database and a local  lisp machine  database to find and combine information necessary to create answers and explanations of those answers. 
       a user interacts with km-1 via the xerox 1  bit-mapped display  mouse  and keyboard. a vax 1 is used mainly as a f i l e and print server for the 1 and a britton-lee idm-1 relational database machine is used to access large databases. the idm-1 can provide access to as many as 1 the manager's assistant consists of: 
* a knowledge base comprising managerial expert i s e 
  a manager-specific database of planned charges to projects 
d  a general mis database of 	actual 	charges 	to projects 
1 a l i b r a r y of computable 	procedures 	for 	data analysis 
currently the manager's assistant contains knowledge about such concepts as   s t a f f i n g      plan/actual discrepancies    personnel turnover  and many other notions that may be useful in assisting managers in t h e i r planning and project monitoring tasks. 

1 	c. kellogg 
　　　consider the case of a manager who needs to find out if there are employees available who maybe candidates for transfer from one particular project  pv  to another  cad . this question may be input to the manager's assistant as follows: 
 find emp-1 is assigned to pv and emp-1 can be assigned to cad  
one employee is located  white  who meets these conditions. figure 1 illustrates the information displayed on the xerox 1 as a result of deductively guided database search. to obtain this information the system f i r s t creates a 
 search/compute  plan consisting of thirteen constrained relations. ten of the relations comprise a database access strategy that is distributed to the two database systems. the remaining relations are computed via lisp procedures applied to tuples 
returned from database search. 

figure 1. manager's assistant response to the query  find erapioyees assigned to pv who can be assigned to cad . 
displays the two top level conclusions  white is assigned to pv and he can be assigned to cad  and lower level conclusions  white can be assigned to cad because he is qualified and available; he is available because his project is overstaffed  he is not a key person on the project  and he is underqualified for his current position . 
c. an  intelligent assistant for information resources managers 
the 	manager's 	assistant 	described 	above includes 	expertise 	designed 	to 	support 	line 
managers in budgeting  planning  and project monitoring as well as staff assignment. an intelligent assistant for irm w i l l require similar expertise to support budgeting  planning  and monitoring of the use of information resources. much additional expertise w i l l have to be encoded about qualitative and quantitative attributes of various information sources to support reasoning about the value  credi b i l i t y   and u t i l i t y of those sources for meeting specific kinds of needs. 
	iv 	summary 
　　　we have outlined some of the issues involved in achieving better computer-aided management of paperwork and other kinds of information resources. 
current approaches to knowledge management and deductive question answering provide the beginnings of a set of tools to support this enterprise but much remains to be done in capturing and u t i l i z i n g the expertise necessary to create computer-based irm assistants. 
	v 	