 
   we suggest a model of perlocutionary acts in order to explain how an actor plans speech acts to ob 
tain a response from a partner. we introduce two knowledge structures  namely games and contracts  which are used together with themes by the mental processes underlying perlocutionary acts. we present our model through the discussion of a paradigmatic example; in particular we focus on the problem of shifting from the wants of the actor to the wants of the partner. our analysis is developed at different levels of detail through the identification of cause-to-want  convince and request actions. eventually  we discuss some theoretica  implications of our approach to perlocution. 
	i 	theoretical framework 
   recent ai research in the field of communication shows interest for speech act theory and its basic concepts of illocution and perlocution  as developed by searle  1 . cohen and perrault  1  and per  rault and allen   1  propose a forma  model of il locutionary acts  both direct and indirect. such a 
model has been introduced for the implementation of an a r t i f i c i a l system which participates in a natural language conversation. given such a target  the treatment of perlocutionary acts is simplified. on the contrary  a deeper analysis of perlocutionary acts is a fundamental component for a theory of hu-
man communication which accounts for the response of interacting subjects. 
   starting from the results achieved by allen  coh en and perrault  we suggest a model of perlocutiona ry acts in order to explain how an actor plans speech acts to obtain a specific response from a partner. to explain the usual felicitous outcome of communication  we assume that the actor is able to handle a model of the partner. this assumption is consistent with the general hypothesis that the actor and the partner share the same pragmatic competence. 
	ii 	causing to want 
   let us assume that an actor a has a goal and forms a plan to achieve i t . if the plan is interper  sonal  i.e. it involves the cooperation of a partner p  a has to induce p to perform his role. in p a r t i cular  we are interested in the most standard way 
of achieving such a result  namely communication. 
   following cohen and perrault  1   we assume that: 
- a performs an illocutionary act  the effect of which is p's recognition of a's want that p performs a specific action tt; 
- a process called cause-to-want is triggered by the illocutionary effect and generates the perlocutionary effect that p wants to perform 1t. 
the main point here is that the process cause-towajmt actuates the transition from a's wants to p's wants. when both a and p are human systems  this transition deserves further investigation. 
   we claim that within a cognitive system a want can only be generated: 
- by a knowledge structure of the kind of schank and abelson's l i f e themes  1 ; 
- as a subwant of a previously existing want. in the following we shall introduce two knowledge structures  namely games and contracts  which generate subwants and  together with themes  are used in our model of perlocution. 
	1 	the use of contracts in perlocution 
모모our standpoint is that human interactions are re gulated by games and contracts. a game is a knowledge structure which describes the interactions of two actors  the players   as regulated by scripts within a specific context  airenti  bara and colombetti   1 . the actions described in the scripts are not only performed for their effects  but also as moves of a relational game  think for instance of games like wife-husband or guest-host . contracts differ from games in that the two actors mutually assume the obligation of performing certain actions. the concept of obligation presupposes a third entity in charge of sanctioning i t . we distinguish between the stipulation of a new contract and the application of a pre-existing one  assumed as shared knowledge by the two actors. 
   we shall now focus on the process of application of pre-existing contracts by illustrating a paradigmatic example  in which the process of plan formation of an actor is reconstructed. let us suppose that actor a wants to reach a location lc  see figure 1  in which a s l o t - f i l l e r formalism is adopted . a applies the strategy of using somebody else's vehicle. this requires that the driver p of the vehicle wants to execute the action of driving 

g. airenti et al. 1 

1 g. airenti et al. 
모모the inference steps just described lead to a for  mula which is the effect of a convince perlocutiona ry act  detailed in figure 1. we reduce the convince action to:  i  two inferences  the f i r s t one made possible again by the taxi contract  and the second one by a communicational assumption of sincerity;   i i   a request action  which models an illocutionary act performed by a. the taxi contract is used here in a simmetric way with respect to figure 1. the meaning of the related inference is that a subject is supposed to participate in a contract as the client  if he manifests to a possible contractor his intention that the contractor performs his role in the contract. this assumption is sound if coupled with the condition that the validity context of the contract is satisfied 
this allows one to reach the same result by the shortcut shown in figure 1  dotted arrow . the f u l l 
process is however necessary to account for: 
- failure recovery: when an actor a executes his plan  a failure may occur at any point. the complete plan allows the actor to recover from the failure by partial replanning; e.g.  if a client is refused by a suspicious taxi-driver  he can show the money to reassure the taxi-driver about his intention to pay   i . e . to participate in the contract ; 
- deceit: a deceitful c l i e n t may exhibit an honest and wealthy look to convince the t a x i - d r i v e r of 
his intention to participate in the contract  while having the actual intention of not paying for the r i d e . 

   the sincerity assumption allows the partner to s h i f t from the i l l o c u t i o n a r y effect of the request to i t s s i n c e r i t y condition. such an assumption can be considered as standard in interactions regulated by contracts. we shall not discuss the request action here  as it pertains to the domain of i l l o cution  which has been thoroughly analyzed in the l i t e r a t u r e . 
	iv 	discussion 
모모we show in figure 1 the overall scheme of the process described in the previous section  for a generic action 뷇 and a generic contract 뷇 containing tt. note that the f i n a l formula: 
 wants  subject p   action  붫  actor p     
can be immediately derived from the content of the request of a to p: 
 wants  subject a   action  tt  actor p         . 
모모moreover  while the shortcut is computationally e f f i c i e n t   i t s correctness is proved only through the complete analysis provided. 
