 
ace  	a 	system 	for 	automated 	cable 
expertise  is a knowledge-based expert system designed to provide troubleshooting reports and management analyses for telephone cable maintenance. design decisions faced during the construction of ace were guided by recent successes in expert systems technology  most notably r1/xc1n  the digital equipment 
corporation vax configuration program. ace departs from  standard  expert system 
architectures in its use of a conventional data base management system as its primary source of information. its primary sources of knowledge are the users of the database system and primers on maintenance analysis strategies. 
	i. 	introduction 
　　　in this paper we describe ace  a knowledge-based system for automated cable expertise. it was designed to provide support for directing telephone cable maintenance. the development of ace  begun by bell telephone laboratories two years ago  demonstrates that 
a r t i f i c i a l intelligence techniques can be applied to significant and practical  real-world  problems in an efficient manner. the developers of ace were able to implement  test  modify  and verify the performance of the system ahead of 
predicted schedules. furthermore  ace demonstrates a successful merger of two complementary yet independent technologies: database and knowledge base systems. 
	unlike  for 	example  	mycin  and 
m1lgen ace is not a consultant. it is an automatic analysis system digesting hundreds of telephone cable maintenance reports daily. this data is provided by another computer system  cras  cable repair administration system   a data management and report generation system. 
telephone company engineers use cras to pinpoint trouble spots in the local telephone network  to predict future work force requirements and to drive plant rehabilitation decisions. ace has subsumed some of these tasks and uses its knowledge of cable analysis to retrieve reports from cras and to provide  bottom line  information and recommendations 
concerning trouble spots. 
　　　although the problem domain of ace appears fundamentally different from that of r1/xc1n  the digital equipment corporation vax computer configuration program reported by mcdermott  there are enough common characteristics of both domains that suggested the organization of r1/xc1n is suitable for ace's application. consequently  many of the 
design decisions faced in the development of ace were guided by the methods used in r1/xc1n. 
　　　specifically  the ace inference engine is a forward-chaining production system executing the match problem solving paradigm. the declarative nature of the 1ps1 production system notation effected the rapid development of the ace knowledge base. the team of knowledge engineers  cognitive psychologists   who interviewed several human experts  had l i t t l e d i f f i c u l t y operationalizing the acquired knowledge directly in 1ps1. subsequent cycles of test  debug and modify were carried out with relative ease. the end result was a working  useful prototype ahead of schedule. an advanced version of the system will be present in the telephone companies in the near future. 
　　　the following sections detail the problem domain and organization of ace and describe how the development and installation of a prototype of this system in a  live  production environment was completed in a cost effective manner. 

	i i . 	the problem domain 
　　　in normal operation the telephone company supports a telephone line from a residential or business site to telephone company switching machines in the central o f f i c e . this line is called a cable pair. a collection of pairs are bundled to form the cables that hang from telephone poles or reside underground. a collection of cables form a wirecenter. these three levels form the bulk of the local telephone network and the cable 
maintenance force concentrate their efforts at a l l three levels. a more detailed description of the local telephone network can be found in a bell 
system handbook. 
　　　a variety of e l e c t r i c a l faults and environmental conditions can cause f a i l u r e in one or more cables or individual pairs.  insect infestations in terminal boxes and gnawing rodents are perennial problems.  an important and expensive operation performed by the operating companies is the general maintenance and r e h a b i l i t a t i o n of these 
1ines. 
　　　customer generated maintenance reports provide information for identifying trouble spots within the local network. in a high density geographic area  the logging and tracking of f a i l u r e reports has become an expensive and important data processing operation. 
　　　in order to identify trouble spots for repair and r e h a b i l i t a t i o n   many telephone companies use cras to monitor the repair a c t i v i t y of the local network on a daily basis. trained analysts routinely examine impressive volumes of data and attempt to identify spots for maintenance to prevent further disruption of service to customers. 
　　　cras provides a set of report generating programs each producing a specialized summary of various aspects of customer generated and employee generated repair tasks. an individual record maintained by cras consists of numerous f i e l d s d e t a i l i n g a repair task reported by a customer or employee. this is referred to as a trouble in telephone company jargon. many d i s t i n c t cras records representing troubles may refer to the same pair or cable  indicating a potential chronic problem. 
g. vesonder et al. 1 
　　　the large volume of detailed information permits the human expert to make an informed selection of candidates for r e h a b i l i t a t i v e maintenance. however  the limited number of specialists available  and the size of the database inhibits the timely analysis and reporting of persistent problem areas that require r e h a b i l i t a t i o n . the backlog 
delays the assessment of future work force needs and the selection of prospective areas for maintenance. the approach of i n s t a l l i n g an expert system as an adjunct to the cras system  assisting management decision making  was proposed as a solution to the problem of timely and accurate selection of areas for r e h a b i l i t a t i o n . 
	i i i . 	the system organization 
　　　knowledge-based expert systems have constructed  t y p i c a l l y from two loosely coupled modules that form the problem solving engine.  see figure 1  

　figure 1: organization of the problem solving engine of a typical expert system. 
　　　the knowledge base contains a l l of the relevant domain-specific information permitting the program to act as a specialized problem solver. within ace the knowledge base is represented in rule form. the inference engine controls the deductive process. this control strategy is also represented in rule form within 
ace. 

1 g. vesonder et al. 
　　　in ace a third component has been added: a database. over the past decade database technology has progressed from dull-witted  efficient systems to systems offering abstract data models to facilitate semantically based retrieval functions. however  few  if any  offer the ability to deduce new data from old. at best aggregate data functions can be applied but deductions from raw data are not possible. on the other hand  knowledge based expert systems have been implemented as consultants to specialists in narrow domains. these systems are 
designed as problem solvers. expert systems rarely operate with a large amount of data. 
　　　ace attempts to merge the two technologies and this merger may be useful in a variety of applications. kellog reports on the knowledge 
management i  km-i  system and its organization is similar in scope to that represented by ace. however  km-i is designed as an intelligent front-end  interfacing the database to the user by an english-like query f a c i l i t y . this makes the database easier to use by making the database access language closer to the language of the application area. 
　　　in contrast  in ace the expert system is the user! tailored to solve a single class of problems  the knowledge base component of ace automates the tasks the database supports. thus the expert system not only answers the questions but also poses them. 
a. details of the implementation 
　　　the knowledge base and inference engine of ace are written in franz lisp and the 1ps1 production system language running on a dec vax 1. 
supporting routines for ace  including cras interfacing and electronic mail facilities  to send ace output to selected user mailboxes  are written in resident unix* software. the gross system level organization is shown in figure 1. 
* unix is a registered trademark of bell telephone laboratories. 

figure 1: the organization of ace and supporting systems. 
　　　note that a user is not necessary to initiate ace on a daily basis. ace is standalone  awakened nightly by unix to study the day's transactions. the only record an ace user sees is an electronic mail message on trouble spots it discovered.  see figure 1  

g. vesonder et al. 1 
from ace thu apr 1:1 1 

ace 1 output message follows: 

b. details of the problem solving engine 
　　　within ace  the body of knowledge about wirecenters  cras data and commands and analysis strategies is embodied by an 1ps1 program. 
1. production systems in 1ps1  data elements in working memory have the form of a r b i t r a r y lisp l i s t structures. the user can also define other condition and action predicates  the former testing for a v a r i e t y of conditions in working memory and the latter adding functions beyond modification of working memory. an english language equivalent of an ace production rule is presented in figure 1. 
if a range of pairs w i t h i n a cable have generated a large number of customer reports 
andif a majority of the work on those pairs was done in the terminal block 
then look for a common address for those repairs. 
figure 1: english language equivalent of an ace production rule. 
1. characterizing the problem domain the forward-chaining  data-driven approach t y p i f i e d by r1/xc1n was chosen for ace since cable analysis is primarily a bottom-up  data-driven task. 
　　　using the taxonomy of problem domains described in we classify our domain in the following way:  1  the data are temporally based. the analyses produced by ace are dependent on the frequencies of f a i l u r e s over time. thus the analyses done by ace are data-driven.  1  the data are r e l i a b l e for the task. the cras data base provides most of the necessary information about the cable plant.  1  the knowledge of the domain is r e l i a b l e .  1  the search of the cras database is exhaustive  but the r e l i a b i l i t y of the knowledge permits significant pruning of the space of possible conclusions.  1  the main focus of the problem-solver is the q u a l i t y of the inferences it makes. the ace design was driven by the necessity of producing the same analyses as i t s human counterparts. 
	because of 	these characteristics the 
match  1  prbblem-solving strategy was chosen for ace. as in r1/xc1n  ace requires no backtracking search of a large problem space  rather i t s primary task is divided into a fixed sequence of subproblems. these sets of productions are described in the next section. 
1. the structure of the knowledge base although no structure is provided  or imposed  by 1ps1  the set of about 1 
productions and 1 related condition and action functions in ace's knowledge base can loosely i n t o sets of related rules that c o l l e c t i v e l y do the analysis. 

1 g. vesonder et al. 
　　　a set of productions does short term analysis by daily examining the flow of maintenance reports. if troubles are reported for a cable that has no previous history of chronic troubles then information is retained that indicates the cable may soon require attention. when new failures are reported for a cable with a history of persistent problems  ace requests further detailed reports from cras. this information is used to deduce:  1  whether the repair task done on that cable suggests that 
preventive maintenance will reduce future repairs;  1  if preventive maintenance is required then what type is likely to be effective; and  1  if possible  where the rehabilitation should be done. thus ace not only identifies trouble spots  but also suggests how to repair them. 
　　　each of these aspects of short term analysis requires substantial deductive power. for example  locating the physical spot where rehabilitation should be done is a d i f f i c u l t problem because the employee reporting the repair task is permitted to enter the site of the failure in a free textual format. subsequently  the cras record of the task may contain an entry that not only may be inaccurate but also subject to typos and 
capricious abbreviations. as an example   wash 1  might refer to the same location as  washington and fifth  or  calendar  might refer to the same location as  calander street.  thus ace contains productions and associated lisp functions encoding heuristics to estimate whether several addresses refer to the same general location. 
　　　the main sources of knowledge for the short term analysis were:  1  textbook knowledge from primers on telephone cable analysis;  1  expert 
advise from the developers of cras;  1  expert advice from theoreticians of cable analysis both in bell telephone 
laboratories and in the local operating companies; and  1  local analysts from the operating companies and users of cras 
performing the actual analyses. 
　　　another portion of the ace pm contains a set of productions that know how to access cras. based on requests for additional information generated by other productions  these productions assemble cras commands and then access the resulting data stream retrieved from cras. the actual transmission of requests and data is handled by a unix communications program accessible from 1ps1. 
　　　finally  a set of rules assemble the appropriate message about the day's events recognized by the system and call on the unix mail facilities to deliver them to the appropriate users. ace knows the target of each message based on the importance of the message to the user. this information is contained in wm and is user modifiable. 
	iv. 	testing ace 
　　　ace has been field tested continually since the spring of 1 by a long distance connection to remote cras 
systems. the local analysts report that they are very satisfied with ace's performance. although ace has not discovered any problems unknown to human users  it did discover them quicker and missed neither the obvious nor the subtle. the praise of the analysts was outweighed only by their enthusiasm for permanent installation of the software. 
　　　the execution performance characteristics of the system are encouraging. each nightly run for a large metropolitan area consisting of about 1 lines averaged only about one hour of vax 1 cpu time  which can confidently be improved . on average  1 production invocations are sufficient for a complete run. new analysis tasks are under development to expand the scope of ace's grasp of cable maintenance. 
