: this paper presents a review of different approximate reasoning techniques which have been proposed for dealing with uncertain or imprecise knowledge  espec ial ly in expert systems based on production rule methodology. theoretical approaches such 
as bayesian inference shafer's belief theory or zadeh's possibility theory as well as more empirical proposals such as the ones used in mycin or in prospector  are considered. the presentation is focused on two basic inference schemes : the deductive inference and the combination of several uncertain or imprecise evidences relative to a same matter. several kinds of uncertainty are taken into account in the 
models which are described in the paper : different degrees of certainty or of truth may be associated with the observed or produced facts or with the   i f . .   then...  rules; moreover the statements of facts or 
of rules may be imprecise or fuzzy and the values of the degrees of certainty which are used may be only 
approximately known. an extensive bibliography  to 
which it is referred in the text  is appended. 
key words: uncertainty; imprecision; inference; combination of evidence; belief function; possibility; necessity; degree of truth; fuzzy set; production systems; expert systems. 
1-introduction: the pieces of information with which we have to deal in decision or reasoning processes  
may be uncertain  imprecise or even vague  incomplete  mutually inconsistent  and time-varying. thus so-
called approximate inexact  plausible reasoning me-
thods are strongly needed in knowledge engineering. inference procedures with uncertainty are becoming more important in rule-based expert systems since the knowledge given by human experts is often uncertain or imprecisely stated. 
for a long time  the bayesian model had been the only numerical approach to inference with uncertainty since no quantification was introduced in the patterns of plausible reasoning analyzed by polya. several 
mathematical models of uncertainty  which depart from the usual probability approach  have been recently 
proposed  particularly shafer's belief theoryand zadeh's possibility theory . in the sane time  many researchers in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence have felt a need for alternatives of the standard bayesian approach  see for a discussion  and have proposed and used  generally with success  more empirical models  particularly in expert systems such as mycin   prospector   casnet  1  speril   see also     . 
in the following  we try to present a synthetic view of most of these proposals within the compass of a small number of pages. the paper is organized in three main parts. the f i r s t part is devoted to an unified 

h. prade 1 

1 h. prade 

	h. prade 	1 

1 	h. prade 

	h. prade 	1 

1 h. prade 
