 
         interpreting measurements of physical systems consists in part of constructing an account of  what's happening  in terms of our commonsense physical theories. since most systems involve change  qualitative dynamics plays a central role in such deductions. this paper presents a theory of measurement interpretation at an instant  based on qualitative process theory. appropriate notions of measurement and interpretation are defined and the computational issues involved in constructing interpretations are examined. after describing an algorithm and illustrating its use by example  possible extensions to interpreting measurements over time will be discussed. 
1. introduction 
         to understand what is happening in a physical system  we must explain what we observe in terms of our physical theories. consider for example the situation illustrated in figure 1. given that the levels in b and c are decreasing  we would conclude that there was a flow from c to b and from b to a  and that if we could measure the level in a we would find it increasing because of water flowing into it. measurement interpretation is an important problem in naive physics 
 1   and solving it will be necessary if we arc to build programs that help us explain  operate and repair the complex physical systems that comprise much of our technology. 
         our notion of  what is happening  in a system is intimately connected with what can be called qualitative dynamics. qualitative process theory  1  concerns the form of qualitative dynamics theories  postulating physical processes as the ultimate cause of changes. thus qp theory provides a representational framework on which a domain-independent theory of measurement interpretation can be 
fig. 1. an example of measurement interpretation 
all three containers are partially filled with water  and we see that the levels in b and c are decreasing. why  

erected. the general problem of measurement interpretation can be split into two cases: figuring out what is happening in a system at a particular time  taking  one look   and describing what is happening over a span of time. this paper presents a theory for the first case. after a brief sketch of qp theory  we define notions of measurement and interpretation  including an account of error due to limited resolution. the design considerations for algorithms that construct interpretations arc examined  along with a sample algorithm. after working through an example  the issues involved in extending the theory to the interpretation of measurements over time arc disussed. 
1. qp theory in brief 
         we will consider a physical situation as composed of objects and the relationships between them. the continuous parameters of an object  such as temperature and pressure  are represented by quantities. a quantity consists of two parts  an amount and a derivative  each of which arc numbers. the functions a and d map from quantities to amounts and derivatives respectively. every number has parts sign and magnitude. the functions s and m map from numbers to signs and magnitudes respectively. the parts of quantities are denoted by the selectors as  am  dg  and om which map from a quantity to the sign of its amount  the magnitude of its amount  and so forth. 
         numbers  magnitudes  and signs take on values at particular times; when we wish to refer to the value of a quantity or some part of it 1 at a particular time  either instant or interval  t  we write: 
 m 1 t  
which can be taken to mean  what god would measure for q at t . signs can take on the values - l   o  l. for defining comparison and combination over numbers and magnitudes we will take values to be elements of ir  although in qp theory we will never know the actual numerical values. 
in qp theory  the value of a number is defined in terms of its 
quantity space - a collection of inequalities which hold between it and other numbers. elements in a particular quantity space come from the conditionalized descriptions that involve that parameter. in general the value will be incomplete  which is reflected by the quantity space being a partial instead of a total ordering. the quantity space is a useful qualitative representation because processes typically start and 
1. simmons  explores the related problem of reconstructing a sequence of events which could lead to a static final state. 
1. by convention  when we speak of the value of a quantity we are refering to the value of its amount 

1 	k. forbus 
stop when inequalities between parameters change.1 
         a changing quantity is said to be influenced. there are two kinds of influence which can occur. a quantity can be directly influenced by a process or processes  in which case we will write 

according to whether n. some number defined within the process  is a positive or negative influence on the quantity 1- if a quantity is directly influenced  then its derivative is the sum of the direct influences. a quantity can also be indirectly influenced by its value being a function of other quantities which are themselves influenced. we will specify functional dependencies between quantities by 

 read  ri is qualitatively proportional to r1   meaning there exists a function which determines r1 and is increasing monotonic in its dependence on r1. note that the function implicitly specified by ¦Áq may or may not depend upon other quantities or properties. the description of a contained liquid in figure 1  for example  uses ¦Áq to describe the relationships between the parameters of a liquid in a container. signifies the same  but with the implicit function being 
fig. 1. describing liquid in a container 
in hayes' ontology of liquids the individuating criteria for a piece of liquid is being inside some piece of space. when we have some substance s in liquid form within a container c  we have an individual that is a contained liquid  as specified below. 

 1. this is an application of the relevance principle of qualitative reasoning. qualitative reasoning about a continuous thing requires quantization of some sort to induce a finite vocabulary of symbols. the choice of quantization must be chosen to draw the distinctions required by the kind of reasoning being performed. ignoring this principle leads to ad hoc  inadequate  and unextendable representations. 
decreasing monotonic in its dependence on r1. 
         influences provide a means of partially specifying direct and indirect effects. figuring out the sign of a derivative for a quantity from its influences will be called resolving its influences. if a quantity has no influences then its ds value is o. if all influences arc of the same sign then the ds value is just that sign. inequality information can provide a resolution when direct influences have conflicting signs. conflicting indirect influences cannot be resolved within qp theory due to the abstract nature of ¦Áq domain- and situation- specific information is used instead. this information can take many forms  including quantitiativc theories and  rules of thumb   depending on what the reasoner knows and the desired precision of answers. 
         a process is a thing that acts through time to cause changes. a process is specified by five parts: 
individuals'. descriptions of the entities which participate in the process  
quantity conditions: inequality statements and status assignments to other conditionalized descriptions which must be true for the process to be active 
preconditions: statements other than quantity conditions that must be true for the process to be active. often preconditions will not be deduciblc solely within qp theory. 
relations: the relationships between the individuals which hold when the process is active. 
influences: descriptions of what quantities of the individuals are directly influenced by the process. 
figure 1 provides an example. a collection of objects that matches the individual specifications of a process gives rise to a process instance  pi  that represents a potential occurance of that process. a process instance has a status  which is either active or inactive. a pi is active whenever both the preconditions and quantity conditions are true. 
         preconditions are distinct from quantity conditions because some factors are external to the dynamics of a domain  e.g. a purely physical theory cannot predict whether or not someone will walk by and turn on a stove  although it can predict that a result of this action 


	k. forbus 	1 
will be that the water sitting in a kettle on top of it will soon boil. 

         the statements in the relations and influences field hold whenever the process is active. the relations field contains information about functional dependencies induced by the process as well as any new entities which it introduces by virtue of being active. 
the influence field specifics direct influences  as discussed above. 
         a process vocabulary consists of the processes that form a domain's dynamics. the collection of active pi's at a particular time in a situation is called its process structure. a principle tenet of qp theory is that only processes directly influence quantities and that functional dependencies induced by processes  and other conditionalizcd descriptions  see below  are the causes of indirect changes. by making closed world assumptions over a process vocabulary and situation description  we arc thus justified in reasoning by exclusion. 
         individual views represent states of objects and objects whose existence depends on the values of quantities  such as the containcd-i liquid description introduced above. individual views are specified by their individuals  preconditions  quantity conditions  and relations just as processes are. similarly  the view vocabulary describes the individual views of a domain  and the view structure describes the collection of view instances actually true in a situation at a particular time. 
1. measurement interpretation 
         a theory of measurement interpretation must specify what can be measured  what an interpretation of those measurements is  and how to compute them from measurements. we will examine each in turn. 
1 measurements 
         first we must specify what kinds of things can be observed in principle and then add further conditions to specify what can be observed in fact. we will start by assuming that a collection of individuals is known. the closed world assumption that these individuals are the only  relevant  individuals will be called the armchair assumption. we will also assume the existence of a partial decision procedure for determining whether or not relationships defined outside qp theory  such as fiuidconnection  hold  in order to confirm preconditions. to state that we have ascertained whether or not a fact is true via observation  we will write: 

where m is the instrument  such as our eyes  used in the observation. 
         within the qp ontology  the kinds of facts that can be observed are occurences of processes  inequalities and the values of signs. the criteria for a type of process being observable reduces to the observability of a particular kind of quantity and the uniqueness of that process  with respect to the reasoner's process vocabulary  in influencing it. a change in position  for example  is by definition the result of motion. thus whenever we see a change of position we are seeing the result of a motion process. we will say 
1. hayes  1  provides convincing arguments and examples of the role of reasoning by exclusion in naive physics. 
1. in particular  this form of omin is simpler than just noticable difference in psychophysics  because the latter also depends on the value of the quantity. a taxonomy of possible forms for omin is outside the scope of this paper. 

1 k. forbus 

1 interpretations 
         an interpretation must explain what is causing the changes that are occuring  including the special case of nothing changing . in qp theory processes are the only causes of changes  so an interpretation will include assumptions about the status of the process instances  pi's  that occur between the individuals. since more than one process can influence a quantity  interpretations must also include assumptions 
concerning influence resolutions. an interpretation must be internally consistent  externally consistent  and sufficient. internally consistent means an interpretation assigns at most one status to any pi and at most one ds value to any quantity. externally consistent means that the status assignments and ds values assigned are consistent with the measurements. sufficient means that every measured d value is 
explained. 
some additional structure on interpretations will prove useful. 
a unit cause hypothesis  uch  is a partial interpretation that forces the assignment of a d$ value consistent with a measurement. any interpretation which satisfies the three criteria above will be a collection of uchs  one for each ds measurement  that is internally consistent the p-influencers of a quantity is the set of process instances that can possibly influence that quantity  directly or indirectly. the influencers of a uch is the subset of the p-influenccrs that arc active in that uch. in addition to the status assumptions that determine the influencers  a uch with conflicting influences must include an assumption about their resolution. as noted above  for direct influences this will take the form of an inequality between  perhaps sums of  the influences. to state the resolution of conflicting indirect influences we will say 
 1. by contrast  an interpretation in deklcer's qual is a collection of device states and incremental changes in quantities  the latter assumed to occur sequentially in  mythical time   1 . despite profound ontological differences  the principles defining interpretations presented here are inspired by his work 

1 computational issues 
         there arc two possible ways to organize the search for interpretations. one way is to search through the possible uch's for each measurement to find a globally consistent collection. finding the possible uch's for a quantity is simple. the set of p-influencers can be computed from the process descriptions associated with the p1's  and each possible subset of influencers can be checked to see if it can be resolved consistently with the measured value. however  the number of uch's can be quite large. suppose we measure a quantity and find it is increasing. then if wc have p pi's that can provide a positive influence and n that can provide a negative influence  there are 

possible uchs. in practice this number will be much smaller  since the p1's are usually not independent. for example  a fluid path cannot have flows going in both directions at once because their quantity conditions would conflict  see figure 1 . the number of consistent interpretations will almost always be much smaller than the product of the number of uchs since processes typically influence more than one quantity  providing mutual constraint. these facts suggest that we organize the search around the space of status assignments to p1s instead. if wc wish a total interpretation wc can use the entire collection of p1s  but if we want a minimal interpretation to explain the measurements wc can just use the union of the p-influcnccrs for the measured d values. any collection of status assignments that cannot be consistently extended by assumptions about influence resolutions to provide a uch for each d measurement can be thrown out  and each extension found is a valid interpretation. 
         several kinds of knowledge can be used to prune the search space. p1s that correspond to observable processes could have their status determined directly by observation  or indirectly by ascertaining the truth of their preconditions and quantity conditions. for example  if we can see that a valve in a fluid path is closed  then that fluid path is not aligned and no flows can occur through it. 
         once a collection of status assumptions is chosen  it must be extended to form a collection of uchs. there are several ways to accept or rule out a uch. if the set of influences can be resolved then the uch will stand or fall according to whether or not the resolved ds value and the measured value agree. again  this can require domain-specific information; we do not expect that evaporation will immediately cancel out the effect of pouring water into a cup. distinguishability provides a means of ruling out small changes. for example  we can say: 


	k. forbus 	1 
1. informal observations indicate that people appear to use the following ineffectuality heuristic - if a pi's result is not distinguishable  assume it isn't acting. the intuition appears to be that its effect won't make that much of a difference anyway  unless the physical structure of the situation leads you to believe there are alot of them! . this heuristic 

prunes the search space of pis enormously  and it seems likely that correct use of this assumption is a mark of an expert in a domain. 
1. ultimately a global order on catagories of facts will be inadequate  since our strength of belief seems to vary on items within a catagory. for example  when the measuring means is indirect and the domain familiar  wc often trust our theories more than the measurements. the opposite is true if the measurements arc direct  sensory  and the domain unfamiliar. 
contains more than one pi  step 1 yields no results. wc now must search over the status assignments for ffi-1. ff1 and ff1 cannot both be active because they presuppose different ordcrings between a pressure wb   and a pressure wc  . if ff1 alone is active then 
d  level  wc   would be 1  which contradicts the measured value. ff1 being active results in an influence resolution consistent with the 
1 k. forbus 

1. discussion 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡a natural extension of this theory is interpreting measurements over time. an interpretation would be generalized to a history   and measurements would correspond to partial information about this history. the description of measurements remains unchanged  the only difference being that differential distinguishability will be used over significant intervals. there is an additional problem of segmentation  finding intervals where the process structure does not change. a heuristic is to use changes in ds values as the boundaries  since these must correspond to changes in the resolving of influences. additional divisions may be necessary  because changes in unobserved quantities may take time to propgate to distinguishable changes in observed quantities - for example  a stove may be on for some time before you deduce that fact by seeing steam pour out of a kettle on top of it. the theory described here could be used to build interpretations for what is occuring during each episode implied by the boundaries. because the episodes are connected  the interpretation for any particular episode has to be consistent with the interpretations for the ones around it. the pruning constraints and heuristics described above still hold - even if we watch for five minutes  evaporation still won't empty a drinking glass. qp theory also imposes an additional constraint on the connected episodes: the interpretation for each episode has to correspond to a process structure implied by some limit hypothesis  sec   for the process structure implied by the interpretation of the episode before it. 
         interpreting observations in terms of physical theories is an important problem in naive physics  and the theory presented here is a first step towards solving that general problem. using qualitative process theory as the representational framework provides a fairly natural notion of what an interpretation is  what processes arc acting  with what net effect  and ensures that the theory and any algorithms based on it can be used in more than one domain. while many domain-specific facts will be needed in any practical system that performs measurement interpretation  qp theory provides a common language in which to express at least part of the information  and provides a constrained role for other kinds of information  resolving conflicting influences  determining preconditions  quantity conditions  and distinguishability . 
1. bibliography 
 hayes. patrick j.  the naive physics manifesto  in expert systems in the microelectronic age  edited by d. michie  edinburgh university press  may 1 
 hayes  patrick j.  naive physics 1 - ontology for liquids  memo  centre pour les etudes scmantiques et cognitives  geneva  1 
 forbus  k.  qualitative reasoning about physical processes  proceedings of ijcal-1 
 forbus  k.  qualitative process theory  mit ai lab memo no. 1. february 1. revised june  1 
 simmons  r.  spatial and temporal reasoning in geologic map interpretation  proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  1 
 allen  james  maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals  tr1  computer science department  university of rochester  january 1 
 de kleer. j.  causal and teleological reasoning in circuit recognition  tr-1  mit ai lab  cambridge  massachusetts  september 1 
 1 davis  r.  shrobe  h.  hamscher  w.  wieckert  k.  shirley  m.  and polit  s.  diagnosis based on description of structure and function  
proceedings of the national conference on artificial intelligence  1 
 brown  j. s.  burton  r. r.  and bell  a. g.   sophiea sophisticated instructutional environment for teaching electronic 
troubleshooting  an example of al in cai   final report  bbn ai report no. 1  bbn  cambridge  mass  1 
