 
to progress significantly beyond current reason maintenance systems  we must formulate their structure and intended behavior precisely enough to analyze computational complexities and tradeoffs independently of the current set of limited implementation proposals. this paper summarizes one such formulation  and indicates some unsolved practical problems for investigation in future reason maintenance sys terns. 
1. reason maintenance systems  a less deceptive name than the original  truth maintenance systems   have been studied by a variety of authors and have gained currency in artificial intelligence in spite of rather unwieldy descriptions in terms of complex procedures.  see  doyle 1    stallman and sussman 1    london 1   
 mcallester 1    cliarniak  rieshkck  and mcdkrmott 1    tliomi'son 1    gardknkous 1    steele 1    de k l e e r a n d d o y l e 1     m c d k r m o t t 1     g o o d w i n 1   and  martins 1 .  there is little hope for improving on existing rms implementations without clearer statements of their intended behaviors and better analyses of their performance  see  martins 1  . these goals require mathematical formulations that clearly capture our intuitions  formulations that enable calculation of complexity-theoretic tradeoffs to guide and justify choices of implementation.  doyle 1  develops exact theories and initial analyses of several issues arising in reason maintenance systems and in  nonmonotonic logic.'' this paper summarizes portions of those theories and some of the questions they raise. 
¡ì1. reason maintenance systems revise database states using records of inferences or computations  records called reasons or justifications  to trace the consequences of initial changes. by keeping track of what information has been computed from what  such a system can reconstruct the information  derivable  from given information. although it is often convenient to think of such bits of information as beliefs and such derivations as arguments  the notion is much more general  applicable instead to all sorts of mental structures. for con-
feteness  we focus on rms  the particular reason maintenance system 
this research was supported by the defense advanced research projects agency  dod   arpa order no. 1  monitored by the air force avionics laboratory under contract f1-k-1. the views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the author  and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies cither expressed or implied  of the defense advanced research projects agency or the government of the united states of america. 
developed by the author  doyle 1 . the following treatment docs not require intimate familiarity with any reason maintenance system  although in the interest of brevity we omit motivating discussion and examples  so passing acquaintance with the basic idea staled above is valuable. here we only-mention that  contrary to the impression held by some  rms floes not maintain consistency of beliefs in any important sense. rms ensures that the set of  beliefs  held are acceptable with respect to the justifications held  or in other  looser terminology  that the assumptions made by the system are consistent with the justifications guiding their adoption. logical notions of consistency play no role here  as the following treatment illustrates. the mistaken impression may stem from the contrasting importance of logical con-
sistency in  nonmonotonic logic   mcdermott and doyle 1 .  see  doyle 1  for further discussion.  
¡ì1. states of rms contain a variety of elements or components. we let p denote the domain of all possible elements of states  so that states of rms are sets s c p. not every subset of p is  admissible  as a state of rms. we define which sets are so in a moment. 
         let n be a finite set of elements railed nodes. these are the fundamental components of states of rms. nodes are usually used to represent  within rms  the database elements  beliefs  desires  rules  procedures  etc.  of significance to the external system using rms  but we ignore those external meanings here since they have no bearing on the operation of rms. each set n generates a state-domain p n  as follows. we define 

 p means power set.  the elements of sl n  are called sl-justifications  for  support list    and are written a    b ||~ c for a  b c n and c e n. the elements of cp n  are called cp-justifications  for  conditional proof    and are written  a    b   - c  ||- d for a  b c n and c  d e n. sl-justifications will be interpreted as rules for making  non-monotonic  inferences  and cp-juslifications as arguments based on  conditional-proofs  of nodes. the formal definitions of these terms follow. note that if n c n'  then p n  c d n  . in fact  all of 
our definitions will be conservative in the sense that additions to the set of nodes do not change the meaning of previous conclusions or representations in important ways. henceforth we hold the set of nodes constant and ignore the dependence of the domain on the set of nodes  writing simply d instead of d m . 

1 j. doyle 

j. doyle 1 
