 
the ability to identify and represent the knowledge that a human expert has about a particular domain is a key method in the creation of expert computer system. the first part of this paper demonstrates a methodology for collecting and analysing observations of experts at work  in order to find the conceptual framework used for the particular domain. the second part develops a representation for qualitative knowledge of the structure and behavior of a mechanism. the qualitative simulation  or envisionment  process is given a qualitative structural description of a mechanism and some initialization information  and produces a detailed description of the mechanism's behavior. this  vertical  slice of the construction of a cognitive model demonstrator  an effective knowledge acquisition method for the purpose of determining the structure of the representation itself  not simply the content of the knowledge to be encoded in that representation. most importantly  it demonstrates the interaction among constraints derived from the textbook knowledge of the domain  from observations of the human expert  and from the computational requirements of successful performance. 
1. introduction 
how does an expert physician reason about the way the body works  we are exploring the hypothesis that the physician has a cognitive  causal model  of the patient that can be used to simulate the normal working of the body  its pathological behavior in a diseased state  and the idiosyncracies that characterize a particular patient. our goal in this paper is to demonstrate a 
method we have used successfully to analyze physician behavior in detail  and derive critical properties of the knowledge representation. taking these empirical constraints along with computational constraints on knowledge representations has allowed us create a working program that simulates the reasoning processes of the physician. 
research in artificial intelligence has recently begun to address the problems of causal reasoning in diagnosis  explanation  and 
 1. this research was supported in part by nih grant lm 1 from the national library of medicine to the first author. we also gratefully acknowledge the intellectual environment of the clinical decision making group at the mit laboratory for computer 
science  supported in part by nih grant lm 1 from the national library of medicine. 
trouble-shooting  focussing primarily on problems in electronics  in simple physics  and in medicine  1 1.1 1 1 . this work has been important in identifying computational constraints on knowledge representations for causal reasoning  but in most cases it has been only loosely constrained by empirical study of the way human experts actually solve problems. cognitive scientists such as chi  et al  and larkin  et al  have studied the ways that experts and novices formulate and solve word problems in physics  but without specifying the knowledge representations and implementing working computer simulations. we believe that it is important to unify these two approaches  to develop techniques for designing knowledge representations constrained by empirical observations. our methods are designed for determining the knowledge representation of the knowledge base  even before attempting to capture large quantities of domain knowledge. 
 1. design of the experiment 
our methodology must determine constraints from human behavioi that can help us develop adequate hypotheses about the structure of knowledge representations . there are two basic questions we want to answer about the behavior of an unknown knowledge representation that will aid in determining its structure: 
 1  what states of knowledge can be expressed  
    what inferences can take place  
a methodology of discovery appropriate to the undoubted complexity of human knowledge requires richly-structured data about individuals rather than easily analyzed data about a population. as newell and simon  point out  only the full complexity of verbal behavior  as captured in a verbatim transcript  can do justice to the complexity of the knowledge representation. therefore  in order to study the representation of causal knowledge in physicians  we decided to analyze verbatim transcripts of a small number of physicians solving problems using their causal knowledge. our study included subjects at three widely spaced levels of expertise: medical school faculty members  the masters   second-year residents  the journeymen   and fourth year medical students  the apprentices . the scope of this paper  however  only permits us tc discuss results from a single subject  a journeyman . 
the interview is designed as a  thinking aloud  experiment  in which the subject is asked to report as much as possible of what he thinks about as he solves a problem. this type of experiment is particularly sensitive to the natural control structure of the subject's problem solving method  but cannot support direct conclusions about the limits of the subject's knowledge. the 

1 b. kuipers and j. kassirer 
 thinking aloud  experiment is complemented by a  cross examination  experiment  in which the experimenter asks probing questions about the subject's knowledge of particular topics. the  cross examination  interview is not sensitive to the natural control structure of the problem -solving method  but is much more effective for determining the limits of the knowledge represented  particularly in highly articulate subjects such as physicians. 
in a recent survey  kassirer  kuipers  and gorry  review the methodologies for investigating clinical cognition and describe some of the pitfalls and promise of the analysis of verbatim transcripts of physicians solving realistic medical problems. although the work of elstein  et al  1| is important and path-breaking  kassirer  et al  criticize it for its reliance on retrospective reflections of physicians when viewing videotapes of 
their own behavior. in an extensive review  nisbett and wilson  1 show that a subject has no privileged knowledge of the factors that influence his behavior ericsson and simon  develop a model of the verbalization process and use it to clarify and refine nisbett and wilson's conclusion they conclude that a subject's statement of what is currently in his focus of attention is unlikely to be in error. it is the subject's commonsense theory of his own cognitive processes that has no particular privileged status. 
the material for the interview consisted of a slightly atypical case of a kidney disorder called the nephrotic  syndrome  presented as a case summary on a single sheet of paper. because of a self induced low-salt diet  this particular patient experienced no swelling  though all other signs and laboratory results allowed an unambiguous diagnosis to be made. the atypical case allowed us to compare throe different causal models in the same subject: the model of salt and water handling by the healthy kidney  the pathophysiology of nephrotic syndrome  and the idiosyncracies of the particular patient. 
1. the nephrotic syndrome 
the nephrotic syndrome case was selected to investigate causal reasoning about equilibrium processes which are central to physiological mechanisms. two important equilibrium processes are disturbed in the nephrotic syndrome: the transfer of salt and water across capillary walls  the standing equilibrium  and the transfer of salt and water from the plasma into the urine. the standing equilibrium determines the flow of water between the plasma and the tissues  the spaces between the cells   according to the balance of competing hydrostatic pressure and oncotic 
pressure in the plasma and in the tissues. the second important equilibrium  also controlled by the kidney  determines the total amount of salt and water in the body. if the body contains too much salt and water  the kidney excretes more of each into the urine; if there is too little  it cuts back on excretion. 
in the nephrotic syndrome  both of these equilibria are shifted to new stable points  keeping the body in balance but causing problems for the patient. the basic cause of nephrotic syndrome is that the kidney excretes protein that it was supposed to retain  and consequently plasma proteins are depleted. the amount of protein in the plasma determines its oncotic pressure  and hence is an important factor in the starling equilibrium. with less protein in the blood  the starling equilibrium shifts  moving some water from the plasma into the tissues. this movement of extra water into the tissues in itself usually causes no clinical manifestations. however  the shift of water to the tissues leaves the plasma volume low. so the kidney starts  to retain water rather than allowing it to be excreted in the urine. 1 he starting equilibrium  of course  continues to shift much of this additional fluid into the tissues  and substantial edema  swelling  particularly in the legs  develops. from the patient's point of view  this accumulation can produce as much as fifty pounds of extra water in the legs and abdomen to understand the mechanism of edema in nephrotic syndrome requires an understanding of both equilibria and their interaction. 
retention of salt by the kidney is central to the mechanism whereby the kidney retains water. in response to a contraction of plasma volume  the kidney's primary response is to retain salt. salt retention  in turn  is what causes water retention. the particular patient whose history formed the basis of the experiment had selected a low salt diet  so the kidney was unable to retain much salt or water  and the edema was consequently much less than a physician would expect. 
1. analysis of the transcript 
the raw data produced by the experiment is a verbatim transcript of the subject's explanation of various aspects of the nephrotic syndrome in general and of this case in particular. as it is transcribed  it is broken into short lines that correspond roughly to meaningful phrases in the explanation  see table 1 . excerpts are selected in which the subject appears to be concentrating on the explanation and presenting his medical knowledge  rather than expressing an opinion about his own mental processes. the analysis of an excerpt takes place in two stages: 
  1  identify the objects and relations in the domain that the subject is referring to  as distinct from the wording used to refer to them  
  1  identify the causal relationships that are described in the segment. 
table 1 presents an excerpt in which the subject  a second-year resident in internal medicine  is explaining  correctly  the mechanism by which the loss of protein from the blood results in edema in nephrotic syndrome. a quick reading of the excerpt shows that the physician is framing his explanation in terms of substances in locations  causing forces which result in flows. by attempting to classify each referring phrase in the extract into one of these categories  we can test whether our initial hypothesis about the framework was correct  or whether additional terms need to be added. 
by classifying each of the referring phrases in the excerpt as shown in tables 1 and 1  we can obtain the set of domain objects and relations that constitute the framework of the explanation. naturally  there will be objects and relations that are represented in the knowledge structure but were not selected for explicit mention in the explanation. computational constraints will bring these to light as we later construct a model to account for the explanation. 

l1 	a: when there is a very low albumin in the scrum  
l1 	there are two forces which cause edema in my thinking ---
l1 	the hydrostatic and oncotic forces 
l1 	and we have actually opposed forces  
l1 	forces  ...break...  formation is secondary to 
l1 	the hydrostatic force of the blood going through the capillaries 
l1 	and causing the transudation of fluid 
l1 	as well as the osmotic force within the blood vessels  
l1 	that is secondary to the proteins in the plasma 
li 1 	which tend to draw fluid 
l1 	from the interstitial spaces into the blood vessels 
l1 	and also there is the forces in the extracellular space. 
l1 	there are certain proteins which tend to pull water 
l1 	out of the blood vessels 
l1 and there is a hydrostatic force i believe also in the interstitial spaces 
l1 	which can counteract the force of the fluid 
l1 	coming out from within the vessels 
l1 	and if you have a very low albumin in the serum  
l1 	there will be a decreased osmotic pressure 
l1 	and make it easier for the fluid to go out into the interstitial spaces. 
substances 
protein  l1  1  1  1  fluid  l1  1  1  1  
table 1. a second-year resident explains how loss of protein from the blood causes edema in nephrotic syndrome. the first stage in the analysis consists of identifying and classifying the phrases in the excerpt referring to substances. similar analyses identify references to locations  concentrations  forces  and flow rates  cf. table 1 . 
substances 
protein  l1  1  1  1  fluid  l1  1  1  1  
locations blood vessels  l1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  interstitial spaces  l1  1  1  
concentrations concentration protein  blood   l1  
forces hydrostatic pressure fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  hydrostatic pressure fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  serum protein oncotic pressure fluid  interstitial spaces  blood  
 l1  1 1  
interstitial protein oncotic pressure fluid  blood  interstitial spaces  
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　 l1  flow rates 
flow fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  1  flow fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  
table 1. the complete set of objects and relations identified in the excerpt in table 1. 
	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 	1 
l1 a: when there is a very low albumin in the serum  l1 there are two forces which cause edema in my thinking ---l1 the hydrostatic and oncotic forces l1 and we have actually opposed forces  l1 forces  ...break...  formation is secondary to l1 the hydrostatic force of the blood going through the 
capillaries l1 and causing the transudation of fluid. l1 as well as the osmotic force within the blood vessels l1 that is secondary to the proteins in the plasma l1 which tend to draw fluid l1 from the interstitial spaces into the blood vessels. l1 and also there is the forces in the extracellular space: l1 there are certain proteins which tend to pull water l1 out of the blood vessels; l1 and there is a hydrostatic force i believe also in the 
interstitial spaces l1 which can counteract the force of the fluid l1 coming out from within the vessels. l1 and if you have a very low albumin in the serum. l1 there will be a decreased osmotic pressure. l1 and make it easier for the fluid to go out into the interstitial 
spaces. descriptions of structure hydrostatic pressure fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  
=   flow fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  
concentration protein  blood   l1  
=   serum protein oncotic pressure fluid  interstitial spaces  blood  
                                                          l1  =   flow fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  
concentration protein  interstitial spaces   l1  
=   flow fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  
hydrostatic pressure fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  
=   flow fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  
descriptions of behavior decreased concentration protein  blood   l1  
=   decreased serum protein oncotic pressure fluid  interstitial spaces  blood   l1  
=   increased flow fluid  blood  interstitial spaces   l1  
table 1. the first four statements describe structural relationships that hold between continuously-variable quantities. the fifth describes the behavior of the mechanism. 
once its basic terms have been formalized  table 1   the content of the explanation can be stated explicitly. table 1 identifies five different statements of causal relationships in the extract  falling into two categories. some of the key objects in the domain  concentrations  forces  and flow rates  are continuously-variable quantities  and the subject is asserting facts about those quantities. the first four statements are assertions of structural 

1 	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 
relationships that hold between certain quantities  without stating anything about the values that they may take on at particular times. the fifth statement refers to the values that the quantities might take on under particular circumstances  and so describes the behavior of the mechanism. 
our analysis of this excerpt from the transcript  shown in tables 1 and 1  provides us with the following conclusions  which will serve as empirical constraints on the knowledge representation we devise for the domain. 
  1  the explanation refers to a relatively small set of objects and relations describing aspects of the domain. 
  1  those objects that are involved in the causal assertions are symbolic descriptions of continuously-variable quantities or the values they take on at a particular time. 
  1  descriptions of the structural relationships making up a mechanism are expressed separately  and therefore probably represented separately  from descriptions of the dynamic behavior of the mechanism. 
  1  the symbolic descriptions of quantities and values are stated in qualitative terms: directions of flow  increased and decreased quantities  low albumin  more perfusion  and so on. this suggests that the symbolic description of quantity and value is stated primarily in terms of ordinal relations among values. 
1. the domain model - structural description 
for the next step in our analysis  we must examine the starling equilibrium itself to find a way to represent the structure of its causal relationships that is consistent with the observations we have made. the purpose of the domain model is to make explicit information that is logically necessary to answer questions correctly about the domain  but may not have been stated in the explanation. based on our observations of the transcript  we begin by defining the possible substances and locations  along with quantities representing their amounts and concentrations  and the constraints among those quantities  table 1 . 
the starling equilibrium is an equilibrium between four forces: the hydrostatic pressures and the oncotic pressures in the two compartments  p and i . there are several different ways to combine the effects of these forces to produce a net flow rate  each with different sets of intermediate terms. we select the combination method that provides the best match with the terms used in the explanation. thus we combine two pressures of each type to produce net hydrostatic and net oncotic pressures  each of which causes a flow between the two compartments  which are in turn combined to produce a net rate of flow  table 1 . 

other constraints  such as the way the hydrostatic pressure in the blood depends on the amount of fluid in the blood compartment  are very complex and may not even be known to the expert. the physician does  however  know that the functional relationship is strictly monotonically increasing  at least for the situations now being considered. accordingly  we define a functional constraint  m +   that states that one quantity is an unknown but strictly increasing function of the other. the constraint can be modified  mz+  to indicate that the function passes through the origin  as well. table 1 gives the functional relationships required to model the starling equilibrium. 
finally  the rate of flow of fluid from one compartment to another specifies the change in the amount of fluid in each compartment. to capture this domain relationship we must formulate and use a derivative constraint. there is no specific phrase 

in the excerpt that we can identify with the use of a derivative constraint  but such a constraint is required for computational adequacy of the model. 

table 1. domain model: rate of flow related to change in amount. 
this system of equations  tables 1 - 1  constitutes the domain model of the structure of the mechanism of the starling equilibrium. figure 1 is a graphical depiction of the structural model  in which the constraint equations are drawn as linking the quantities involved. 
	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 	1 
1. qualitative simulation in the explanation 
the structural assertions we have identified in the explanation specify the relevant objects  relations  and their connections. the next step is to augment the representation until it can carry out a qualitative simulation of the behavior of the mechanism  given this qualitative description of its structure. just as we did with the structural description  we will use constraints from the observed explanation  from the computational requirements of the representation  and from knowledge of the domain  to specify the representation and its behavior. 
we can illustrate our analysis of the behavioral parts of the explanation by overlaying the described behavior onto the structural description. figure 1 illustrates the final statement of the explanation  showing the causal pathway by which loss of plasma protein causes a shift in the starling equilibrium  thus translocating fluid from the plasma into the interstitial space. 

 figure 1. a diagrammatic representation of the domain model of the starling equilibrium  tables 1 - 1  showing quantities related by arithmetic  functional  and derivative constraints.  the sign of net flow fluid p l  is inverted before reaching one of the derivative constraints.  at any point in time  the values of the quantities must obey all of the constraints. the system as a whole changes over time while continuing to satisfy the constraints. 
figure 1. the portion of the explanation referring to the behavior of the mechanism can be analyzed as asserting changes to the quantities involved in the structural description  figure 1 . 

1 	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 
1. the domain model -- qualitative description of state 
the fifth statement in the explanation describes the behavior of the mechanism. by examining the relations described in the transcript  and attempting to maintain logical adequacy  we can propose a representation for the dynamic state of the qualitative simulation  and for the inference rules that drive it. 
one conspicuous characteristic of the transcript is the qualitative vocabulary used to describe quantities: directions of flow  increased and decreased quantities  low albumin  more perfusion  and so on. this suggests that the simulation works primarily with ordinal relations among the values of the quantities in the structural domain model: e.g. a quantity is increased if its current value is greater than its previous  or its normal  value. the numerical values of particular quantities  e.g. plasma oncotic pressure  at different times are unspecified and sometimes unknown to the physician. thus  the knowledge representation must function with descriptions of values  not with the numerical values themselves. since all that is mentioned about those values are their ordinal relationships  we might conclude that the description of a value consists of exactly its ordinal relationships with other values. 
logical adequacy  however  requires us to distinguish between two closely related concepts: 
  1  the ordinal relation between two values: greater-than  equal  less than; 
  1  the direction of change of a single value over time: increasing  steady  decreasing. 
a patients current blood pressure  for example  could be in any one of the nine states combining these two attributes  with different clinical significance in each case. therefore  the qualitative description of a value must contain both its ordinal relations with other values and its direction of change. the logical necessity of this distinction forces us to include it in any representation for expert causal reasoning  even though the two concepts are difficult to distinguish in the transcript. 
the constraint types defined above for the structural description interact almost perfectly with these qualitative descriptions of value. essentially  each constraint acts as a local theorem-prover operating in an unquantified relational calculus  having access to its own axioms and the information known about the associated quantities  and communicating with its neighbors through shared quantities. for example  the constraint x + y = z makes inferences of the form: 

kuipers  defines this representation in detail  based on a design by steele  that operates on integer values. 
this propagation of information through constraints does not correspond to a sequence of events taking place over time. rather  we start with a small amount of information about the current state of the mechanism and deduce a more complete description of the state of the mechanism at the same point in time. the actual simulation process analyzes the configuration of changing values to predict the next state after the passage of time. 
1. the domain model - qualitative simulation 
the propagation of information across the constraints provides a more complete description of the state of the mechanism at a 
particular point in time  deriving new information about the states of its intermediate variables. once a sufficiently well-specified description of the current state exists  the simulation process examines the configuration of changing values to determine what can be asserted about the next state whose qualitative description is distinct from the current one. the propagation process then begins again for this new time-point  until yet another state can be determined. dekleer  introduced the term envisionment for this cyclic process. 
the rules for determining the next qualitatively-distinct state are elaborations on the following two types of qualitative changes  which depend on the ordinal relationship between the current value of a quantity and nearby  landmarks  or distinguished values. 
 move from distinguished value: if the current value of a changing quantity is equal to a distinguished value  then let the next value be an undistinguished value perturbed in the direction of change  closer to the starting point than any other distinguished value. 
 move to limit: if the current value of a changing quantity is not equal to a distinguished value  and there is a distinguished value in the direction of change  let the value of that quantity in the next time point be equal to the next distinguished value. 
the subject's goal in his explanation is to show how the starling equilibrium contributes to edema in the nephrotic syndrome  table 1  l1 . our hypothesis is that the explanation is derived from the qualitative simulation of the starting equilibrium mechanism  based on its structural description. the result we want the explanation to justify is: 

table 1 shows the result of envisioning the starling equilibrium. 
we assume that the reasoning system has  from its previous knowledge of nephrology  a description of the normal state of the starling mechanism in equilibrium. state  n  in table 1 represents that normal state; the term  norm  in each line refers to the normal value of that quantity  to simplify the notation. state  1  is created by asserting the initial conditions defining the nephrotic syndrome: 

thereafter  the propagation process completes the description of state  1 . the simulation process asserts new ordinal relations in state  1  for each changing quantity in state  1   and propagation adds the directions of change to complete the description of state  1 . the simulation process must diagnose which of several qualitative changes take place after state  1 . it concludes that the first qualitative change makes net flow fluid.p.h = 1. but leaves all other changing quantities different from their previous normal values. the propagation process fills in the directions of change  all steady  to show that state  1  is an equilibrium. 

	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 	1 

examining the qualitative values in table 1. we see that the 
                                                                         1. conclusion original goal was achieved  of explaining the link: amt protein p   normal =  amt fluid i    normal  
we have followed the derivation of a working computer simulation 
since the antecedent of this causal link was asserted as an initial of an aspect of causal reasoning from end to end. the first part of 
condition  and the consequent holds true in the final equilibrium the paper demonstrates a methodology for collecting and 
state. patil  addresses the problem of maintaining the analyzing observations of experts at work  in order to find the 
correspondence between this detailed causal model description conceptual framework used for the particular domain. the 
and the clinical level of description. the many facts derived about second part developed a representation for qualitative knowledge 
the states of other variables in the mechanism serve as the of the structure and behavior of a mechanism. the qualitative 
interface to other physiological mechanisms. in this case  the simulation  or envisionment  process is given a structural 
value of amt  fluid.p  in state  1  acts as the interface with the total description of a mechanism and some initialization information  
body fluid equilibrium. and produces a detailed description of the mechanism's behavior. 
the knowledge representation for causal reasoning is presented 
the requirement of computational adequacy tells us that the in greater detail in   along with several examples in 
reasoning process must carry out this simulation in order for the nonmedical domains that reveal more of its interesting properties. reasoner to predict the behavior of the mechanism. it must produce a wealth of detail in order to interface correctly with the 
by following the construction of a knowledge representation from 
many other mechanisms in human physiology. on the other hand  the identification of the problem to the running computer 
a careful examination of the behavioral description in table 1 and simulation  this paper provides a  vertical  slice of the 
its illustration in figure 1 shows that the content of the subject's construction of a cognitive model. it demonstrates an effective 
explanation is derived solely from the propagation of information knowledge acquisition method for the purpose of determining the 
through the network to complete state  1 . a possible explanation structure of the representation itself  not simply the content of the 
for this is that the qualitative simulation is both complicated to knowledge to be encoded in that representation. most 
express  and capable of running to conclusion on its own  so the importantly  it demonstrates the interaction among constraints 
most effective explanation omits the simulation trace. 
derived from the textbook knowledge of the domain  observations of the human expert  and the computational requirements of successful performance. 

1 	b. kuipers and j. kassirer 
this representation for the structure and behavior of a mechanism is similar to differential equations  but expresses descriptions that are strictly weaker  in the sense that several different differential equations would be consistent with a single causal model. 

figure 1. the qualitative structural description is capable of capturing more partial states of knowledge than differential equations  and produces a partial description of the mechanism's behavior. because the qualitative simulation occasionally uses heuristics  the two paths through the above diagram do not necessarily yield the same result. 
the fact that the causal model is strictly weaker than the corresponding differential equation model may have important implications for the construction and validation of a truly large medical knowledge base. it suggests the possibility that causal models might be constructed by systematically transforming precise models from the scientific literature into the weaker causal model representation. the weaker descriptive language allows the system to reason effectively with the type of mixed qualitative and quantitative information that is typically available to physicians. the systematic relationship with formal scientific models of physiology suggests a possible alternative to the current slow and unverifiable methods for constructing large knowledge bases. 
1. 