 
a central process in any learning experience is the incorporation of a new fact into an existing theory. despite the abundance of papers on learning  no one has yet defined rigorously what it means to be  new . this paper attempts to fill that gap by first stating  and then formalizing several intuitive ideas about novelty  focusing on what it means for a statement to be a new fact about some concept. the report also includes a brief discussion of how this result might be applied and outlines many remaining research areas. 
1 introduction 
﹛a central process in any learning experience is the incorporation of a new fact into an existing theory. often the goal of that process is more specific  to learn some new fact about some concept. but what does it mean to claim that a sentence is new  and even more interesting  what qualifies as a novel fact about some concept  despite the vast interest in learning and the abundance of related papers  cf.  dietterich 1a    buchanan 1    michalski 1    dietterich 1b    dietterich 1    no one has rigorously defined what it means to be  new   either in general or with respect to a single concept. 
﹛this paper attempts to fill that gap. our goal is to obtain a semantic rather than a syntactic understanding of novelty. this preference stems from our belief that a semantic account  one based on the possible interpretations of the theory  provides important insight into the phenomenon of novelty. it also means we may be able to generalize these results to other logics and languages. 
﹛the results of this research are relevant  and useful  to many different fields. the primary importance of this work is in providing a first stab at describing the different senses of novelty. in addition to the applications a complete and adequate definition of newness would have as an analytic tool  there are possible applications in knowledge acquisition  representation  and discourse analysis. many of these stem from the intimate connection between novelty and the intuitive notion of 
 aboutness .  section 1 elaborates on each of these.  
﹛this report discusses two kinds of novelty. section 1 describes newness of a sentence with respect to a theory. section 1 uses this result to address the more difficult task of determining when a sentence conveys something new about a particular concept. while the first kind of novelty is fairly easy to capture  the second requires a consideration of the interconnections among facts within a theory. section 1 justifies why this undertaking is relevant and describes how these results may eventually be used. the concluding section 1 lists several outstanding research issues. 
1 new with respect to a theory 
﹛this section addresses the issue of what it means for a sentence 考 to be new with respect to a theory1 th; this is the relation n th  考 . intuitively  we want 考 to be new if it  somehow  further specifies something about the world. alternatively we can think of a new sentence as providing some additional constraints  which remove some possible worlds   moore 1   from consideration. 
﹛we first consider a semantic definition of newness: 考 is new with respect to a theory if it eliminates some possible interpretation of that theory.1 that is  given any theory th  in the language l  there is a set of models lth = {i }  in which each i  maps the symbols of l into objects or sets of tuples of objects in the  real world  in the standard way. notice that this means that the universe is fixed beforehand and that these ranges can overlap. 
﹛adding additional sentences to a theory can only restrict the set of possible interpretations: th c th' means that l t h ' c lth. 
﹛﹛we are taking a slightly unorthodox syntactic view of theory: viz.  a theory is a consistent and deductively closed set of axioms. wo will also assume that the deductive system is complete. 
r. greiner and m. genesereth 1 
 this new definition seems  at first  adequate. in addition to paralleling the n situation  it also resonates nicely with the ideas of 

1 new with respect to a concept 
﹛in many situations it is not enough to realize that an assertion is new; rather  one often wants to claim that it is a new fact about some concept. with this in mind  we define the ternary relation new th   s. 曳  to mean that the assertion 考 expresses a new fact about the concept s with respect to the theory th. the  learning step  involves adding this sentence a  along with all of its deductive consequences  to the theory. 
﹛what should go into a definition of new th s. 1   clearly  a necessary condition is that a be a new fact with respect to the entire theory; that is  n th.考 . but beyond that  we want to capture the sense in which 考 further specifies the concept s  or enables the derivation of additional relevant conclusions about s. 
﹛this section will present a definition of new by proposing a 
﹛series of  increasingly more nearly correct  descriptions. for simplicity  the examples are taken from propositional logic. 
conjecture 1: syntactic method. most statements 
which relay information about some concept will contain the symbol that refers to that concept. this leads to the proposed syntactic solution: the sentence 考 conveys new information about the symbol a if the token  a  is lexically included in the siring of tokens which form a  denoted with the assertion lexin  a h  考  - e.g.  lexin   a   aab'' . for the reasons mentioned above  we will further insist that n th  考 . formally  
defn 1: newsyn th s 考   =  n th 考  a lexln s 考 . 
unfortunately  this syntactic condition is neither necessary nor sufficient. to see that it is not necessary  realize that we want new {a =*b}  a   b   to be true  since asserting b in this situation means that a must now be true  which had not been the case before that assertion. 
﹛to show insufficiency is a little trickier. should new {avb}   a    a= b''  be true  we argue the answer is no: 
in this context  asserting a= b is the same as asserting b  which we know says nothing new about a. we clearly need a more powerful method for specifying novelty. 
conjecture 1: fewer interpretations. 	using the 
notion of possible interpretations discussed in section 1  we can define the  interpretation range  of a particular symbol. let the term ij  s  designate the  real world  referent of the symbol s  given by the interpretation ij - here  either i or e.1 we use this to define the interpretation range of the symbol s i t h  s   by shannon's information theory  in which information is tied to the reduction of uncertainty in the distribution of possible values of a signal.  see  gallager 1 .  it also handles the two cases used above to discredit newsyn . 
﹛unfortunately  this newfi requirement does not include all desired cases. there are some sentences that do convey new information in the informal sense outlined above but that do not satisfy this constraint: start with an empty theory  th1  - {} 1 in the language l = {a b}. the four possible interpretations are shown in figure 1. by inspection  l t h l   a   = {!.㏒}  now  form th1  - thl +  a = bh. while this leaves only two of the four original interpretations  i1 and i1  lth1  a   remains {i ㏒}  indicating that a = b said nothing mowfi about a. 
﹛although newfi rejects this a = b  we still believe it should be considered a new fact about a in this situation: if we later learn -ib  we will be able to infer that - a  a conclusion that would not 

have followed without that sentence. that is  any sentence that makes as range of interpretations dependent on some other symbol  in the sense that a = b made a dependent on b  also  feels  new. 
so there are at least two ways a statement can be new: 
  it directly limits the interpretation range of a  or 
  it establishes  or increases  a dependency of a on some other symbols  as that may  in turn  lead to a reduction of the above type . 
while newfi covers the first case exactly  it fails in the second. 
conjecture 1: partial interpretations. to define 
dependency requires an understanding of what it means for one symbol to depend on some other symbols. the a = b case above is clearly one instance of this. in addition to such singular dependencies  of a on one other symbol   a may depend on a combination of symbols.  consider the assertion a  b =*c . 
underbar notation denotes the referent of the corresponding linguistic 
symbol. 
   the notation t *← y means the theory t is assigned the deductive closure of the set  y; and th   考 refers to the deductive closure of thu{考} 

1 	r. greiner and m. genesereth 


  analytic tool. an adequate definition of newness would help us identify the sources  and recipients  of novelty within learning programs. for example  the teacher provides the arch program   winston 1   with the new facts that enable it to learn. lex's problem solver and critic are the sources of novelty for the rest of the system   mitchell 1  . am   lenat 1   has no clear source of novelty. this definition may also help us understand the distinction between compositional new terms - such as am's definition of prime numbers - and other new terms  such as bacon's use of intrinsic properties   langley 1  . finally  it may lead to a definition of learning not based exclusively on performance. 
  learning and knowledge acquisition. an adequate  i.e.  computable  definition of novelty might suggest ways of learning a topic more effectively. for example  it could focus the learner's effprts on those aspects of the domain where he has the greatest potential for acquiring something new. this information would help a knowledge-base builder decide which concepts need to be better understood  helping him to direct the dialogue. an analysis of a symbol's dependencies  defined above  might then be used to generate appropriate  probe  sentences to help understand this still vague concept. 
  representation. how should a given proposition be indexed  in general each concept should point to all the relevant facts that are about that concept. the most obvious approach  based strictly on lexical inclusion  is inadequate. for example  one would want to index  x + 1 =1  by  x  and not by   f    whereas  x + y = y + x  should be associated with   +   and not with  x . 
so how does one determine those concepts that a given fact is really about  we claim that  aboutness  is intimately tied to  newness  in the sense that a is about a concept c whenever this a expresses something new about c with respect to the appropriate diminished theory  which excludes g s  and all of its consequences . 
  linguistics. the basic purpose of communication is fcr the speaker  s  to transmit a set of new facts  usually about some specific topic. to understand this process  we have to know what it means for a fact to be new to h and then how s  and h  can use this meta-fact when constructing  or understanding  the message. 
1 conclusion 
﹛while space does not permit an adequate discussion of the all the issues associated with this model of novelty  this paper would be incomplete if it did not address the following topics  and point the interested reader to the longer paper  greiner 1 . 
* applicability. the newpi relation described above is applicable to any symbol in predicate calculus as well as propositional logic. in particular  the same formalism we saw work for constant symbols works adequately for relation symbols  albeit with an even larger tableau. 
   assertional novelty . the novelty we discussed above  newpi  is  definitional   in that its goal is to specify more precisely the referent of a given symbol. another source of novelty comes from specifying some attribute of the concept; we label such facts  assertionally novel .  see 
 woods 1 .  
	r. grelner and m. genesereth 	1 
these two categories are distinct: imagine the symbol rdg had been totally determined  in the sense that the set lth  rdg   had but a single member. as such  there is nothing newpi we can say about rdg. despite this certainty  you still might not know what his hair color is. that is  ha1rcolor rdg brunette  might be true in one interpretation  whereas others might hold that ha1rcolor rdg blond . clearly ha1rcolor rdg 
blond  is a newpi fact about haircolour; however  most people would also want this it to be a new fact about rdg as well - that is  
newassert th  rdg '' haircolor rdg blond   . 
  intensional  not extensional. this paper has dealt exclusively with extensional phenomena  where novelty was determined with respect to the extensions of the symbols. another approach is intensional - based on descriptions. 
  deductively closed. probably the most serious criticism of this work is its dependency on a complete deductive system and the requirement that each theory be deductively closed. new-sounding statements can also be used to focus the hearer's attention on some facts he already knew  rather than expose him to new facts. it should be possible to extend this formalism to handle such resource-limited deducibility. then we could 
address topics like monotonic novelty and information obsolence. 
each of the issues mentioned above suggests a research task 
- that of plugging each limitation. the two issues we find most pressing are: 
  finding an equivalent but syntactical formulation of the semantical newpl relation  in the same manner that nsyn matched nsem. we hope this will lead to one or more operational versions  of the types mentioned in the beginning of section 1. 
  expanding this newpi definition to work with deductive systems that are incomplete.  this reiterates the last issue shown above.  
﹛our basic thesis is that a is a new fact about a  with respect to the theory th  if  under some set of circumstances  考 limits the number of interpretations of a. newpj achieves this by examining every partial interpretation  testing each to see if a loses a possible interpretation in that situation. this  partial interpretation  definition of context is clearly as general as possible. furthermore  by counterexample  we have shown that this extreme generality is necessary. 
acknowledgments 
   we would especially like to thank tom dielterich for his significant contributions to this work. the following people also contributed: professor bruce buchanan  dr. lew creary  jim davidson  dr. johan dekleer  dianne kanerva.dr. jussi ketonen  jock mackinlay  dr. robert moore  yoram moses  and 
ben moszkowski. many useful comments were provided by the reviewers. this basic research was funded by arpa contract #mda1c-1. 

1 r. greiner and m. genesereth 
bibliography 
 buchanan 1  buchanan  b. g.  mitchell. t. m.  smith  r. g. and johnson. c. r. jr. 
models of learning systems. 
in encyclopedia of computer science and technology . 
dekker  1.  dietterich 1a  dietterich. t. g. and buchanan  b. g. 
the role ol the critic in learning systems. 
technical report stan-cs 1  computer science department. stanford university  december  1.  dietterich 1b  dietterich  t. g. and michalski  r. s. 
inductive learning of structural descriptions. 
artificial intelligence 1.  dietterich 1  dietterich  t. g.  london  r.. clarkson. k.  and dromoy. g. 
learning and inductive inference. 
in cohen. p. and feigenbaum  e.a.  editors . the handbook of aritilicial intelligence . william kaufman  inc.  los altos  ca. 1.  enderton 1  enderton  herbert b. 
a mathematical introduction to logic. 
academic press  inc.  new york  1.  gallager 1  gallager. 	robert g. 
information theory and reliable communication. 
john wiley and sons. inc.  new york  1.  greiner 1  greiner  russell and genesereth  michael r. 
what's new  a semantic definition of novelty. 
hpp working paper hpp-1  computer science department  stanford university  february  1.  langley 1  langley  pat. 
rediscovering physics with bacon.1. 
in 1-ijcai  pages 1. tokyo. august. 1.  lenat 1  lenat  douglas b. 
am: discovery in mathematics as heuristic search. 
in davis  randall and lenat. douglas b.  editors . knowledgebased systems in artificial intelligence.. mcgraw-hill international book company  san francisco. 1.  michalski 1  michalski  ryszard s.  carboneil. jaime g.  and mitchell  tom m.  editors . 
machine learning: an artificial intelligence approach. 
tioga publishing company  palo alto  ca  1.  mitchell 1  mitchell  thomas m.  utgoff  paul e.  nudel  bernard and banerji  ranan. 
learning problem-solving heuristics ihruough practice. 
in ijcai-1  pages 1. ubc. 1.  moore 1  moore  robert c. 
reasoning about knowledge and action. 
technical note 1. sri interational  october. 1.  winston 1  winston  p. h. 
learning structural descriptions from examples. 
mcgraw-hill book company  new york  1  chapter 1.  woods 1  woods. w. a. 
what's in a link: foundations for semantic networks. 
in d. g. bobrow & a. m. collins  editors . representation and understanding. academic press  1. 
     1 a/e are only concerned with  true interpretations   which map symbols into referents within a legal model. we ch1e  interpretation  rather than  model  to emphasizes that we are dealing with a mapping rather than its rango. 
﹛---------------

﹛------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

