ion. the focus of this paper is attentioned more to issues on knowledge representation and model inference than that on natural language analysis. hierarchical model is employed. in particular  cause-effect representation is used to make it clear how actions of each module and events are related to each other. a brief description is given to illustrate our approach. 
1. introduction 
       one of the difficulties with expert system is knowledge acquisition. the fact that most of human knowledge is integrated as natural language documents has led us to the development of a system which can automatically acquire knowledge from existing documents. in knowledge acquisition from documents  expressive power of natural language  in particular the ability of representing any complex object or situation from various levels of abstraction  should not be sacrificed but be effectively utilized by an expert system for cad. the essential problem to be solved consists more in model representation and inference problem than in parsing. for example  the resolution of anaphoric expression depends more on domain specific knowledge than on linguistically general knowledge. 
	a 	system 	called 	h m u 	 hardware 	manual 
understander  is in the course of development  which will analyze given natural language specification of lsi chips  such as microprocessor and the like   and which will construct a knowledge structure specifying the behavior of the chip. the acquired model will be utilized by intelligent symbolic simulator to give human designer explanations about the chip. the intelligent symbolic simulator is also under development  nishida 1 . 
       hmu's main components are natural language analyzer and model builder. natural language analyzer utilizes domain specific knowledge to resolve ambiguities  anaphoras  etc. accordingly  the model builder and the natural language analyzer communicates to each other. the details are described in  nishida 1 . the model builder receives internal representation obtained from natural language analysis and builds an automaton-based hardare model structure using common sense knowledge about hardware  time  action  events  etc. in what follows  we will describe the model representation and model building procedure to more detail. 
1. a model for representing multiple agent co-operating situation 
       this section describes the hardware model which we used. the well defined hardware domain can be modeled as a world where multiple agents are cooperating each other to attain a common goal. actions are done in parallel and are synchronized through events. use of hierarchical representation gives human designer good understanding of hardware. for example  a phrase like  *mreq is asserted  can be given a good explanation  if a statement like  it indicates that address to the memory becomes valid  is accompanied. 
       our hardware specification model is hierarchical. hierarchies are linked together by indicates relations. 
each hierarchy consists of an event model and a set of action models. to each hardware module  an action model is defined to specify the behavior of the module. the notion of hierarchy is important in digital circuit design  mcdermott 1  mitchell 1  stefik 1  sakai 1  sussman 1 . in the event model  cause-

t.-a. nishida et al. 1 
effect representation is used to corelate actions of each 

agent along with the time axis. the notion of causeeffect relationship has been advocated to be useful in understanding cooperating actions and events  rieger 1 . the action model of an agent represents the actions taken by the agent when a specified input event takes place. this representation is independent of the internal structure of the agent  and makes it possible to give the abstract level description of any complex hardware. 
1. model inference procedure 
¡¡¡¡¡¡the model builder is given some information from the natural language analyzer and other information from the diagram analyzer  currently pictures like time chart are manually encoded into symbolic expressions   and it attempts to construct a consistent model from inputs. since the information from the natural language analyzer may be vague or not specified to full details  the model builder has to make inference in the hardware domain. sometimes model revision may be needed to correct arbitrary choices that are made due to the lack of information. accordingly  the task has much in common with truth maintenance system  doyle 1 . the model builder mainly makes forward inferences using common sense knowledge. in this paper  we concentrate on the descriptions on hardware behavior and assume other parts of the hardware manual such as pin descriptions  have already been analyzed and converted into the knowledge structure. the below illustrates a part of the knowledge: 

       the model inference procedure involves the following types of reasoning: 
 a  seeking an action which causes a given event: this task will be done using action-event definitions. 
 b  seeking values of case slots which were not filled by the natural language analyzer: this task will be done using definitions for individuals. 
 c  linking descriptions of each hierarchy using indicates liks. 
 d  reasoning about cause-effect relations between events: this reasoning utilizes action-event definitions. 
 e  making vague expressions more accurate: this task is done using axioms for event and action. example of such axioms can be found in  mcdermott 1 . 
 f  revising a model if needed: each position where arbitrary acoice was made is marked. those positions are candidates for reconstruction when any contradiction takes place. 
 g  verifying constraint condition. 
fig.l illustrates how the description:  *mreq lines goes low at t l   is incorporated into the model. as is seen from the figure  action and event models of each hierarchy are revised so as to be able to give explanation 

1 t.-a. nishida et al. 
to the input. symbols attached to the figure indicates which inference rule is made. 
1. conclusion 
       currently  a simplified version of hmu is in the course of development  where the focus is mainly attentioned to rather basic issues  i.e.  natural language analysis  discourse analysis  canonical transformation  and reasoning about action  time  and event. however  the initial experiments by hand reveal fundamental validity of our approach. some of them are illustrated in the appendix. 
