 
　　　a method for learning by practice  based on the transference of knowledge between domains  1 discussed and illustrated in the context of a problem solver functioning in a domain of elementary physics. as an example of the application of this approach  it is shown how knowledge belonging to the domein of  symmetry of figures  cen be successfully used to solve problems in the f i r s t domein. this controlled transference of knowledge is accomplished in four steps: a  mapping certain components of the physics problem into the domain of figures  b  applying the available knowledge for that domain  c  mapping the results back into the original domain  and d  testing the validity of the trenbference. 
introduction 
　　　an  intelligent  system should have two main components: a problem solver end a learning agent. the problem solver has the capability of solving problems in a particular domein; the learning agent is in charge of supervising the behavior and modifying the structure of the problem solver. in the case of leerning by practice  the learning agent analyzes the solutions given by the problem solver to a sequence of problems  end determines appropriate modifications to be made to the problem solver. 
　　　severe i mechanisms have been proposed to perform this type of learning  some of which heve been explored 1n the context of elementary physics  novak and araya  1 . here  a 
	this 	work 	wee 	pertisally 	done 	et 	the 
depertmente 	of 	computer 	science 	of 	the university 	of 	texas 	at 	austin  	and 	the 
p.unversided catolica de chile. it wee supported in part by grant 1 of the d1recc1n de investigations  p.unlverelded catolica de chile. 
learning method based on the transference of know ledge between domains  is presented. this process cen be viewed es an approach to the discovery of heuristics  in the sense thet methods thet work for one domein are found to be also appropriate for another domain  provided thet the problems satisfy certain conditions. the possibility of discovering these heuristics is particularly important when they lead to simplified solutions. 
	maps: 	bridges between domains 
　　　in solving a new problem it is often useful to try to apply knowledge thet ha1 been successfully employed in the solution of similar problems in the pest. more specifically  in problem 1olving by ananlogy e problem to be solved is compered to previously solved problems. when a high degree of similarity is found  it is reasonable to expect thet knowledge used in the solution of the old problem  or even the solution i t s e l f   cen be applied to solve the new problem. in general some adjustments w i l l have to be made in the old solution due to differences between the problems. an important characteristic of this analogical approach is the high degree of similarity that must exist between old end new problems in order for the process to be carried out. such use of analogy in learning and problem solving he1 been discussed by car bone 1  anderson 1  win1ton 1  end winston  1. 
　　　an alternative approach is to make applicable to the solution of a problem in e given domein  knowledge belonging to another domein. in whet follows we show how this can be accomplished by means of mappings between concepts pertinent to the respective domains. this allows one to view e problem in the original domain 1n terms of concepts defined in the new   external   domain. since the mappings between the original and external domain are given  this approach does not involve any search for analogous problems as 1n the analogical methode mentioned above. although the fect thet there is a map implies that some kind of  similarity  between the two domains exists  1 	a. araya 
this similarity is only implicit  and the transference process is not directly concerned 
with i t . this he1 two important consequences. on the one hand  it meke1 it necessary to determine whether the epplicetion of e particular piece knowledge from the externel domain yields valid results in the original domain. on the other hand  the proposed method has the advantage of bringing more diverse knowledge to beer on the problem under consideration. 
　　　the notion of learning by transference of knowledge has been analyzed by winston  1. korf 1 has studied the problem of transforming representations to obtain those that yield simplified solutions. mcdermott et al 1 discuss different representations used by experts in solving physics problems. mccarthy et al 1 have proposed e notion of mapping to be used for representing concepts in terms of deformation of prototypes. 
an example 
we have developed 	e 	problem 	solver 	that deals 	with 	a 	domain 	of elementary physics in 
which forces ere applied to linear rigid bodies. the system knows  for instance  that   i f forces satisfy certain conditions  then the rigid body is 1n equilibrium  in e statics sense .  at some 
point in the process of solving a given problem  the problem solver produces a diagram  that i s   a figure representing forces and objects as lines.  mcdermott et al 1 consider that this is typical of humans when solving problems in elementary physics . let us assume that the system has knowledge about symmetry of figures 1n the plane. for instance  the system could know that   i f a figure is symmetric with rebpect to some axis  then the figure 1s in equilibrium  in e geometric sense .  thus  if the figure obtained from the problem satisfies certain symmetry conditions  this knowledge becomes applicable and may actually produce a solution to the problem. the learning agent may react to this situation by i n i t i a t i n g a learning episode as a result of which the system learns that  1f forces are symmetric with respect to some axis  and satisfy some additional conditions  then the rigid body is in equilibrium.  let us consider the following problem to i l l u s t r a t e the effects 
of using knowledge of symmetry: 
 several forces ere applied to e lever. forces f1  f1  f1 end their locations are known. suppose that the location of force f1 is also known. if the lever is in equilibrium  find the magnitude and angle of f1.  
solution 	1 
　　　in order to compute force f1 the problem solver applies a method based on elementary knowledge of physics. it makes use of the notions of equilibrium of forces end equilibrium of moments. the system obtains the information needed to write the corresponding equations  writes them  end solves the equations. 

　　　in parenthesis  near the lines  appear the names of the components of the physics problem that are represented by them. in the original problem  the question was to compute the magnitude and angle of force f1  assuming the lever to be 1n equilibrium. when the problem is mapped into the figure  the question becomes that of finding the size and angle of dline1 so that the figure is in equilibrium  in a geometric sense . let us assume that the locations of the forces are such that there is an axis  passing through the center of the line representing the lever  with respect to which directed lines dline1 and dline1 are symmetric. furthermore  we assume that the locations   i . e .   the coordinates of the respective tails  of dline1 and dline1 are also symmetric with respect to that axis. by applying knowledge about symmetry  the system can determine the angle and size of dline1 so that it is symmetric to 1line1. finally  efter mapping back dline1 into force f1 we obtain a solution to the physics problem. 
　　　this solution  however  may not be correct. even 	1f the figure is symmetric with respect to 
a 	given 	axis  	the 	lever 	may 	not 	be 1n equilibrium. 	in 	fact  	1n 	the 	example the condition 	of 	equilibrium 	of 	forces 	in the vertical 	direction 	may 	be 	violated 	by the solution. 	this 	is 	determined 	during the validation stage. in consequence  the heuristic of symmetry works correctly when the problem satisfies the condition of equilibrium of forces 1n the vertical direction. other examples given below w i l l further clarify this issue. 

1. the transfer process 
　　　the example shows how knowledge from one domain can be applied to another domain. the transfer proce1 that makes this possible may be divided in the following stages: 

　　　to test the feasibility of this approach we are currently developing an experimental system  and explain below how the different steges of the process are to be carried out. 
1 mapping a  problem from the orginal domain to the. external domain 
　　　in a problem solving mode  the system uses physics knowledge to solve a problem. in a learning mode the system tries to explore other 
kinds of knowledge that could be applied to solve a particular problem. this is accomplished by using a mapping mechanism to project a problem into some external domain. in a f u l l fledged system containing knowledge about several problem domains and with a large number of mappings between them  the system should have a way of determining  1n a given situation  which of the mappings should be explored. this would help cut down a potentially combinatorial explosion of the number of maps that could be applied at different problem solving steps. in our experimental system  however  we are primarily concerned with understanding more basic issues  such as the utilization of the maps themselves and how the application of external knowledge can be veil dated. 

	a. araya 	1 
　　　let us suppose that in the domain of figures there ere several pieces of know ledge. for instance  knowledge about symmetry  as 
indicated above; knowledge about simplifying a figure by projecting it in some direction  figure 1a ; or knowledge about simplifying a figure by eliminating parts of it  figure 1b . these become applicable once the problem has been appropriately mepped to the domain to which they belong. 
　　　in the case of the problem discussed above  several maps are necessary: to map linear rigid bodies into line segments  forces into directed lines  end questions into questions. a map has the following general form: 

　　　this map states that an instance of class1  belonging to the original domain  can be mapped into an instance of class1  belonging to the external domain. the  identicelprops  component of the map contains a list of pairs of properties of the destination and source instances that have the same value. the  transformations  component of the map contains e l i s t of pairs  composed of properties of the destination instance and procedures that may be used to compute their values  possibly using properties of the source . let us i l l u s t r a t e the notion of e map with an example: 

　　　the map indicates how a force can be mapped into a dline. for instance  the length of the dline is equal to the magnitude of the force  and the  x  of the dline   i . e .   the horizontal component of he t a i l   can be found by activating a procedure whose description appears above. the specific form that the mapping process takes depends on how knowledge is 

1 	a. araya 
represented  and how problems are described. in the hierarchical  schema-based representation that we have used to implement the problem solver  the process consists of performing the mappings of instances in a cartain order  end propagating their effects along the way. 
1 applying external knowledge 
　　　up to this point  external knowledge has been useless to the system. it is present  but since it is formulated in terms of concepts different from those in which the problem 1s represented  it cannot be u1ed in eny wey. once the mappings are applied  however  projection of the problem into the external domain becomes available  and the external knowledge cen now be u t i l i z e d . 
1 mapping back to the. original domain 
　　　to continue with the example given above  let us assume that knowledge about symmetry is applied. after that  it is necessary to map the results obtained to the original domain. this is carried out in a manner similar to the f i r s t stage. in the example dline1 has to be mapped back to f1. 
1 	validating 	the 	transference 	of 	external knowledge 
　　　after the f i r s t three stages have been completed  the problem solving process continues in the original domain. if the problem has not been completely solved  physics knowledge available there is applied  and a solution is eventually obtained. the system  however  cennot teke for granted the correctness of this solution. whet it cen do is assume that if a problem satisfies certain conditions  the use of external knowledge w i l l produce correct results. in this case the learning agent initiates a 
　　　process to discover those conditions. 
　　　let us consider now the conditions for the correct application of the three pieces of external knowledge mentioned 1n 1 . 1 . for symmetry knowledge  the condition is the equilibrium of forces 1n the vertical direction.  since the figure was found to be symmetric with respect to e vertical axis  symmetry knowledge is not enough to establish equilibrium in the vertical direction . the heuristic of  projecting a line in a horizontal direction  w i l l work correctly if all the forces applied to the lever are vertical.   i f there were oblique or horizontal forces  their horizontal components would produce moments 1n the inclined lever but not 1n its horizontal projection  
producing incorrect results . for the heuristic of eliminating parts of a figure  the condition is that the lever have no weight  because if the lever had weight  after removing part of 1t  that weight would change  leading to incorrect reeulta . 
　　　we ere currently developing a component of the system that determines those conditions. the basic idea is that the solution obtained by applying only physics knowledge be compared to the solution produced when using knowledge from the external domain. if the solution is correct  the problem being solved is an instance of a  problem type  characterized by the fact that a particular piece of external knowledge can be correctly applied to its problem instances. then  using appropriate heuristics  the system explores the problem domain in an attempt to arrive at a description of that problem type. this description is precisely the condition of applicability of the specific piece of knowledge used in the solution of the problem  and must be added to the conditions it already had. 
1. 	discussion and conclusions 
　　　we have examined a learning mechanism based on the transference of knowledge between domains. the system learns that knowledge of an external domain can be applied to solve problems in the original domain. it also learns that in order for this application to be successful  the problems have to satisfy certain conditions. we think that the proposed method has wide applicability  and have found that several pieces of knowledge in the domain of  figures  can be transferred to the physics domain. for instance  knowledge about how to  simplify a figure by projecting it in some direction   or how to  simplify a figure by ignoring parts of i t     etc  cen be successfully used in the 
physics domain. 
　　　to test the feasibility of this approach  we are developing an experimental system. the problem solver works in the domain of elementary statics  handling problems of equi librium of rigid-bodies subject to externel forces. the implementation of the f i r s t three stages of the transfer process has been completed  and the implementation of the validation stage is under wey. after this last stege 1s completed  we intend to cerry out experiments using mors knowledge about the domain of figures  and then apply the method to other external domains. 
　　　the process we heve presented presupposes the existence of the maps. it seems netural to assume that a physics problem solver should know how to produce a diagram corresponding to a physics problem. an important problem  however  is to determine the origin of these maps. this leeds to the notion of a  map generating process   in which  concepts 1n different domains are exemined for their degree of  similarity   to determine potentially useful maps. the analysis of this  map generating process  is a significant topic for future raaearch. 

acknowledgments 
       i wish to thank j u l i a n gevirtz for h i s valuable comments and h i s assistance in e d i t i n g e a r l i e r d r a f t s o f t h i s paper. 
