 
　　this paper addresses the problems of  1  representing natural shapes such as mountains  trees and clouds  and  1  computing such a description from image data. in order to solve these problems we must be able to relate natural surfaces to their images; this requires a good model of natural surface shapes. fractal functions are good a choice for modeling natural surfaces because  1  many physical processes produce a fractal surface shape   1  fractals are widely used as a graphics tool for generating naturallooking shapes  and  1  a survey of natural imagery has shown that the 1-d fractal surface model  transformed by the image formation process  furnishes an accurate description of both textured and shaded image regions. this characterization of image regions has been shown to be stable over transformations of scale and linear transforms of intensity. 
　　much work has been accomplished that is relevant to computing 1-d information from the image data  and the computation of a 1-d fractal-based representation from actual image data has been demonstrated using an image of a mountain. this example shows the potential of a fractal-based representation for efficiently computing good 1-d representations of natural shapes  including such seemingly-difficult cases as mountains  clumps of leaves and clouds. 
	i 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
　　this paper addresses two related problems:  1  representing natural shapes such as mountains  trees and clouds  and  1  computing such a description from image data. the first step towards solving these problems  it appears  is to obtain a model of natural surface shapes. the task of finding such a model is extremely important to computer vision because we face problems that seem impossible to address with standard descriptive techniques. how  for instance  should we describe the shape of leaves on a tree  or grass  or clouds  when we attempt to describe such common  natural shapes using standard shape-primitive representations  the result is an unrealistically complicated model of something that  viewed introspectively  seems very simple. 
　　furthermore  how can we extract 1-d information from the image of a textured surface when we have no models that describe natural surfaces and how they evidence themselves in the image  the lack of such a 1-d model has generally restricted image texture descriptions to being ad hoe statistical measures of the image intensity surface. a good model of natural surfaces together with the physics of image formation would provide the analytical tools necessary for relating natural surfaces to their images. the ability to relate image to surface can provide the necessary leverage for dealing appropriately with the problems of finding a good 

represent at ion for natural surfaces and computing such a description from the image data. 
　　even shape-from-shading and surface-interpolation methods are limited by the lack of a 1-d model of natural surfaces. currently all such methods employ the heuristic of  smoothness  to relate neighboring points on the surface. such heuristics are applicable to many man-made surfaces  of course  but are demonstrably untrue of most natural surfaces. in order to apply such techniques to natural surfaces  therefore  we must find a heuristic that is true of natural surfaces. finding such a heuristic requires recourse to a 1-d model of natural surfaces. 
　　fractal functions seem to provide such a model of natural surface shapes. fractals are a novel class of naturallyarising functions  discovered primarily by benoit mandelbrot. mandelbrot and others  1 1  have shown that fractals are found widely in nature and that a number of basic physical processes  such as erosion and aggregation  produce fractal surfaces. because fractals look natural to human beings  much recent computer graphics research has focused on using fractal processes to simulate natural shapes and textures  see figure 1   including mountains  clouds  water  plants  trees  and primitive animals  1 1 1 . additionally  we have recently conducted a survey of natural imagery and found that a fractal model of imaged 1-d surfaces furnishes an accurate description of both textured and shaded image regions  thus providing validation of 
　　
　the research reported herein was supported by the defense advanced research projects agency under contract no. mda 
　　
this physics-derived model for both image texture and shading. 
　　
1-c-1; this contract is monitored by the u. s. army engineer topographic laboratory. approved for public release  distribution unlimited. 
　　
1 a. pentland 
i i f r a c t a l s a n d t h e f r a c t a l m o d e l 
　　during the last twenty years  benoit b. mandelbrot has developed and popularized a relatively novel class of mathematical functions known as fractals  1 . fractals are found widely in nature  1 1 . mandelbrot shows that a number of basic physical processes  ranging from the aggregation of galaxies to the curdling of cheese  produce fractal surfaces. one general characterization is that any process that acts locally to produce a permanent change in shape will  after innumerable repetitions  result in a fractal surface. examples are erosion  turbulent flow  e.g.  of rivers or lava  and aggregation  e.g.  galaxy formation  meteorite accretion  and snow flake growth . fractals have also been widely and successfully used to generate realistic scenes  see figure 1   including mountains  clouds  water  plants  trees  and primitive animals  1 1 1 . 
　　perhaps the most familiar examples of naturally occurring fractal curves are coastlines. when we examine a coastline  as in figure i   we sec a familiar scalloped curve formed by innumerable bays and peninsulas. if we then examine a finer-scale map of the same region  we shall again see the same type of curve. it turns out that this characteristic scalloping is present at all scales of examination   i.e.  the statistics of the curve are invariant with respect to transformations of scale. this fact causes problems when we attempt to measure the length of the coastline  because it turns out that the length we are measuring depends not only on the coastline but also on the length of the measurement tool itself ! this is because  whatever the size measuring tool selected  all of the curve length attributable to features smaller than the size of the measuring tool will be missed. mandelbrot pointed out that  if we generalize the notion of dimension to include fractional dimensions  from which we get the word  fractal    we can obtain a consistent measurement of the coastline's length. 
　　the definition. a fractal is defined as a set for which the hausdorff-besicovich dimension is strictly larger than the topological dimension. topological dimension corresponds to the standard  intuitive definition of  dimension.  hausdorffbesicovich dimension d  also referred to as the fractal dimension  may be illustrated  and roughly defined  by the examples  1  of measuring the length of an island's coastline  and  1  measuring the area of the island. 
　　to measure the length of the coastline we might select a measuring stick of length x and determine that n such measuring sticks could be placed end to end along the coastline. the length of the coastline is then intuitively nx. if we were measuring the area of the island  we could use a square of area x1 to derive an area of mx1  where m is the number of squares it takes to cover the island. if we actually did this  we would find that both of these measurements vary with x  the length of the measuring instrument - an undesirable result. 
　　in these two examples the length x is raised to a particular power: the power of one to measure length  the power of two to measure area. these are two examples of the general rule of raising x to a power that is the dimension of the object being measured. in the case of the island  raising x to the topological dimension does not yield consistent results. if  however  we were to use the power 1 instead of 1 to measure the length  and 1 instead of 1 to measure the area  we would find that the measured length and area remained constant regardless of the size of the measuring instrument chosen.* the positive real number d that yields such a consistent measurement is the fractal dimension. d is always greater than or equal to the topological dimension. 
　this example is discussed at greater length in mandelbrot's book   fractals: form  chance and dimension.  the empirical data are from richardson 1. 
　　the most important lesson the work of mandelbrot and others teaches us is the following: 
　　standard notions of length and area do not produce consistent measurements for many natural shapes: the basic metric properties of these shapes vary as a function of the fractal dimension. fractal dimension  therefore  is a necessary part of any consistent description of such shapes. 
　　this result  which could almost be stated as a theorem  demonstrates the fundamental importance of knowing the fractal dimension of a surface. it implies that any description of a natural shape that does not include the fractal dimension cannot be relied upon to be correct at more than one scale of examination. 
　　fractal brownian functions. virtually all the fractals encountered in physical models have two additional properties:  1  each segment is statistically similar to all others;  1  they are statistically invariant over wide transformations of scale. motion of a particle undergoing brownian motion is the canonical example of this type of fractal. the discussion that follows will be devoted exclusively to fractal brownian functions  a generalization of brownian motion. 
　　a random function b x  is a fractal brownian function if for all x and ax 
		 1  
where f y  is a cumulative distribution function . the fractal dimension d of the graph described by b x  is 
		 1  
if // = 1 and f y  is a zero-mean gaussian with unit variance  then d x  is the classical brownian function. this definition has obvious extensions to two or more topological dimensions. the fractal dimension of a fractal brownian function can also be measured from its fourier power spectrum  as the spectral density of a fractal brownian function is proportional to f-1h-1. discussion of the rather technical proof of this fact may be found in  
　　the fractal dimension of a surface corresponds roughly to our intuitive notion of jaggedness. thus  if we were to generate a series of scenes with the same 1-d relief but increasing fractal dimension d  we would obtain the following sequence: first  a flat plane  d  s 1   then rolling countryside  d  = 1   a worn  old mountain range  d - 1   a young  rugged mountain range  d  = 1   and finally a stalagmite-covered plane  d  =  1 . 
　　the fractal dimension of a surface is invariant with respect to transformations of scale  as ax is independent of h and f y . the fractal dimension is also invariant with respect to linear transformations of the data and thus it remains stable over smooth  monotonic transformations. 
a. fractals and the imaging process 
a. pentland 1 
real images do not  of course  appear fractal over all possible 　　before we can use a fractal model of natural surfaces to help us understand images  however  we must determine how the imaging process maps a fractal surface shape into an image intensity surface. the mathematics of this problem is difficult and no complete solution has as yet been achieved. nonetheless  simulation of the imaging process with a variety of fractal surface models can provide us with an empirical answer - i.e.  that images of fractal surfaces are themselves fractal as long as the fractal-generating function is spatially isotropic. it is worth noting that practical fractal-generation techniques  such as those used in computer graphics  have had to constrain the fractal generating function to be isotropic so that realistic imagery could be obtained . scales of examination. the overall size of the imaged surface places an upper limit on the range of scales for which the surface shape appears to be fractal  and a lower limit is set by the size of the surface's constituent particles. in between these limits  however  we may use equation  1  to obtain a useful description of the surface. 
　　simulation shows that the fractal dimension of the physical surface dictates the fractal dimension of the image intensity surface; it appears that the fractal dimension of the image is a logarithmic function of the fractal dimension of the surface. if we assume that the surface is homogeneous  therefore  we can estimate the fractal dimension of the surface by measuring the fractal dimension of the image data. even if the surface is not homogeneous  we can still infer the fractal dimension of the surface from imaged surface contours and bounding contours  by use of mandelbrot's results. 
　　what we have developed  then  is a method for inferring a basic property of the 1-d surface  its fractal dimension  from the image data. the fact that the fractal dimension corresponds closely to our intuitive notion of roughness shows the importance of the measurement: we can now discover from the image data whether the 1-d surface is rough or smooth  isotropic or anisotropic. we can know  in effect  what kind of cloth the surface was cut from. the fact that the fractal dimension also describes the basic metric properties of the imaged surface is further indication that it is a critical element in any consistent representation of natural surfaces. 
b. applicability of the fractal model 
　　an implication of the fractal surface model is that the image intensity surface is itself fractal - and vice versa. this is because image intensity is primarily a function of the angle between the surface normal and the incident illumination; thus  if the image intensities satisfy equation  1   then  for a homogeneous surface  the angle between surface normal and illuminant must also and  integrating  we find that the 1-d surface is a spatially isotropic fractal. 
　　a method of evaluating the usefulness of the fractal surface model  therefore  is to determine whether or not images of natural surfaces are well described by a fractal function. to evaluate the applicability of the fractal model  we first rewrite equation  1  to obtain the following description of the manner in which the second-order statistics of the image change with scale: 
 1  
where the change in intensity over distance equation  1  is a hypothesized relation among the image intensities; a hypothesis that we may test statistically. if we find that equation  1  is true of the image intensity surface and the viewed surface is homogeneous and continuous then we may conclude that the 1d surface is itself fractal. it is an important characteristic of the fractal model that we can determine its appropriateness for particular image data because it means that we can know when  and when not  to use the model. 
　　to evaluate the suitability of a fractal model for natural textures  the homogeneous regions from each of six images of natural scenes were densely sampled. in addition  twelve textures taken from brodaz  were digitized and examined  see figure 1 . the intensity values within each of these regions were then approximated by a fractal brownian function and the approximation error observed. 
　　figure 1 shows the results for a typical textured patch. the graphs  a  to  e  show the distribution of intensity differences  i.e.  the second-order difference statistics  at one  two  three  five and ten pixel distances; the distributions are approximately gaussian. 

figure 1 f  shows a plot of the variance of the transition distribution as a function of distance between the pixels. overlaid on this graph is a least-squares fit of a fractal rule. as can be seen  the fit is quite good - implying that the intensity surface in this region is actually a fractal brownian function  at least over the 1 range of scales measured. 
　　for the majority of the textures examined  1%   the model described the image data accurately. in 1% of the cases the region was constant except for random  zero-mean perturbations  consequently  the fractal function correctly approximates the imago data  although the fractal dimension was equal to the topological dimension and thus the data's dimension is technically not  fractional.  the fit was poor in only 1% of the regions examined and  in many of these cases  it appeared that the image digitization had become saturated. 
　　the fact that the vast majority of the regions examined were quite well approximated by a fractal brownian function indicates that the fractal model will provide a useful description of natural textures and their images. further  in the cases where the fractal description is appropriate  the only statistical structure that remains unaccounted for by the fractal brownian function is reromcan unit-variance gaussian noise - indicating that the fractal description effectively  uses up  all of the second-order difference information. 
　　fractal brownian functions do not  of course  account for large-scale spatial structure such as seen in the image of a brick wall or of a tiled floor. such structure must be accounted for by other means. similarly  the fact that the fractal brownian function appears to account for all of the second-order difference information does not mean that there are aren't other texture  dimensions* which contain useful texture information. 
c. 	texture edges 
　　it is an important characteristic of the fractal model that we can determine its appropriateness for particular image data because it means that we can know when to use the model. conversely  when we discover an image region which can not be fit using the fractal model  we can infer that the image region was not caused by a homogeneous fractal surface. 
　　
1 a. pentland 
　　
a. pentland 1 
boundaries between homogeneous regions are one example of 
　　
a physical configuration which can not be accounted for by the fractal model. thus  when we examine points which lie on the boundary between two image regions we find that the fit between the fractal model and the image data is normally poor. the fact that boundaries seem to be the most common event giving rise to a non-fractal intensity surface provides a method of detecting image points which are likely to be texture edges. 
　　one simple way to find such points is examination of the computed fractal dimension. it turns out that when we compute the fractal dimension for image data covering a boundary between two homogeneous areas  we normally calculate a fractal dimension which is less than the topological dimension. this is a physical impossibility  implying that the assumptions of the fractal model are inappropriate for that specific image data. thus  a fractal dimension which appears to be less than the topological dimension is a sufficient condition for concluding that the fractal model is inappropriate; it may also be a necessary condition. 
	iii i n f e r r i n g 	surface properties 
　　fractal functions appear to provide a good description of natural surface textures and their images; thus  it is natural to use the fractal model for texture segmentation  classification and shape-from-tcxture. the first four headings of this section describe the research that has been performed in this area  and indicate likely directions for further research. 
　　fractal functions with h  =  1 can be used to model smooth surfaces and their reflectance properties. for the first time  therefore  we can offer a single model encompassing both image shading and texture  with shading as a limiting case in the spectrum of texture granularity. the fractal model thus allows us to make a reasonable and rigorous definition of the categories  texture  and  shading n thus enabling us to discover similarities and differences between them. the final heading of this section briefly discusses this result. 
a. 	some examples of texture segmentation 
　　in the following examples  the fractal dimension was measured from the fourier power spectrum by using an 1 x 1 block of pixels  after which the measured fractal dimension was histogramed. this histogram of fractal dimension was then broken at the ''valleys'1 between the modes of the histogram  and the image segmented into pixel neighborhoods belonging to one mode or another. no attempt was made to incorporate orientation a! information into the measurement of the local fractal dimension  i.e.  differences in dimension between various image directions at a point were collapsed into one average measurement. 
　　figure 1 a  is an aerial view of san francisco bay. figure 1 b  shows a histogram of the fractal dimensions computed over the whole image. figure 1 c  shows the segmentation obtained by thresholding at the breakpoint indicated by the arrow under  b ; each pixel in  c  corresponds to an 1 x 1 block of pixels in the original image. as can be seen  a good segmentation into water and land was achieved - one that cannot be obtained by thresholding on image intensity. the values to the left of the large spike in  b  have a computed fractal dimension which is less than the topological dimension; these points all occur along the water-land boundary and partially delineate that boundary. 
　　this image was then averaged down  from 1 x 1 pixels into 1 x 1 and 1 x 1 pixel images  and the fractal dimen-
sion recomputed for each of the reduced images. figures 1 d  and  e  illustrate the segmentations that result from using the same cut point as employed in the original full-resolution segmentation  demonstrating stability across wide  1  variations in scale. 
using the fourier technique. 
as shown in figure 1. figure 1 a  shows a picture of a mug and  just behind it  a chairback. this image was digitized into 1 x 1 pixels and the local fractal dimension computed;  b  is a histogram of the fractal dimensions with the two breakpoints indicated by arrows. figure 1 c  shows the image segmented into two classes at the point indicated by arrow number one. a good partial segmentation results. figure 1 d  illustrates the points whose computed fractal dimension is less than the topological dimension  the points to the left of arrow number two in  b  ; these are clearly edge points. 
　　one final example is the desert scene shown in figure 1 a . this scene was segmented into three classes  based on the histogram shown in  b ; the segmentations are shown in  c   road and sky versus desert  and  d   road and desert versus sky . as can be seen  there is a good segmentation into desert  road and sky. 
several other images have been segmented in this manner. 
in each ca.se a good segmentation was achieved. the computed fractal dimension  and thus the segmentation  was found to be stable over at least 1 : 1 variations in scale; most were stable over a range of 1 : 1. stability of the fractal description is to be expected  because the fractal dimension of the image is directly related to the fractal dimension of the viewed surface  which is a property of natural surfaces that has been shown to be invariant with respect to transformations of scale . * 
　　the fact that the fractal description of texture is stable with respect to scale is a critically important property. after all  consider: how can we hope to compute a stable  viewerindependent representation of the world if our information about the world is not stable with respect to scale  this example of texture property measurement reiterates what we observed earlier  i.e.  the fact that the fractal dimension of t he surface is necessary to any consistent description of a natural surface. 
b. 	a comparison with other segmentation techniques 
　　to obtain an objective comparison with previously established texture segmentation techniques  a mosaic of eight natural textures taken from brodatz  was redigitiied. the digitized texture mosaic  shown in figure 1  was constructed by laws  for the purpose of comparing various texture segmentation procedures. the textures that comprise this data set were chosen to be as visually similar as possible; gross statistical differences were removed by mean-value- and histogram-equalization. 
　　segmentation performance for these data exists for several techniques and  although differences in digitization complicate any comparisons we might wish to make  laws's performance figures nevertheless serve as a useful yardstick for assessing performance on this data. 
　　for this comparison simple orientational information was incorporated into the fractal description; the fractal dimension was calculated separately for the z and y directions. the sample size used to compute the fractal dimension was 1 x 1 pixels  and the dimension was computed directly  using equation  1 . five subrcgions were extracted from each of the eight textures 
　　
1 a. pentland 
and used to establish the parameters of a quadratic classifier. classification probabilities were then computed using a monte carlo simulation. 
　　the two-parameter fractal segmenter yielded a classification accuracy of 1%. this compares quite favorably with correlation techniques  1  reported by laws as attaining 1% accuracy  as well as with co-occurrence techniques  1  reported to be 1% accurate. this superior performance was achieved despite the large number of texture features employed by these other methods. 
　　the simple two-parameter fractal segmenter even compares well with laws' own texture energy statistics; even though laws' segmentation procedure included more than a dozen texture statistics that were optimized for the test data  theoretical segmentation accuracy was only 1% better. thus  the results of these comparisons indicate that fractal-based texture segmentation will likely prove to be a general and powerful technique. 
c. relationship to texture models 
　　the fact that the fractal dimension of the image data can be measured by using either co-occurrence statistics in conjunction with equation  1   or by means of the fourier power spectrum  suggests one interesting aspect of the fractal model: it highlights a formal link between co-occurrence texture measures  1  and fourier techniques  1 1 . the mathematical results mandelbrot derives for fractal brownian functions show that the way interpixel differences change with distance determines the rate at which the fourier power spectrum falls off as frequency is increased  and vice versa. 
　　thus  it appears that the fractal model offers potential for unifying and simplifying the co-occurrence and fourier texture descriptions. if we believe that natural surface textures and their images are fractal  as seems to be indicated by the previous results   then the fractal dimension is the most relevant parameter in differentiating among textures. in this case we would expect both the fourier and co-occurrence techniques to provide reasonable texture segmentations  as both yield sufficient information to determine the fractal dimension. the advantage of the fractal mode  would be that it captures a simple physical relationship underlying the texture structure - a relationship lost with either of the other two characterizations of texture. 
d. shape from texture 
　　there are two ways surface shape is reflected in image texture:  1  projection foreshortening  a function of the angle between the viewer and the surface normal  and  1  the perspective texture gradient that is due to increasing distance between the viewer and the surface. these two phenomena can be independently observed  therefore they can serve to confirm each other - 
i.e.  if projection foreshortening is used to estimate surface tilt  that estimate is independently confirmed if there is a texture gradient of the proper magnitude and same direction  1 . we may be confident our estimate is correct when such independent confirmation is found. 
　　the fractal dimension found in the image appears to be nearly independent of the orientation of the surface  by virtue 
of independence with respect to scale ; therefore fractal dimension cannot be used to measure surface orientation. projection foreshortening does  however  affect the variance of the distribu-
　these comparisons are between the actual classification accuracies of the co-occurrence and correlation techniques and the theoretical accuracy of the fractal segmenter; however  laws results indicate that the theoretical accuracy closely reflects the accuracies actually obtained. 
   laws' classification probabilities were achieved using linear classifier; see   page 1. 
tion f y  associated with the fractal dimension  see equation  1  . foreshortening affects var f y   in exactly the manner it affects the distribution of tangent direction. thus  to estimate surface orientation  we might assume that the surface texture is isotropic and estimate surface orientation on the basis of previously derived results . 
　　if we apply this technique to the image in figure 1 we estimate a vertical tilt direction  and a slant of 1＜; for the upper half of the image in figure 1 we obtain a vertical tilt estimate and a slant of 1＜. while this technique for estimating surface orientation often performs well  the necessity of assuming isotropy is a serious shortcoming of the technique. an important new result  therefore  is that we may in part cure this problem by observing the fractal dimensions in the x and y directions. if they are unequal we have prima facie evidence of anisotropy in the surface texture  because fractal dimension is unaffected by projection. it may even be possible to correct the surface orientation estimate using this information. 
　　however a foreshortening-derived estimate of surface orientation is produced  we may still seek confirmation of it by measuring the perspective texture gradient; if confirmation is found  we may be confident of our estimate. the images in both figures 1 and 1 also show a perspective texture gradient: the houses in figure 1 and the bushes in figure 1 dwindle in site 
with increasing distance from the viewer. if this texture gradient can be measured in these images  then the foreshortening-derived estimates of surface orientation can be confirmed. 
　　figures 1 a  and  b  show relief plots of the local fractal dimension computed from figures 1 a  and 1 a   respectively. the computed dimensions are viewed from the left-hand side of the original image. in both  a  and  b  there is a gradual rise in the computed fractal dimension with increasing distance  a result of the pixel size becoming large with respect to the largestscale variations in surface texture. this gradient in the computed fractal dimension confirms the foreshortening-derived estimates of surface tilt in this imagery. these two examples demonstrate that perspective texture gradients can be inferred from the locally computed fractal dimension. 
　　this two new results  i.e.  the ability to obtain evidence of surface texture anisotropy and the measurement of the perspective texture gradient  are extremely important because they offer a way to make shape-from-unfamiliar-texture techniques sufficiently reliable so as to be useful. 
e. 	shading and texture 
　　fractal functions with h    1 can be used to model smooth surfaces and their reflectance properties accurately. when h  =  1  the surface is locally planar  except for small  random variations described by the function f y  in equation  1 . if we assume that incident light is reflected at the angle of incidence and we make the variance of f y  small relative to the pixel size  the surface will be mirrorlike. if  on the other hand  the variance of f y  is large relative to the pixel size  the surface will become more lambertian. 
　　the fractal model  therefore  is a single model that can account for both image shading and texture  with shading corresponding to the limiting value of h. the fractal model thus allows us to make a reasonable and rigorous definition of the categories  texture  and  shading   in terms that can be measured 
 *note  however  that in figure 1 b  the portion of the image closest to the viewer does not exhibit a smooth texture gradient. in this near area the image data used to compute fractal dimension are often boundaries between textured areas  and thus do not fit the fractal model. as described previously  the appropriateness of the fractal model may be determined for the specific image 
data under consideration. thus  most of the  texture gradients  in the near portion of figure 1 b  can be identified as artifacts. by using the image data. one important goal of future research will be to discover similarities or differences between these two categories; initial results indicate that local shape-from-shad ing results  can be generalized to include shape-from-texture. 
	iv 	c o m p u t i n g a description 
　　current methods for representing the three-dimensional world suffer from a certain awkwardness and inflexibility that makes them difficult to envisage as the basis for humanperform auce-level capabilities. they have encountered problems in dealing with partial knowledge or uncertain information  and they become implausibly complex when confronted with the problem of representing a crumpled newspaper  a clump of leaves or a puffy cloud. furthermore  they seem ill-suited to solving the problem of representing a clase of objects  or determining that a particular object is a member of that class. 
　　what is wrong with conventional shape representations  one major problem is that they make too much information explicit. experiments in human perception  lead one to believe that our representation of a crumpled newspaper  for instance  is not accurate enough to recover every z value; rather  it seems that we remember the general  crumpledness  and a few of the major features  such as the general outline. the rest of the newspaper's detailed structure is ignored; it is unimportant  random. 
　　from t he point of view of constructing a representation  the only important constraints on shape are the crumpledness and general outline. what we would like to do is somehow capture the notion of constrained chance  that is  the intuition that  a crumpled newspaper has z  y and z structural regularities and the rest is just variable detail   thus allowing us to avoid dealing with inconsequential  random  variations and to reason instead only about the structural regularities. 
a. 	the process of computing a description 
　　how shall we go about computing such a  constrained chance  description  let us consider the problem formally and see where that leads us. the process of computing a shape description  given some sensory data  seems best  characterized as attempting to confirm or deny such hypotheses as  shape x is consistent with these sense data.  computation of a shape description  therefore  seems to be a problem in induction . 
　　if  naively  we try to use an inductive method  we start with the set of all possible shape hypotheses; we then attempt to winnow the set down to a small number of hypotheses that are confirmed by the sensory data. the  set of all shape hypotheses   however  is much too large to work with. consequently  we must take a slightly different tack. 
　　using the notion of constrained chance. rather than attempting to enumerate ''all shape hypotheses  explicitly  let us instead construct a shape generator that uses a random number generator to produce a surface shape description  i shall shortly describe how to do this . if we were to run this shape generator for an infinite period  it would eventually produce instances of every shape within a large class of shapes. if the generator were so constructed that the class of shapes produced was exactly the set of  all hypotheses  about shape  then the program for the shape generator  together with a the program for the random number generator  would comprise a description of the set of all shape hypotheses. 
the shape generator illustrates how the notion of constrained 
 *thc term  representation  will be used to refer to the scheme for representing shapes  while the term  description  will be reserved for specific instances. thus  one can compute a description of some object; it will be a member of the class of shapes that can be accounted for within the representation. 
a. pentland 1 
chance may be used to obtain a compact description of an infinite set of shapes. by changing the constraints that determine how the output of the random number generator is translated into shape  we can change the set of shapes described; specifically  we can introduce constraints that rule out some classes of shape and thus restrict the set of shapes that are described. the ability to progressively restrict the set of shapes described allows us to use the constrained-chance shape generator as the basis for induction  rather than being forced to use the explicitly enumerated set of all shape hypotheses. 
　　the process of computing a  constrained chance description  is straightforward. we use image data to infer  using knowledge of the physics of image formation  constraints on the shape  and then introduce those constraints into the shape generator. the end result will be a programlike description that is capable of producing all the shapes that are consistent with the image data; i.e.  we shall have a description of the shapes confirmed by the image data. this  then  is the type of description we wanted: a description of shape that contains the important structural regularities that can be inferred from the image  e.g.  crumpledness  outline   but one that leaves everything else as variable  random. 
　　some people are already doing this. something very much like this constrained-chance representation is already being widely utilized in the computer graphics community. naturallooking shapes are produced by a simple fractal program that recursively subdivides the region to be filled  introducing random jaggedness of appropriate magnitude at each step  1 . the jaggedness is determined by specifying the fractal dimension. the shapes that can be produced in this manner range from planar surfaces to mountainlike shapes  depending on the fractal dimension. current graphics technology often employs fractal shape generators in a more constrained mode; often the overall  general shape or the boundary conditions are specified beforehand. thus  a scene is often constructed by first specifying initial constraints on the general shape  and then using a fractal shape generator to fill in the surface with appropriately jagged  or smooth  details. the description employed in such graphics systems  therefore  is exactly a constrained-chance description: important details are specified  and everything else is left unspecified except in a 
qualitative manner. 
　　this type of description bears a close relationship to surface interpolation methods. typically  such schemes fit a smooth surface that satisfies whatever boundary conditions are available. the initial boundary conditions  together with the interpolation function  constitute a precise description of the surface shape. such schemes are limited to smooth surfaces  however  and therefore are incapable of dealing with most natural shapes. in contrast  a fractal-based representation allows either rough or smooth surfaces to be fit to the initial boundary conditions  depending upon the fractal dimension. this method of description  therefore  is quite capable of describing most natural surfaces - and that is why the graphics community is turning to the use of fractal-based descriptions for natural surfaces. 
　　in order to make use of this type of description it is necessary to be able to specify the surface shape in a qualitative manner  i.e.  how rugged is the topography  this specification of qualitative shape can he accomplished by fixing the fractal dimension. the fact that we have recently developed a method of inferring the fractal dimension of the 1-d surface directly from the image data means that we are now able  for the first time  to actually compute a fractal or constrained-chance description of a real scene from its image. inot only terrestrial topography has been modeled by use of a constrained-chance representation  but also clouds  ponds  riverbeds  snowflakes  ocean surf and stars  just to name a few examples  1 1 1 . researchers have also used constrainedchance generators to produce plant shapes  1 1 . a very natural-
　　
1 a. pentland 

looking tree can be produced by recursively applying a random number generator and simple constraints on branching geometry. in each case a random number generator plus a surprisingly small number of constraints can be used to produce very good models of apparently complex natural phenomena. thus  there is hope for extending this approach well beyond the domain of land topography. 
b. 	an example of computing a description 
　　figure 1 illustrates an actual example of computing such a description. figure 1 a  is an image of a real mountain. let us suppose that we wished to use the image data to construct a threedimensional model of the rightmost peak  arrow   perhaps for the purpose of predicting whether or not we could climb it. i will take the standard fractal technology used in the computer graphics community as the unconstrained  primal  shape generator  as it provides an apparently accurate model of a wide range of natural surfaces. 
　　all that is necessary to construct a description of this mountain peak is to extract shape constraints from the image and insert them into the primal shape generator. the fractal dimension of the 1-d surface is the principal parameter  constraint  required by our fractal shape generator; roughly speaking  it determines the ruggedness of the surface. the fractal dimension of the 1-d surface in the region near the rightmost peak was inferred from the fractal dimension of the image intensity surface in that area by use of the empirically-derived relationship between surface and image. constraint on the general outline of this peak was derived from the estimated z-values of distinguished points  those with high curvature  along the boundary between sky and mountain. these two constraints  together with the shape generator  are a 1-d representation of this peak; the question is: how good a represent ation  a view of a 1-d model derived from this representation is shown in figure 1 b . it appears that these simple constraints are sufficient for computing a good 1-d representation of the 
 * rather primitive ray tracing  etc.  was used to generate this image; better code is being implemented. 
peak. 
c. 	what do we accomplish with this approach  
let's consider the problems cited above: 
　　 1  the problem of representing a complex shape  such as a crumpled newspaper. the problem with a shape-primitive representation such as surface normals  voxcels or generalized cylinders is that the resulting description seems hopelessly complex. because the constrained-chance representation allows us to deal only with the structural regularities and to ignore inconsequential details  the problem can become much simpler. thus  for instance  the graphics community has found that constrainedchance fractal descriptions of complex objects  e.g.  a mountain  are quite compact and easy to manipulate. it also turns out that many previously simple things  such as describing a smooth plane  
remain simple. 
　　how does this representation function when we want to compute a description of a specific mountain  bush or other entity from its image  current  shape-from-x  research furnishes constraints on shape in a variety of forms: surface orientation  from texture  shading   relative depth  from motion  contour   and absolute depth  from stereo  egomotion . it appears to be fairly straightforward to mix each of the various flavors of constraint into the vanilla-flavor shape generator  1   although significant research remains to be done. as more shape constraints are obtained from the image  the description becomes more and more precise; i.e.  there is less and less chance in the description. eventually  only one shape satisfies all of the constraints. 
　　how complex could such a description become  the constrained-chance representation would at worst be as complex as a two-dimensional array of z values representing the same surface  because we could always use it to actually generate such an array of z values. as mentioned previously  experiments in human perception indicate that our representations are usually not accurate enough to recover every z value. the representation of a particular object  therefore  is likely to be quite a bit simpler than a full depth map. 
　　 1  the problem of representing classes of shapes  such as are referred to by the terras ''a mountain   or ''a bush.  again  the ability to specify important structural details and leave the rest only qualitatively constrained allows simplification of the problem. the definition of  a mountain   for instance  might reasonably consist entirely of a specification of the fractal dimension of the surface and a caveat concerning size. if we are to judge by the results reported in the computer graphics literature  the notion of representation by constrained chance thus allows us  using only a few lines of code  to produce an accurate description of the class of shapes we label  mountains   or  bush.  
　　 1  the problem of determining the set of appropriate descriptions when the shape is underconstrained by the sense data. the problem with standard shape-primitive representations is that either we must generate all combinations of shape primitives consistent with the sense data  a very hard problem   or pick a prototype and specify error bounds. the problem with using prototypes plus error bounds is that we are forced to overcommit ourselves by choosing the prototype; e.g.  there is something seriously wrong about describing a cube as  a sphere ＼1r   even though the cube certainly fits within the specified volume. 
　　because the constrained-chance representation allows details to be left constrained but unspecified  it allows us to deal with insufficient sense data by simply adding in those constraints that can be deduced from the image data and committing ourselves no further. the result is a programlike description that can be analyicd and manipulated  does not overcommit itself as to object shape  and allows examples of shapes consistent with the image data to be generated and examined. 
　　 1  the problem of determining that a specific description is a member of a more general class. here the problem 
　　
with shape-primitive representations is that there is so much variability among the descriptions of the members of a class such as  mountain  that a description of the class as a whole seems extremely difficult  and determination of class membership even more so. 
　　the problem of establishing class membership by using constrained-chance representations reduces to determining whether the constraints used to specify a particular description arc a subset of those of the more general class. a determination regarding class membership is  therefore  exactly equivalent to determining whether one program's output is a subset of another program's output. while such automatic proof is a difficult problem  it is at least tractable and well-defined - unlike the equivalent problem can be when using a shape-primitive representation. thus  a constrained-chance representation allows a clear and potentially useful definition of what it means to 
 recognize that z is an y'' 
　　further  because we need only deal with the structural regularitics  this problem can become much simpler than it might at first appear. taking the class  a mountain  to be defined by fractal dimension and overall size  a definition that is actually sufficient to produce realistic mountain shapes  we can  for instance  easily determine that the description computed by us for the mountain peak is in fact a description of part of a mountain - a task that previously seemed to be nearly impossible. 
	v 	s u m m a r y 
　　fractal functions seem to provide a good model of natural surface shapes. many basic physical processes produce fractal surfaces. fractal surfaces also look like natural surfaces  and so have come into widespread uses in the computer graphics community. furthermore  we have conducted a survey of natural imagery and found that a fractal model of imaged 1-d surfaces furnishes an accurate description of both textured and shaded image regions. 
　　fractal functions  therefore  are useful for addressing the related problems of representing complex natural shapes such as mountains  and computing a description of such shapes from image data. the following describes the progress achieved toward the solution of these problems. 
　　computing a description. characterization of image texture by means of a fractal surface model has shed considerable light on the physical basis for several of the texture techniques currently in use  and made it possible to describe image texture in a manner that is stable over transformations of scale and linear transforms of intensity. these properties of the fractal surface model allow it to serve as the basis for an accurate image segmentation procedure that is stable over a wide range of scales. 
　　because fractal dimension is not affected by projection distortion  its measurement can significantly enhance our ability to estimate shape from  unfamiliar  texture. specifically  it seems that measurement of fractal dimension can provide  1  evidence of surface texture anisotropy  and  1  an estimate of the perspective texture gradient. both capabilities are extremely important because they provide a way to obtain independent confirmation of the assumptions on which previously-reported shape-fromunfamiliar-texture techniques are based. 
　　representing natural shapes. a constrained-chance representation modeled after the fractal techniques used by the graphics community seems useful for representing complex natural shapes  such as a crumpled newspaper or a mountain. the problem encountered when using conventional shapeprimitive representations to describe natural surfaces is that the resulting description is often hopelessly complex. because the constrained-chance representation allows us to deal only with the structural regularities and to ignore inconsequential details  the problem can become much simpler. thus  for instance  the 
a. pentland 1 
graphics community has found that constrained-chance fractal descriptions of complex objects  e.g.  a mountain  are quite compact and easy to manipulate. similarly  the problem of representing classes of shapes  such as are referred to by the terms  a mountain   or  a bush   can also be significantly simplified. 
　　the encouraging progress that has already been achieved on both of these problems augers well for this approach. it appears that a constrained-chance representation incorporating a fractal model of surface shape will provide an elegant solution for some of the most difficult problems encountered when attempting to progress from the image of a natural scene to its description. 
