 
this paper describes a japanese language semantic analyzer based on an extended case frame model  which consists of a relatively large collection of case relations  modalities and conjunctive relations. the analyzer performs four stage analysis using a frame type knowledge base. it also utilizes plausibility scores for dealing with ambiguities and local scene frames for the prediction of omitted case elements. 
1 introduction 
many natural language understanding systems employ the concept of case frames  bruce  1   which is suitable for japanese sentence analysis. however  
most systems deal with rather simple sentences  in which the analysis is a relatively easy task. however  in the case of more complex everyday sentences  a case analysis is not a simple matching of case frame slots and phrases  candidates of case elements . moreover  these sentences result in a variety of problems such as an increase in the possible number of semantic structures in a sentence  ambiguities   the presence of various modality expressions  and frequent occurrences of ellipses. 
as part of a research program on language understanding  the authors are observing actual sentences in scientific or engineering articles  and are developing a language understander. the observations and the language understander are based on an extended case frame model. the characteristics of the model are 1  its relatively large collection of case relations for distinguishing between meanings  and 1  emphasis on modalities and conjunctive relations  relations between sub-sentences in a sentence . 
the analyzer  designed in accordance with the model; 1  performs four stage analysis using a frame type knowledge base  1  constructs a frame type semantic structure  ftss   1  uses plausibility scores to determine a better structure within the possible number of semantic structures in a sentence  and 1  predicts omitted case elements by using local scene frames. 
1 extended case frame model 
an extended 	case 	frame 	model 	used 	as 	an understanding model consists of predicates  semantic case relations  roles   modalities  and conjunctive relations  table 1  appendix 1 . 
1 case relations 
one characteristic of this model is the relatively large collection of case relations. a small set of case relations is not sufficient for representing the differences in various expressions  which is a significant feature of natural languages. therefore  from the viewpoint of language understanding and analysis  a large collection of relations is better for capturing the richness of the language phenomena as has been pointed out by minsky  minsky  1 . 
the case collection is based on the following criteria; 1  adoption of surface cases  1  differentiation between the meanings of various linguistic expressions  1  adoption of a semantic interpretation model rather than primitive decomposition  bobrow and winograd  1    lehnert  1 . the interpretation is applied to 
a  different case views of the same phrase  a1 in  tom gave mary a present    tom  is an agent of  gave  and source of  a present  movement   charniak  1   b  a hierarchy between analogous cases  appendix 1   and c  different expressions of the same meaning  as in  add six to five.  and  add six and five.  . 
our 	collection 	includes; 	1  basic 	cases 	like 
fillmore's case system  1  case relations such as extent  manner  and degree  which appear as adverbial phrases  and 1  additional cases represented by the inflection of a certain verb such as  tsuite   concerning . 
table 1 extended case frame model 
sentence = simple sentence i sentence + conjunctive relation + sentence 
simple sentence = predicate + case relations + modalities 
ca1e relations = see appendix 1 
modalities - 	tense i aspect i manner i intention 
　　i guess i attitude i negation i ability i necessity i ... conjunctive relation ＊ time i cause i reason i result i contrast i goal i assumption i 
　　circumstance i ... 

1 a. shimazu et al. 
1 modalities 
in addition to these propositional matters  semantic structures must include information on 
modality such as tense  aspect  intention  manner  attitude and assumption. real  not toy  sentences convey much of this type of information. 
unfortunately  however  most understanding systems and linguistic theories have not dealt sufficiently with modalities. 
1 conjunctive relations 
a sentence generally consists of several subsentences  each of which represents a unit event. in the model  event relations are expressed by conjunctive relations such as time  cause  reason  result  goal  assumption  contrast and circumstance. these are essential for understanding a sentence  and must be organized 
into semantic structures. 
1 analysis framework based on the model 
the design policies of the semantic analyzer 	are; 
 a  to reflect the case frame model  and  b  to integrate semantic and syntactic analyses. in accordance with these policies  the semantic analyzer performs four stage analysis using a knowledge base. the knowledge base is made of frame systems  and consists of lexical and syntactic structure information  case frames  concept relations  event conjunctive relations  common sense knowledge  and expertise. 
case1:  a case with  *case-name unfilled  
  case-instance case-instance1  
  case-marker kara-k  from   
 score 1  ...   
case-instance1: 
 a case-instance with  *type complex  
 *category object   *instance complex1  
complex1:  a complex with  *modifiers modifier1  
 *modificant case-instance1  ...   
modifier1: 
 a modifier with 
  relation-category whole-part  
 *modifier-instance case-instance1  
  relation-instance no-k  of  ...   
case-instance1 ... 
 kyuukou densha'  express train   kind of densha  train . 
case-instance1 ...  mado'  window   part of  densha'  train . 
1 four stage analysis process 
this analysis consists of morphology  case element  simple sentence  and whole sentence stage. in each stage  the analyzer uses information obtainable in its own stage. in the 
morphological stage  the analyzer relates a string of characters to words  which will be related to concepts in the latter stages. case element candidates analyzed in the second stage are simple 
noun phrases  not including embedded sentences  or adverb phrases. analyses of case relations  modalities  and event conjunctive relations are done in the third and the fourth stages. the analyses of embedded sentences are also accomplished in the fourth stage. 
1 growth of a semantic structure 
as the analysis proceeds  more information is used and a ftss of the sentence grows. for example  as for the underlined part of the sentence  
 kyuukou densya no mado kara. tsuuka eki no ekimei hyouziban wo miru toki. kantan na ekimei naraba 
hitome de yomitoru kotogadekiru ga  zisuu ga 1 
to nakanaka muzukashii.  
 when we see the signboard of a passing station from an express train's window  we can read it if the name is simple. however  it is difficult in the case of a lot of characters.   
the second stage analysis constructs ftsss for case element candidates  which include compound 
nouns. ftsss represent concepts and their relations in addition to surface morphological expressions. the frame structures represent kyuukou densya  an express train  and mado  a window  as prototypes  not a constant   where mado is represented as a part of kyuukou densya using the knowledge base  figure 1 . in the third and fourth stages  the semantic structure grows to 
ssent1:  a simple sentence with 
  predicate predicate1  
  case case1 case1  
  unfilled-slot  agent ...    
  score 1  ;assumption of ssent1. 
;happens at the same time. 
case1:  a case with   case-name source  
  case-instance case-instance1  ...   
predicate1 ... 
 miru'  see  with  modalities ...  
case-instance1 ...  mado'  window   part of  kyuukou densha'  express train  
case1 ...  ekimei hyouji ban'  signboard   

at  tsuuka eki'  passing station  
figure 1 	semantic structure  abbreviated  

to a case element 

figure 1 semantic structure  abbreviated  to a simple sentence 

include case relations  modalities  event relations  and time relations. the frame structures represent kyuukou densya no mado kara  from a window of an express train  as a source relation to miru  see   and the underlined part is represented as a reference time for the rest of the sentence  figure 1 . 
1 dealing with ambiguities 
the analyzer generally produces multiple possible semantic structures at each stage. to control this multiplicity  the analyzer attaches a plausibility score to each structure. the score represents the matching appropriateness between a sentence and the knowledge base as will be described in the case analysis in section 1. as a result of the analysis  a better ftss is applied to the succeeding process such as a structural transfer and a query command generation. if necessary  the next better ftss is applied. ftsss with the same score are dealt with as ambiguities. 
1 analysis characteristics 
1 matching case frame slots with phrases 
filling case frame slots is 	not 	a 	simple 	task. 
this is because;  a  meanings can be variously expressed   b  obligatory cases are not necessarily present  especially in japanese   c  there may be sub-sentences between a case and a predicate for case ellipses   d  some cases must be present to determine the meaning of a 
predicate  and  e  there may be optional cases. 
considering such phenomena  a sophisticated pattern matcher performs case analyses using case frames and an agenda control  charniak  1   and attaches plausibility scores to each possible ftss. the matcher predicts case slots  relations  from a particle as a human does  and compares a case slot with a case element by checking semantic categories including inheritance  particles  obligatoricity  and specific information such as the fact that a certain word requires another word to have a certain meaning. a case slot is taken from a  obligatory  case frame given to each verb  or adjective   a default case frame  used when there are no case frames   or an optional case frame. the matcher assigns an approapriate score to a ftss by subtracting points for each unmatched checking element in the comparison. when the match is not complete and there are other possible 
case slots  the matcher tries another matching. 
1 filling elliptical cases 
cases and events in a sentence are considered to constitute a local scene frame  lsf . it is recognized that an omitted case element is generally present as the same or similar case in a preceding simple sentence. based on such a 
phenomena  the analyzer constructs a lsf as the analysis proceeds  and f i l l s the unfilled slots from the lsf. 
a. shimazu et al. 1 
1 analysis of modality 
modalities  which characterize natural languages  are expressed by various words such as auxiliary verbs  particles  and adverbs  whereas in the extended case frame model  adverbs are regarded as special case relations. each modality is analyzed by the semantic categories  features  or the attached procedure  in the case of ambiguities  of each word. the procedure uses a verb's semantic categories  the information in the case slots  and contextual information. 
1 analysis of conjunctive relation 
a series of simple sentences  events and states  expressed in a sentence constitutes a discourse  as does a series of sentences in a story. to grasp such a discourse  semantic conjunctive relations are analyzed by syntactic relations between simple sentences  the semantic characteristics of predicates  and event/state relations. as a part of this analysis  time relations between events/states are analyzed according to the types of relations between simple sentences  case elements involving time  and tense 
marker  auxiliary verb  ta  . 
1 conclusion 
this paper describes ongoing research on a japanese language semantic analyzer based on an extended case frame model. the first version is being used in a japanese multiwindow editing system jmacs developed by maclisp on dec 1. it has been applied to an intelligent machine translation system lute  appendix 1   and a 
question answering system. a more advanced 
version is under development. 
