 
this paper deals with the relationship adding to a habitual formalization of lower predicate calculus  lpc  the following axiom schemes and the following rule of inference : between the termination of programs and the validity of certain modal formulas. we give a complete proof procedure for theses formulas  which will allow to bring the correctness of these programs back to a problem of automated deduction in modal logic. 

　　　many modal logics of programs have been developped during these last years  pr  hkp  m1 . particular attention has been paid to their ability to express many properties of programs  hkp  m1 . 
　　　this paper is concerned with the relationship of termination problem for regular programs to the validity of certain formulas in modal logic. 
　　　for these formulas we present a proof procedure  very close to the resolution procedure for first-order predicate  calculus. we will use this 
procedure to prove the termination of programs. as in lucid  aw  we can consider the set of modal for-
mulas with the proof procedure as a programming language. this way of doing things permits direct reasoning about programs  from their direct manipulation  rather than indirectly via another language. 
i. preliminaries 
　　　we shall consider as in  m1  the modal system s1  for reasoning about programs. 
     for our formalization of quantificational s1  we start with denumerably infinite lists of individual variables x1  x1  x1  ...  n-adic function symbols fn  gn  hn ...  and n-adic predicate symbols pn  qn  rn  
　　　atomic formulas as well as negations of atomic formulas are called literals. we adopt the prime symbols &  conjunction      negation  l  necessity  and  xi   universal quantification . we use the usual notions of terms and well-formel formulas. let a  b  c  ... be arbitrary formulas. for each a  ma is defined as usual as  l a. the axiomatization of quantificational s1 is obtained by following the example of kripke  we define a quantificational s1 modal structure as an ordered triple  g  k  r   where k is a set  r is a relation on k and g is a distinguished element of k  together with a function y wich assigns to each h a set y' h   called domain in h. we shall further specify that all domaines are identical. the interpretation t of a at h is defined as in lpc by induction on the number of logical symbols in a. and f lb h =t iff t b h' =t for every h'ek such hrh  otherwise t lb h =f. 
　　　a sentece a is said to be true in a model u associated with a modal structure  g k r  if r a g =t ; it is said to be false in that model if t a g =f. a is said to be valid iff it is true in all its models  for every modal structure   and unsatisfiable iff it is false in all its models. 
　　　a set of formulas is said to be consistent if there is no finite subset such that the disjunction of negations of its elements in a theorem. 
i i . programs and modalities 
　　　1. assume that a program is represented by a directed graph whose nodes are the labels of this program and whose arcs represent transitions between labels. in the graphs there is only a start node  ls  and a terminal node  lt   ml . for an arc  1|  i1  the transition has the general form as follows : 

where x =  x  ... x   is the input variables  

l farinas-del-cerro 1 


1 l. farinas-del-cerro 


l. farinas-del-cerro 1 
 ml  manna  z.  properties of programs and first order predicate calculus   in j. a.cm.   1  1   1   pp. 1. 
 m1j 	manna  z.  logics of programs   in proc. ifip 1  north-holland  pp. 1. 
 mw  manna  z.  waldinger  r.  is  sometime  sometime better than  always    : intermittent assertions in proving program correctness   in com. acm  1  1   1   pp. 1. 
1  orlowska  e.  resolution systems and their applications   i  tt  fundamenta informaticae   1   pp. 1  1. 
 pr  pratt  v. r.  semantical considerations on floys-hoare logic   in proc. 1th ann. ieee symp. on foundations of comp. sci.   1 ; pp. 1. 
 rs  rasiowa  sikorski   the mathematics of mathematics   warszowa   1 . 
 r  robinson   a machine oriented logic based on the resolution principle   in j. a. cm.   1   1   pp. 1. 
js  salwicki   fromatized algorithme language   in bul. ac. pol. sci.   1  1   1   pp. 1. 
bibliography 
iaw  ascroft  e.  wadge  w.  intermittent asser-tion proofs in lucid   in ifip 1  pp. 1. if ' tarinas-del-cerro  l.  a deduction method for modal logic . european ai conference  1 july 1  orsay.  hkp  harel  kozen  parikh   process logic  expressiveness  decidability  completeness   in focs 1  pp. 1.  ho  hoare   an axiomatic basic of computer programming   in com. acm  1  1   1 .  hc  hugues  cresswell   an introduction to modal logic   mathuem & co.  london   1 . 
