 	easily specify typical algorithmic tasks. 

the paper describes a language based on the paradigm of production systems. the novel aspects of the proposal are the possibility of augmenting production systems with demons able to monitor the visit of the search space  and the integration of production systems with abstract data types and traditional functional programming. 
1. introduction 
     traditional algorithm programming languages have shown inadequate to solve problems which naturally require a certain amount of reasoning. 
     currently two approaches seem to be promising: logic programming / l / and production systems / .  1/. both of them allow to organize the solution to a problem as a proof finding activity. a problem is essentially specified by two components: a collection of facts  data base  data memory  and a collection of inference rules  rewriting rules  productions . the solution is a sequence of applications of inference rules which transforms the data base in such a way that the goal is satisfied. 
dpsp allows to add to a set of productions a set of demons  which watch over the problem space and control the evolution of the problem solving process. 
     the main objective of the design is to map the problem space into the architecture of 
production systems  while preserving their mostappealing aspect  i.e. their being so close to the actual nature of the problems they try to solve. as a consequence any direct annotation of productions aimed at improving the search of the solution seems doomed to betray the basic nature of the approach. the proposed solution is then to leave productions uncluttered and to add  possibly later  certainly in a separate module  demons which incorporate the search strategy. 
     the paper is organized as follows: section 1 discusses the basic ideas of the language. section 1 gives a user view description of the language dpsp while section 1 provides a few examples. conclusions are devoted to compare the authors' proposal with other solutions and to the analysis of possible developments of the project. 

     this paper describes a production system executor  dpsp for demonized production system processor  built upon the following paradigms: 
1. extending production systems to include modules where search control and conflict resolution can be programmed. 
1. applying to production systems recent ideas developed in the realm of algorithmic languages research  especially the abstract 
data type approach. 
1. integrating production systems with a functional programming language in order to 
* this work was partly supported by cnr-pfi under contract n. 1.1. 
1. demons and the problem space: basic ideas 
     a demonized production system consists of four principal components: 
1. a data base 
1. a set of productions  c1ndf acti  
1. a goal condition g 
1. a set of demons 
by  problem space   associated to a production system  we mean a tree whose nodes are labelled by instances of the data base and whose arcs are labelled by productions. if a is an arc  labelled by  c1nd act    going from nl  with data base dl  to n1  with data base d1  then cond dl =true and d1=act dl . informally  the problem space is a  possibly infinite  finite branching tree recording all possible evolutions of a production system given an initial state of the data base. dy  search space  we mean a finite prefix of the problem space. at any point of the computation of a production system the search space records the part of problem space which has already been explored. 
     rephrasing /1/ the process of searching is described as the repeated execution of the cycle: 
1. select a node in the search space  search strategy ; select a production applicable to the corresponding data base state  conflict resolution ; 
1. apply the production to the data base state; add the new state to the search space; 
1. decide if the new state is a goal state; decide to quit; 
by default  dpsp implements a conflict resolution based on the declaration order- of productions and a depth first search strategy. 
     the first three components of a dps constitute the classic composition of a production system /1/. the fourth one specifies the search strategy and the conflict resolution strategy. demons are the entities authorized t.o browse into the problem space. demons can implement conflict resolution selecting the production to apply or they can select a node of the search space  thus allowing to realize a search strategy different from depth-first. as a matter of fact  if productions are considered to be a set of inference rules  
i.e. a level of reasoning  demons constitute a level of meta-reasoning  i.e. functions able to structure the deductive process. 
     the system has been designed and implemented to allow incremental programming in the following sense: a production system may be prepared and run without any demonization. in this case dpsp executes it using the default control strategy. the first runs can then be used to acquire knowledge about better strategies. demons embodying more accurate strategies can then be added without disturbing the original production system and the process can obviously be iterated. 
g. pacini and f. turini 1 
1. the language dpsp 
     dpsp embeds production systems into a programming language suitable for defining data types and operations on them. the programming style is functional and the specific syntax resembles lisp. 
a dps has the following components: 
1. type definitions; 
1. function definitions; 1. data base definition; 1. goal definition; 
1. a set of productions; 1. a set of demons. 
the following subsections describe each of the components separately. 
1. type definitions 
     type definitions introduce new abstract data types into the system. as in all other languages equipped with abstract data types mechanisms /1 1/ type modules export a set  of operations which characterize the data type. the remaining part of the data type module contains the implementation. 
	in practice  	since dpsp is 	built upon 
magmalisp /1/ which is a dialect of lisp  the internal representation is a list structure and the operations are functions operating on it. 
1. function definitions 
     function definitions are basically lisp functions which implement either more complex operations on the data types or operations on the data base. 
1. data base definition 
     the data base definition is simply a collection of declarations of variables. 
1. productions 
     a production has the- form l- cond act . the label l identifies uniquely the production and it is used in the triggering mechanism of demons 
as well as for interaction with the user  i.e. tracing  recording of the history the solution and so on. 
     the condition cond is a predicate on the state of the data base. the action act is a transformation of the data base state. more 1 g. pacini and f. turini 
precisely it is a set of assignments on the variables of the data base. 
1. the search space 
before discussing demons it is necessary to 
define the search space as it is in dpsp. 
     the search space is a pair: a finite tree and a node. each node of the tree is in turn a pair: a data base instance and a set. of production names  i.e. the productions which are applicable to the data base instance of the node but which have not been yet applied. 
     each arc of the tree is labelled by a 
     production label  i.e. the production which caused the transition from the father to the son. the node associated to the tree is a handle to the tree itself and it is the  current node . 
     furthermore  each node of the search tree can be associated with control variables. control variables can be inspected ana updated only by demons and they serve to maintain state information of the node in order to implement 
sophisticated search strategies. 
     demons can inspect the search space via operations on trees  i.e.: 
sons : node -   list-of-nodes father : node -   node leaves : -   list-of-nodes nodes : -   list-of-nodes root : node -   bool prods: node - list-of-production label inprod: node -  production label 
all the previous operations have the search space as an implicit parameter. if no argument is specified for the operations expecting a node the current one is assumed. prods returns the list of s t i l l applicable productions associated to a node. inprod returns the label of the production which caused the transition to the node. 
     the addition of nodes to the tree occurs on applying a production to a node. a new node is created as a son and it becomes the current one. nodes may be dropped via command   k i l l   . kill returns the father of the killed node. 
     demons 	can 	evaluate 	expressions 	in 	a particular 	node 	with 	the 	form 	 in   nodereturning-expr  value-of 	 expr  . 
1. demons 
     demons are similar to productions in that they are pairs  trigger ch1cefuncti1n . 
     triggers are boolean expressions. they may involve functions which inspect the search tree looking at data base states  production labels and control information. if a production label occurs in a trigger it evaluates true or false if it does or does not occur in the applicable 
production list of the current node. 
     the choice function of a demon may return either a node or a production label. in the former case the demon chooses the node to be expanded next  search strategy . in the latter one  the demon suggests a conflict resolution strategy. 
     a  demonization  is a list of control variable declarations and a list of demons. when the demonization is invoked by the interpreter  triggers are evaluated in a sequential order. if 
a trigger is verified the associated function is computed and its result is returned to the interpreter. if no trigger is verified  a default demon  see next section  is applied. 
1. the execution cycle 
     the execution cycle of dpsp is the following: 
a: 	compute the goal condition for the current node. if it is satisfied halt. 
b: compute the applicable production list for the current node and bind it to the node. 
c: 	apply 	the 	demonization. 	let r 	be 	the result. 
d: if r is a node  set r as the current node and repeat step c. 
if r is a production label  delete the production label from the current applicable production list  apply the production  i.e. generate a son of the current node  label the arc with r  set the newly created node as the current one  and repeat step a. 
the default demonization implements a conflict resolution based on the declaration order of productions and a depth first-backtracking search strategy. more precisely the default demonization is defined as: 
	 not  null prods   	 first prods ; 
	 null prods  	 kill ; 
1. examples 
     the following examples aim at offering the flavor of the construction of dpsp programs. 
1. computing the change 
     the problem is to form the change for a customer paying a b i l l . the initial data base contains information about the b i l l   the amount handed by the customer and the amount of available coins. the syntax is  hopefully  self explanatory. where comments are needed they are enclosed in curly brackets. 
type c1n= cent nickel  dime.quarter.dollar ; 
{coin is an enumerated type; 	the syntax is 
pascal-like} type counter =  1 .. maxinteger ; type decmoney =  1 .. maxinteger ; type money-
exports 
zero: money; 
addc1in c1n money : money; dec money : decmoney; 
read: money 
 read reads values of type money as a list of 
integer-coin pairs} implementation 
{the implementation section contains lisp functions implementing the exported operations}; 
 the following section declares the data base} var cents nickels dimes  
¡¡¡¡quarters dollars: c1unter= read ; var bill: decm1ney= read ; var cash: money= read ; var change: m1ney= zer1 ; 
{follows the goal declaration} goal  eq dec cash   plus dec change bill   
productions 
pi -
 and 
 greater  difference 
 dec cash  
 plus dec change bill  
1  
 greater dollars 1   
  assign dollars  sub1 dollars   
    assign change  addcoin change' dollar   ; p1 - . . . 
{p1 etc. are similar to pi  with p1 labelling the production for quarters  p1 the production for dimes and so forth} 
{a simple demonization may be added in order to maintain a comparable number of dimes and 
g. pacini and f. turini 1 
quarters} demonization 
 and  not p1 p1 p1  
 c1nd  greater dimes quarters  'p1  
 'true 'p1   
1. a general best-first strategy 
     the second example is a possible demonization which realizes a best-first strategy. suppose you have a function which evaluates the likelyhood of success given a data base state. a possible strategy is implemented by the following cycle: 
1- when in a node  apply all applicable productions generating new sons; 
1- select the best of the sons; 1- move to the selected son. 
this strategy is implemented by the following demonization: demonization var active: b1l='false; 
{variable active is a control variable; when a new node is created  active with its initial value is associated to it} 
 not active    assign active 'true  
 father  ; 
{upon creation a node sets itself active and lets the father continue the generation of sons} 
 and active not null  prods     
 first prods  ; 
{continuing the generation of sons} 
 and active null prods  not null sons     
	 ... 	returns the best son . . .   ; 
it is worth noting that if a failure occurs  
i.e. no productions are applicable in a selected node  the default demon implies a backtracking to the father and the demonization implies the selection of the second best son and so on. 
1. conclusions 
     computing in a production system environment produces a sequence of search spaces. then a possible general definition is that controlling production systems means limiting the possible produced sequences of search spaces. in this light it is evident that control decision must in general rely on the examination of the actual search space  in order to decide what kind of evolution the search space itself can undergo. 
     this approach  which is not explicitly present in other proposals /1 1/ is the 1 g. pacini and f. turini 
most characterizing aspect of our work. indeed demons can operate examining the search space in order to control both conflict resolution and search strategy. 
     the language for describing demons is essentially a conventional functional programming language enriched by primitive operations for inspecting the search space. the choice of a conventional programming language is primarily motivated by the fact that the search space is a complex data structure and  consequently  only a full blown programming language seems to be adequate for coding the inspection process. 
     as it is for the logic and the control part of algorithms in / l / the distinction between productions on one hand and demons on the other is somewhat ambiguous. indeed  one analysis of the problem might include in productions what another analysis include in demons. for instance  in the example 1 the demoruzation relies only on the data base current state. as such it could be embedded in productions. 
     anyway  it is rather clear what cannot be included in productions. productions cannot include control decisions which effectively rely 
on inspecting the search space. this is due to the fact that conditions in productions can deal only with the current data base state. this impossibility is not definitive  because data base states could be enriched by adding components for hiding some information about search spaces. however this method can lead to modify the data base nature betraying the spirit of the solution initially given to the problem. 
     currently an experimental version of dpsp is implemented as an embedded language in magmalisp  which in turn runs under vm-cms. this way dpsp inherits the most interesting feature of the implementation of magmalisp  i.e. the incremental state saving mechanism based on the 
notion of contexts /1/. 
     planned developments for the system are a larger experimentation via the construction of simple expert systems to be used in an office automation project on one hand  and the study of the possibility of enriching the language with parallel features on the other hand. parallelism can be added at least in two different ways: 
- one is to allow parallel inspection of the problem space under control of demons. 
- the 	other 	one 	is 	to 	have 	concurrent communicating production systems. indeed guarded commands used in communicating sequential processes /1/ share several interesting aspects with production systems  including the nondeterministic one. 
