 
     a theorem proving procedure is described which combines the approach of locking resolution with that of rewriting systems. indeed  both the binary resolution and a complete restriction of paramodulation are embodied by an extension of the rewriting operation called superposition. experimental results are reported and compared with literature automated proofs. 
i - introduction 
     we describe in this paper a theorem-proving procedure for first-order logic with equality which combines the approach of locked resolution with that of term rewriting systems . 
     in 1  r.s. boyer introduced a restriction of resolution  without naranodulation  called  locking  which involves an index ordering of literals within clauses  bo  this index ordering 
restriction was somehow refined and extended to paramodulation under the name of 1 e-resolution by j.a. loveland  lo . independently in some other works  paramodulation was specifically controlled by favoring one direction in the substitution of equals : a subterm u within a clause can be replaced by an equal only if u matches with a cer-
tain side of an equation alpha=betanstance alpha and not b the concept of demodulation and the equation marking one atom term locking  
have thus been introduced 	 wr   la . 
     in the procedure described herein  we use this notion of unidirectional paramodulation but 
with an increased selectivity : indeed  the subterm u of an equation y=1 can be replaced only if u belongs to a certain side of that equation  for instance y and not 1. the restriction is 
developed on the basis of the 1je-resolution and has the completeness property. 
     its strongly oriented character induces us to consider the restricted paramodulation as a form of superposition  the rewriting operation . we achieve this in using a new formalism of clauses that we call  equational clauses   each literal being converted into an equation. we will show that superposition on to equational clauses embodies 
not only paramodulation but also binary resolution and will so constitute our major rule of inference. 
ii - i-ordering 
     the reader is assumed to be familiar with the notions of e-insatisfiability and classical resolution. in this section  we will summarize the defi-
nitions and results attached to the index ordering deduction by resolution and paramodulation  which is named 1j e-deduction in  lo   and here simply 
noted as i-deduction. 
     in i-deduction  a positive integer is assigned to each literal occurrence of the given set s of clauses. within a clause  literals are disposed from left to right in non - decreasing index order. such ordered clauses are called i-clauses. within an i-clause  only the leftmost occurrence of identical literals is retained  merging low rule  and positions among literals of like index are interchangeable. 


1 l. fribourg 

　　　in order to control even more the i-paramodulation rule  we shall mark the equations nearly the same as lankford does in term locking i la j.but unlike  la   marking does not affect each equation and descendant clause marking is not induced by parent clause marking. 
　　　def : an i-clause is marked when its rightmost literal  being an equation  has one and only one underscored side. 
　　　in our procedure  starting with a given set of  marked  i-clauses  the descendant clauses are marked through a binary resolution or factoring when an equation becomes the rightmost literal or through a paramodulation when the paramodulated literal is an equation. in every case  the side to be marked is freely chosen. for instance  the i-clause  b=c pa  can be resolvedagainst the iclause  pa  into either  b=c  or  b=c  . 
　　　the equation marking enables us to distinguish four types of paramodulation. first  two cases of paramodulation can be defined  depending on whether the paramodulant is obtained  i  by a matching with the marked side of the active equation or  ii  by a matching with the unmarked side. then for each of these cases  two new subcases can be defined  depending on whether  j  the paramodulated literal is not an equation  or is an equation 
whose marked side contains the matched subterm ;  jj  the paramodulated literal is an equation whose unmarked side contains the matched subterm. a paramodulation satisfying both cases  i  and  j  is said to be a -typed. 
iv - completeness of a -typed paramodulation 
　　　theorem : if s is a finite e-unsatisfiable set of marked i-clauses  there exists a deduction of d from s u {x=x} u sf by i-factoring  i-binary resolution and i-paramodulation of type a . 
the proof is given in  fr  . 
v - link with rewriting systems 
　　　the a -typed paramodulation appears as a directed kind of paramodulation where the equations are treated as a one way-replacement from the marked side to the unmarked one. now in term rewriting systems  kb   ho   equations are also used unidirectionnally  but then from left to right. in order 
to imitate rewriting  we may have to invert the sides of an equation so that the side to be marked 
becomes the left-hand one. we are entitled to do so  provided that we extend the resolution and factoring rules so that they are no longer submitted to the order of the sides within equations  thus we can factorize  a=b ld=a  into  a=b  and resolve  b.=a  against  a not =b  . henceforth  marking an i-clause will only consists of choosing a leftright orientation for the righmost equation. 
　　　since the marked side of the equation is on the left  the a -typed paramodulation of an equation e1 into an other one e1 involves the matching of the left-hand side of e1 with a subterm r in the left-hand side of e1 . in rewriting language  this is a superposition of e1 on e1 - provided that r is not a variable. 
　　　let us consider now the a paramodulation of an equation s =t into a literal p which is not an equation. p is either  1  an atom a or  1  a negation a . in order to continue with the comparison between superposition and a -paramodulation  we have to superpose s=t on p   which implies assimilating the matched term in p to a subterm of an equation left-hand side. this is achieved by writing p in the form of l' a=true or  1' a-false  where  true  and  false  are new constant symbols. this leads us to define a new formalism  noted   ec i  of special clauses  called equational clauses  in which every literal has an equational form. 


the  ec  transposition of the a -paramodulation completeness theorem is : 
　　　theorem : if s is a finite e-unsatisfiable set of oriented equational clauses  there exists a deduction of d  from s u {e x x - true} u s by superposition  factoring and trivial removal. 
　　　so far  the orientation of term equalities has been used as a means of restricting paramodulation. yet  the original idea behind orientation is to simplify terms by applying equality units  kb si . 
　　　this idea has been incorporated in  ec  by authorizing term simplifications within the rightmost literals. our procedure then has the features of a knuth-bendix algorithm running on equational clauses ; s t i l l it is a form of locking resolution when restricted to clauses without term equality  gr et al . 
vi - experimental results 
　　　the implemented program of superposition on equational clauses  sec  is written in lisp and runs on inria's hb 1. it has been developed as an extension to the system kb written by j.m. hullot  hh ho   now a part of the formel system. we present the most noteworthy examples with  for each one  the equivalent literature results of a theorem prover chosen for its specific competiti-
veness. by comparison  sec proofs are often impressively shorter - with regard to the number of generated clauses. the last example - which fails - is included to point out that so far  for very rich sets of initial axioms  sec runs out of space. 

l. fribourg 1 
vii - conclusion 
     the reduced length of our experimental proofs convinces us that the described approach constitutes a progress in the handling of equality in resolution oriented systems. our procedure efficiency is due to : 
1  the combination of locking resolution with a strong  new and complete restriction of paramodulation 
1  the use of a new formalism of equational clauses which unifies the two research processes of paramodulants and binary resolvents into the one of superposants. 
1  the use of equality units as simplifiers. 
