 
     a conceptually new  computationally simple approach to shape from shading is presented. it is assumed that objects of interest in 1-d space can be approximated by chunks of spheres  cylinders and planes  and that the formation of the true image can be modelled as the scattering from a lambertian surface of light from a distant point source or distributed source. the observed image is modelled as this true image plus a white gaussian perturbation. to permit parallel processing for computational speed  an image is partitioned into 
many small square windows  image patches  that can be processed simultaneously. 	it is assumed that a chunk of only one object type  plane  cylinder  sphere  is seen in a patch. 	two kinds of results 
are presented. the first result is an algorithm for the recognition of the object type seen within a patch. this algorithm uses constrained 1-d quadric polynomial approximations to the picture function to implement true bayesian recognitition. the second result is an algorithm for the estimation of the 1-space location  and orientation  of the recognized object seen within a patch. the image is thresholded with many pairs of thresholds and lines constrained to be parallel or ellipses constrained to have the same shapes and orientations are fit to the resulting swaths of data. three-d location and orientation parameters are estimated from these statistics. the two algorithms are derived from a general formal statistical formulation of the shape from shading problem. 
	i. 	overview 
     the ultimate goal of this work is the recognition of a manufactured object and the estimation of its location and orientation in 1-d space  based on the use of a single 1-d image. a priori information of object structure is used  as 
well as appropriate functions for image formation based on knowledge of camera location and perhaps of the illuminating light source. our recognition and information extraction approach is based largely on data generation modelling and then the 
application of bayesian recognition and roughly 
this work was partially supported by army 
research office grants #daag1-g-1 and 
daag1-k-1 and by the national science foundation grant #ecs-1. 
maximum likelihood estimation. the approach is robust to deviations from the assumed models and is computationally attractive. in this paper  
we concentrate on the subproblem of object type recognition and object 1-d parameters estimation based on an image patch-the data in a single window. the patches are sufficiently large to contain important structural information  but are sufficiently small to permit simple processing. the information extracted simultaneously from many such patches must then be used to make reliable inferences concerning the object that is composed of the chunks of planes  cylinders and spheres seen. section ii describes experimental results on extracting information from a patch. section i i i contains a brief introduction to our general formulation  and points out how the algorithms for extracting information from a patch come from this general formulation. 
i i . experimental results 
     the two results briefly described are typical of those observed in experimentation with the algorithms. figure la is an image of a portion of a sphere taken with a vidicon camera in a room illuminated by standard ceiling mounted fluorescent tubes behind diffusers. three data swaths can be seen in figure lb. each swath consists of pixels having image intensities lying between a specific pair of thresholds. an ellipse has been fit to each swath. the elliptic shape of the data swaths occurs because the contours of constant image intensity associated with the sphere are ellipses 
when the light source is a point source  and are approximately ellipses for a distributed source such as the ceiling fixtures commonly encountered. a new twist arising here is that the ellipse fitting has been constrained such that all ellipses 
have the same shape and orientation. in practice  many pairs of thresholds and associated data swaths and fitted ellipses are involved. 
     the elliptic curve fitting is computationally simple and involves constrained least squares curve fitting. the location of the projection of the sphere center on the image plane can be estimated from the ellipse parameters. though less computation is required if the sphere radius and source direction are known  these parameters can be 

b. cernuschi-frias et al. 1 


1 b. cernuschi-frias et al. 

