 
	in this paper  	we 	describe 	an 
e f f i c i e n t algorithm for 1 scene anal sis. this algorithm usesuses  a a segmentation of the surfaces to to be i d e n t i f i e d into geometrical primit i ves   the original data being obtained by a laser range finder. moreover  the algorithm estimates precisel  the location and orientation of an i d e n t i f i e d object of the scene. results are presented on real objec t s . 
i 	introduction 
　　　in applications of scene analysis techniques to robotics it is interesting 
not only to recognize objects in the scene but also 	to 	estimate 	as 	accurately 	as possible their position 	and 	o r i e n t a t i o n . in both 	cases 	symbolic 	descriptions 	of objects 	must 	be 	available. 	such descriptions 	are 	usually 	obtained 	by segmenting 	the 	scene 	into 	regions homogeneous with respect to some c r i t e r i o n and representing the 	result 	as 	a 	graph where 	nodes 	are 	regions 	labelled 	with features and arcs 	are 	relations 	between regions. in many cases the 	relations 	are topological 	 neighbor  	i n s i d e . . . .   	and 
sufficient for 	recognition 	but. 	not 	for positioning. 	in 	order 	to 	achieve recognition and 	positioning 	we 	need 	to introduce the constraint of r i g i d i t y which is global 	and 	therefore 	not 	very 	well suited to the 	graph 	representation. 	our representation is 	purely 	geometrical 	in the sense that objects are segmented 	into regions approximated by simple parameterized primitives 	such 	as 	planes. and quadiics 	 l-1l 	which i m p l i c i t e l y embed 
the r i g i d i t y constraint. 	the 	geometrical matcher 	presented 	here 	is 	part 	of 	a general 	1-d 	vision 	system 	including automatic 	data 	gathering  	segmentation  model construction and scene analysis. 
transformed by t. 
ii 	geometrical matching 	this 	measure 	of 	consistency involves 	the 	estimation 	of 	the 	best 
a geometrical 	description 	g 	of 	an 	transformation defined by the matching 	in the least-squares 	sense. 	the 	algorithms which 	perform 	this 	estimation 	are presented in part i i i . 
o. faugeras and m. hebert 1 


1 o. faugeras and m. hebert 

o. faugeras and m. hebert 1 


1 o. faugeras and m. hebert 


o. faugeras and m. hebert 1 
this estimate could be obtained by computing the transformation using only planner regions  the matching of the quad lies beinq used to validate or reject the matching of planes. 
v i i conclusio n 
　　　we have presented an algorithm of 1-d recoqnition using primitive surfaces which gives a precise estimation of the positions of the objects. we are in the process of extending the algorithm to more complex primitive surfaces such as quidric surfaces. our future work is to include this recognition module in a complete vision system including automatic data acquisition  segmentation  model construction and scene analysis. 
	 l  	d.l. milgram  cm. bjorklund  
 range image processing: planar surface extraction   proc. of the f i f t h icpr  dp. 1  miami  dec l-'1  1. 
 r.o. dud a  d. nitzan  p. barret    l se of range and reflectance data to find planar surface regions   ieee trans. on pattern analysis and machine intelligence  vol. pami-l  no 1  pp. 
	1  	jul  	1. 
 m. oshima y. shirai  
 a scene description using 
three-dimensionnal information    pattern recognition  vol. 1  dp. 
	1  	1. 
 c.a. dane  
 an object-centered three-dimensionnal model builder   phd dissertation  university of pennsylvania  1. 
 o.d. paugeras and m. hebert   segmenting range data into planar and quadratic patches   cvpr  washington  june 1. 
 m. hebert   j. ponce   
 a new method for segmenting 1-d scenes   proc. of the 1ixth icpr  dp. 
1  munich  october 1. 
 o.d. faugeras et a 1 .   
	 towards a flexible vision system  	in 
	robot vision a. 	pugh 	editor  
springer-verlag   1. 
|1  n. jacobson  
	 lectures in 	abstract 	algebra   	van 
	nost rand 	e d   1 1 
 g.w. steward  
  introduction to the matrix computations    academic press  1. 
 lo l. shapiro  r. haralick   structural descriptions and inexact matching   pami  vol. 1  no 1  sept. 
1  pp. 1. 
 n. ayache   
 a model based vision system to identify and locate p a r t i a l l y visible parts   cvpr  washington  june 1. 


