 
       this paper describes the main features of the parnax system for natural language access  in italian  to an adabas data base. the core of the system is constituted by the analyzer that includes parallel processing of syntactic and semantic knowledge. it is argued that this feature  together with the new macro and micro-analysis technique which is only shortly mentioned in this paper  allowed the system to reach a good linguistic coverage  still ensuring an acceptable degree of efficiency. after the basic architecture and operation of parnax have been described  attention is focused on the parallel syntactic/semantic analyzer which is illustrated in detail. the advantages obtained through parallelism are also shortly discussed. examples of parnax operation are presented. references to related works are mentioned  and directions for future research are outlined. 
1. introduction 
       this paper discusses a research project devoted to the design of a robust and effective parser for italian language  that can support a large linguistic coverage  still ensuring an acceptable degree of efficiency. the project has been partially based on previous results by the authors  guida and somalvico  1  1; guida and tasso  1  and presents several original contributions. among these are: a two-level analysis strategy that includes a macro-analysis and a micro-analysis phase; a model for semantic processing that is made up of two sequential phases  namely  a nondeterministic part that validates and completes the activity of a syntactic analyzer  followed by a deterministic part that constructs the output internal representation; a parallel algorithm that manages the two cooperating processes of syntactic analysis and the nondeterministic part of semantic analysis. 
       this research project is supported by the implementation of an experimental system  called parnax  which is presently running in an interlisp version on siemens 1 at cselt 
 torino  italy . parnax is a natural language interface to an adabas data base containing information on the staff of a sample company. 
       in this paper  attention is focused on the parallel strategy developed for syntactic and semantic processing. at each step during the parsing of an utterance  the syntactic analyzer proposes candidate syntactic structures for a component of that utterance that fit the given set of syntactic rules. similarly  the nondeterministic semantic analyzer constructs candidate semantic structures according to a given set of semantic rules. among these only those structures that can be associated to a corresponding syntactic structure are validated and will be further considered in the following steps of the processing. all other candidate structures are discarded  thus considerably limiting the search space which is actually expanded during the 
analysis. this enables the system to reduce the nondeterminism of the analysis process  and  therefore  to operate with improved efficiency. 
1. basic system architecture 
       parnax allows casual users to access an adabas data base in italian. it translates natural language requests into n a t u r a l programs  the adabas formal query language  in two steps. first the natural language query is processed by the analyzer  that generates a semantic representation expressed in an internal formalism  called metanatural. m e t a n a t u r a l is an intermediate language which should allow a sufficient degree of independence of the understanding process of the details of the data base logical schema. then  the formalizer transforms the m e t a n a t u r a l query into a full n a t u r a l program. this is eventually supplied to the dbms which provides the user with the desired answer. system tailoring and updating is ensured by a knowledge base management system 
       figure 1 shows the basic architecture and mode of operation of the a n a l y z e r   that constitutes the core of the system. the analysis is performed at two levels: the upper level  called macro-analysis  takes into account the outer sentence structure and suggests possible splitting and normalization of complex or syntactically unusual sentences into simpler fragments; the lower level  called microanalysis  parses the sentence fragments and returns the obtained m e t a n a t u r a l subtrees to the upper level that will compose them into the final metan a t u r a l tree. 
       macro-analysis operation is mainly rule-based: a set of structural rules of the type   pattern  fragmentation-normaliza-

1 r. comino et al. 
fig. 1 - basic mode of operation of the anal yzer 
tion action  composition action   is used both by the fragmen-
tation and normalization module for analysing the outer surface structure of the input sentence  and by the composition module for building up the output m e t a n a t u r a l tree. macroanalysis also includes a paraphrase and dialogue module that manages the user-system interaction and generates echoing paraphrases of the input requests. 
       micro-analysis consists of three phases. the first phase  namely lexical analysis  classifies the elementary components of the input fragment  words or simple constructs and idioms  
according 	to their lexical type. its operation is based on a nondeterministic finite-state recognizer that utilizes the lexical 
part of the dictionary  which contains lexical roots and models  courtin  1 . the second phase includes two parallel pro cesses: the syntactic analysis  which is based on the dependency grammar model  hays  1  courtin  1   and the first part of the semantic analysis  called semantic validation the knowl edge bases utilized in this phase are the dependency rules  the semantic rules  and the semantic part of the dictionary. the result of the syntactic analysis and semantic validation is a set of validated trees. a validated tree is a modified dependency tree  where semantically meaningless components have been pruned and appropriate semantic variables have been added each node of the tree is therefore associated both to a semantic variable that expresses the kind of information o1 the cor responding sentence fragment  and to a pointer to a procedure  semantic module   which will be later used to assign the correct value to the variable. the third phase  namely semantic interpretation. is a deterministic process devoted to construct the output m e t a n a t u r a l tree. it operates through a bottom-up activation of the semantic modules that are referred to in validated trees  and assignes the appropriate values to the corresponding semantic variables. 
1. improving 	nondeterministic analysis 
	through 	parallelism 
       parallelism between syntactic analysis and the first part of the semantic analysis  semantic validation  is used in par nax to improve the efficiency o1 the parsing process. both syntactic analysis and semantic validation are nondeterministic processes  that can be viewed as problems to be solved by a reduction-to-subproblems mechanism as far as syntactic analysis is concerned the problem is to construct all the correct dependency trees for a given sentence. this problem  once a 
       word in the sentence has been chosen as a candidate root o1 the tree  can be split ted into subproblems. each o1 them consists in finding all the dependency subtrees whose roots  determined through dependency rules  are just one step below the root of the dependency tree corresponding to the basic problem. many groups of alternative subproblems may arise  since many groups of roots can be generated according to the dependency rules. a similar situation arises in the case of semantic validation  where the problem consists in finding all the correct semantic trees  and the subproblems in finding the semantic subtrees whose possible sequences of roots are determined by the semantic rules. both semantic and syntactic problems could be 
separately solved by two distinct search processes in their respective search spaces  and-or graphs   which are generally very large. 

       our choice is to solve both problems in a joined way  using two parallel  step-by-step search processes in the two search spaces. to this purpose a correlation between the two search spaces is necessary. this is defined in terms of an association criterion among problems in the two spaces  which is generally a many-to-many relation . according to this  for each problem p in one search space only those reductions of p are taken into account which have at least one association among the possible sets of successor problems of the problem p' associated  in the other space  with p thus  most of the search for non existing solutions  semantic trees without corresponding syntactic trees  and vicoversa  is avoided  with the desired result of constructing  with considerably minor effort  only the set of the semantic trees which are also syntactically valid  validated trees . 
       in the current implementation of parnax the parallel processing strategy above outlined is realized in a sequential way in which syntactic and semantic steps alternate in the analysis  due to the limitations of the available interlisp system. 
1. an example 
       a simplified example of parallel syntactic/semantic processing is shown in figure 1. the focus is centered on one step of the analysis concerning the segment  nati a torino prima dll 1   for the english translation refer to the appendix  
       lexical and semantic types are extracted from the dictionary and are self explanatory. for what concerns the structure of semantic rules  taking rule i as an example  its meaning is the following one. a segment conveying the intorma tion  a  s e l l c i o n  i.e.  how to select an object from a set  must contain a word of lexical type  verb  and semantic type   a t   inside that segment the information   v a l u e must be found  it is underlined  while   'date and   'comparative may possibly be found  in any order. f 1 is the pointer to the semantic module used during the bottom-up activation of the semantic interpretation phase. the structure of dependency rules is evident considering rule 1 as an example; an adverb may be the dependent of a verb; the weights  -1  +1  determine the possible positions of the dependent  courtin  1 . 
       at the point of the analysis shown in figure 1  two associated problems are considered; the former  p  consists in looking for a dependency tree rooted in   n a t i     the latter  m  consists in looking for a semantic tree rooted in  c selection. they are reduced to five and four subproblems respectively. 
only subproblems sp1 and sp1 can be associated to subproblems sm1 and sm1 respectively. all other subproblems are pruned since no problem in { sm1  sm1 }can be associated to some problem in { sp1  sp1  sp1 }. the analysis continues with problems sp1  sp1  sm1  and sm1  but only spi and smi will 
r. comino et al. 1 
lead to the solution  boldface in figure   while sp1 or sm1 will fail in following steps. 
1. the power of parallelism 
       some empirical experimentations have been done to estimate the benefits obtained through parallel execution of syntactic and semantic processing. two samples a and b of about 1 and 1 sentences respectively have been considered. a has been chosen from a set of sentences proposed by casual users; b has been constructed to contain a broad spectrum of different ways of expressing the same request. fach sentence in the two samples has been parsed first using the syntactic 
analyzer alone  i   and then using the parallel syntactic/semantic processor  ii  thus generating the complete validated trees as 
well. the following parameters have been estimated  cardinality of the syntactic search space expanded in both cases i and ii  and analysis time for syntactic processing alone in case i and parallel syntactic/semantic processing in case ii. the mean values of the ratios of the above parameters in cases i and ii  case i/case ii   tor both samples a and b  have been computed. 1 he table of figure 1 illustrates the results obtained. 
       note that the sum of the time required for both syntactic and semantic analysis  performed in parallel  is less than the time needed for the syntactic analysis alone. we also outline that the benefits of parallel processing increase with the length of the sentences. 
	sample a 	sample b 
cardinality ra1 l   1 1 analysis time ratio 1 1 fig. 1 - experimental results of parallel syntactic/semantic processing. 
1. experimental activity 
       an experimental version of parnax has been fully implemented at cselt  torino  italy  in the last two years. the system is connected to an adabas data base containing information on the staff of a sample company. it supports free italian language interaction  including single sentences as well as sequences of interrelated utterances   and is able to deal with ungrammatical sentences  ellipsis and telegraphic: forms  a class of anaphoric references  and multiple queries. parnax can also engage the user in a limited dialogue  that includes echoing user's request with a system generated paraphrase  presenting alternative interpretations when reference ambiguities occur  and asking the user tor validation of the proposed interpretation in the cases where other interpretations could exist. 
parnax is written in interlisp and is running on 
siemens 1. parnax dimensions are about 1 kbytes for algorithms and 1 kbytes tor knowledge bases  the present version includes about one thousand lexical roots  1 structural rules  1 dependency rules  1 semantic rules  and 1 semantic 

1 r. comino et al. 


modules . the average time needed to parse an average-length sentence  1 words  is approximately 1 cpu seconds  without accessing the dbms . 
　　　　figure 1 reports a short dialogue with parnax. f igure b shows a small sample of different ways of expressing the same request  all ot which are correctly understood by parnax  that should give an idea of the linguistic coverage of the system. for the english translations of the examples refer to the appen-
dix. 
  conta 	i dipendenti 	della 	divisione 	informalical 
nati dopo il 	1 	e comunicaml la loro categoria * la richiesta contienc due distinte domande 1. numero dei dipendenti con divisione informatica e anno di nascita maggiore di 1 
1 1. categoria professionals dei dipendenti con divisione inforrnatica e anno di nascita maggiore di 1 
	cognomf 	nome 	categoria 
	rossi 	mario 	i 
	verdi 	claudio 	d   oual e' il livello di ouflli che era loro sono lau-
reate * livello dei dipendenti con divisione inforrnatica  anno di nascita maggiore di 1 e titolo di studio laurea 
	cognome 	nome 	livello 
	rossi 	mario 	1 
fig. 1 - a sample dialogue. 
  dimmi i'anno di nascita dei dipendenti laureati 
  vorrei sapere i'anno di nascita di tutti i laureati 
  dimmi quando sono nati i dipendenti chc sono laureati 
  anno di nascita laureati 
  vorrei sapere qual e i'anno in cui sono nati tutti quei dipendenti che hanno conseguito la laurea 
  vorrei sapere i'anno di nascita dei dipendenti con titolo di studio laurea 
  dimmi in che anno sono nati coloro che sono laureati 
  dimmi i'anno in cui sono nati i dipendenti in possesso di laurea 
  dimmi i'anno di nascita di chi ha conseguito la laurea 
  dei laureati dimmi i'anno di nascita 
  dei dipendenti che sono laureati voglio sapere i'anno in cui sono nati 
  cerca i dipendenti il cui titolo di studio e laurea e comunicami i'anno in cui sono nati 
  qual e la data di nascita dei dipendenti che hanno la laurea  
  qual e i'anno di nascita di quelli che si sono laureati 
  qual e i'anno di nascita dei dipendenti che sono in possesso di laurea  
  laureati anno nascita 
fig. 1 - a sample of different ways of expressing the same request. 
1. conclusion 
　　　　the parallel syntactic/semantic analyzer developed within the parnax project shares some features with the rus/psiklone system  bobrow and webber  1 . although an in-depth comparison of the two approaches is difficult  two major differences seem worth being outlined: 
r. comino et al. 1 
- the way in which syntactic and semantic processing interact  which is strictly step-by-step sequential in rus/psi-klone and far more oriented towards a real parallelism in parnax; 
- the structure of semantic analysis  which is intended as a single process in rus/psi-klone while it is splitted in two bases  namely nondeterministic validation and deterministic interpretation in parnax. 
　　　　among most promising research directions that deserve further attention we mention the refinement of both syntactic and semantic models used by parnax to better fit the issues of parallel processing  and the study of improved parallel 
strategies. 
　　　　as a concluding remark we note that the use of parallel search algorithms that utilize several and diverse sources of knowledge is not limited to the analysis of natural language but represents a core topic in many al problems and could be of interest in several applications. 
appendix 
figure 1 list the employees born in turin before 1 figure 1. 
  count the employees in the computer science department born after 1 and let me know their professional category * the request contains two queries. 
1. number of employees having department computer science and birth year greater than 1. 
1. professional category of the employees having department computer science and birth year greater than 1   what is the level of those among them who received a doctor degree * level of employees having department computer science  birth year greater than 1  and doctor degree. 
figure 1 
  	tell me the birth year of the employees with a doctor degree. 
