 
     the fopho  f oreign phonetician  speech recognition project concerns the development of a system to produce a reasonably high quality phonetic transcription output from continuous speech input. the system is developed to perform in a way which approximates the actions of a phonetician trying to transcribe a foreign tongue   in the case of fopho  australian english . because of this central philosophy  fopho is a very interactive system and has f a c i l i t i e s for automatic learning and analysis of its own performance. good quality recognition is achieved through algorithms which are very context-dependent and which are sensitive to a variety of possible productions of similar sounds even though the system itself is speaker independent. 
introduction 
     the aim of the fopho project is to build an automatic system which can learn to recognise continuous  conversational-style speech  unrestricted by speaker or context  in the manner in which a foreign phonetician  hence the name fopho  would learn to understand a language. the novelty of this approach lies in the system design which combines techniques developed in the a r t i f i c i a l intelligence fields of learning systems and expert systems with the principles of automatic speech recognition. the result is a system which is a 'learning expert' and that is precisely what a phonetician trained to approach an unknown language with a view to identifying and categorising its sounds is. 
     in practice fopho is designed to recognise australian english which is a dialect of english more suited to automatic recognition than many 
other dialects of english because although it is spoken by a large number of speakers  approximately fourteen million  it is remarkably free of regional variation.  mitchell and delbridge  1 . 
this paper describes work done partially in the 
department of engineering physics  
research school of physical sciences  australian national university. it was supported by grants from the australian computer research board. 
system features 
     in this section we briefly describe the main features of the fopho system apart from the actual speech recognition strategy which is 
described in the next section. it must be emphasised that fopho is envisaged as a long-term project with the system providing a framework for its own development. thus  while is is primarily meant as an automatic speech recognition system it is also designed to provide an automated framework for experiments in phonetics and for experiments in automatic-
speaker characterisation. 
     the expertise of fopho resides in its recognition algorithms which are designed to be as detailed as possible. i.e. context-dependent rules and rules dealing with a wide range of  often redundant  phonetic features are included in the algorithm wherever possible. each recognition algorithm consists of conjunctive and disjunctive concatenations of simple fuzzy breakpoint rules  demichaelis  de mori  laface and o'kane  1 . each algorithm slots into a hierarchy of recognition algorithms  segmentation algorithms precede fine classification algorithms and so on . this hierarchy provides a chaining between a l l the various recognition rules and through this chaining the system can carry out an analysis of its own performance and  when requested  modify its own recognition rules. the system provides the analysis of its own performance in the 
manner and terms of a phonetician. 
　　with these considerations in mind the main features of fopho are: 
1. the system is interactive  i.e. it can answer back using its synthetic voice which is the klatt cascade/parallel formant 
synthesizer  klatt  1   and it has simple yes/no question-answer routines for gaining general information about a new topic or a new speaker. these routines can be run through keyboard entry or by speech response 
using simple template-matching speech recognition techniques. fopho also has been provided with the a b i l i t y to produce ipa phonetic script on a graphics screen  millar and oasa  1  and  in its phonetics 
experiment mode  it can accept graphical input through a graphics tablet. 

collectively these interactive routines are known as the 'friendly face1 of fopho; 
1. the system seeks verification  i.e. using in-built facilities for synthetic speech and phonetic symbol output the system seeks verification of what it 'thought it heard1; 
1. the system can be made self-tuning. 	in this learning mode it can be made aware that it has made a recognition mistake and it w i l l seek to identify and then modify the algorithm which has caused it to make a 
mistake; 
1. the system is modular in design  i.e. the algorithms of the system are written as discrete modules so that they can be individually and independently tested and modified and so that the system can perform at least partial recognition even though a 
complete set of recognition algorithms has not been developed. thus  as the system stands at present it can segment speech into 
broad phonetic classes  it can perform reasonable classification of vowels  and it 
has very robust algorithms for the fine classification of plosive consonants and liquid consonants. however  its fine classification algorithms for other consonant classes are s t i l l under development. at present if it is asked to recognise a phrase  for example: 
　　fred sings it w i l l produce as its highest-weighted fuzzy output something like the following: 
	 fricative  r  	 mid-high front vowel  d  
 fricative  high front vowel  
 nasa1  fricative ; 
1. the system has on-going speaker adaptation  
i.e. when a new speaker is introduced to the 
system  the system creates a f i l e for that speaker in which it deposits 
on-line-gathered statistics about that 
speaker's pronunciation for later use in 
conjunction with the general 
speaker-independent recognition algorithms; 
1. the system  which at the moment is being developed as a speech recognition system  
has the f a c i l i t y for being extended to act 
as speech understanding system according to the same general model except that the phonetician is replaced by a linguist. 
     the principles on which the model is based should lead eventually to reasonable recognition of unrestricted continuous speech; these principles can be also used in the design of special-purpose speech recognition systems. 
principles of recognition 
     two basic principles underlie the speech recognition rules used in fopho. they are: 
m. o'kane 1 
1. context-dependent recognition rules are better than context-independent rules; 
1. perfect recognition is impossible to achieve so that rather than produce one classification for each phoneme it is generally better to produce a l i s t of possible classifications with associated fuzzy weightings. 
     the recognition process starts when the digitized  lpc analysed speech is segmented using a modified version of the hierarchical segmentation algorithm developed by de mori  laface and piccolo  1 . after this  primary vowel recognition takes place. this is done by a context-independent algorithm which relies mainly on formant and timing data to achieve results. as there are twenty vocalic nuclei in australian english  it is quite common that a vowel can receive a classification with a high fuzzy rating in several categories at once. for 
example  a vowel that is actually / i / might receive classifications of over .1  on a scale of 1 to 1  in the categories / i /   / i / and / r / . because of this and because fine vowel classification is not needed for the context-dependent consonant recognition algorithms  this primary vowel recognition providing the 'context' for the consonant recognition algorithms  the vocalic sections are also given ratings in broader categories such as high front vowel  low back vowel etc.. of course if some data for the current speaker is 
already held knowingly by the system in its previously-met-speaker files these can be consulted and finer vowel recognition achieved. it should be noted also that the vowel recognition algorithm is more successful for female voices than for male voices because of the wider spread of the second  and third formants in female voices. further details of this and other features of this vowel recognition algorithm are given in o'kane  1 . 
     after vowel recognition is completed  fine classification of the consonantal parts of the utterance is undertaken. it has been established that the consonants in conversational australian english show strong coarticulatory effects due to both anticipatory and carryover articulation  and that the presence of a word boundary does not significantly inhibit either type of 
coarticulation unless there is a long time gap between the words  o'kane  1 . thus  we have found that consonant recognition is most successfully done using context-dependent 
algorithms  and not surprisingly this type of recognition is most successful when a consonant occurs in a vcv context. however  even when only vc or cv coarticulatory rules can be used  due to the presence of consonant clusters  the 
results are very satisfactory. 
     the problem with consonants in rapid conversational australian english is that they can be produced using several features or using only a subset of those features. for example  a 

1 m. o'kane 
perfectly produced plosive consonant w i l l have well-defined formant transitions from and to 
surrounding vowels as well as a burst of a 
certain spectral shape  and the voice onset time w i l l be of a certain length a l l depending on the place of articulation of the consonant and the nature of the surrounding vowels. 	but certain speakers at certain times use ony some of these cues  for example  never producing a / d / burst before a high back vowel or having negligible formant transitions before / b / . 	as the 
algorithms for recognising plosives are designed 
to be speaker independent these effects have to 
be allowed for. also it has been found necessary to have different consonant recognition algorithms for male and female voices - at least algorithms that differ when dealing with frequency dependent features. how an algorithm is developed is described briefly in the next section. 
     after fine consonant recognition has been completed for an utterance the results for each phoneme are reviewed. if a phoneme has received no fuzzy rating in any category greater than 1 or if it has a high rating in several categories simultaneously the possibility of a mistake at lower levels is considered  and a certain amount 
of backtracking is performed. 	the system displays its results to date  and an analysis of 
these results  indicating particularly those parts where no successful classification has been achieved and where rule modification is perhaps necessary. 
     after this the results can be further improved by operating the  phonetic  context-dependent and prosody-dependent word 
boundary algorithms which allow some word and 
phrase boundaries to be tentatively tagged. 
design of recognition algorithms 
     the design of the speech recognition algorithms is accomplished by f i r s t considering what phonetic features are known to be perceptually important in the human recognition  and which parameters have been shown to be particularly robust in the automatic recognition of a particular class of sounds. this information is used as a guide to the basic form of the algorithm. then a large number of examples of a l l members of the sound class being 
recognised in a l l possible contexts  and as spoken by a large number of sneakers is considered  and from this information the final recognition rules are developed. as f1ph1 is designed to recognise continuous speech  the sound examples considered in developing the rules are extracted from continuous speech. in order to obtain these sound examples in a l l possible contexts a special experimental paradigm has been devised whereby speakers are presented with l i s t s of words or word pairs 
containing some target sound in a l l possible contexts  and are asked to put these words or 
word pairs into sentences as rapidly as 
possible. 	this has proved to be very useful in obtaining the required material in a continuous speech format. 
     to provide a wide range of material to further develop and test the fopho algorithms a large database of spoken australian english has recently been collected. thirty-two volunteers  fifteen male and seventeen female  have provided  on ten different occasions  exemplars of a variety of speaking styles ranging from the formal  set reading passages  reading lists of sentences and l i s t s of words  to the informal  word games of the type described above  free conversation . this material is also intended for use in speaker characterisation research  o'kane  millar and bryant  1 . 
conclusion 
     the fopho speech recognition project which aims at achieving high quality recognition of conversational australian english has been described. this project is expected to take some years to complete and has thus been 
designed in a very flexible way so that the project can take advantage of new developments in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. 
re ferences 
p. demichaelis  r. de mori  p. laface  and m. o'kane  'computer recognition of plosive consonants using contextual information'  ieee transactions on acoustics  speech and signal processing  1  in press. 
r. de mori  p. laface  and e. piccolo  'automatic detection and description of syllabic features in continuous speech'    
ieee transactions on acoustics  speech and signal processing  assp-1  pp. 1  1. 
d.h. klatt  'software for a cascade/parallel 
formant synthesizer'  journal of the acoustical society of america  1  pp. 1  1. 
j.b. millar and h. oasa  'proposal for ascii coded phonetic s c r i p t '   j. i n t . phonetic assoc   1  pp. 1  1. 
a.g. mitchell and a. delbridge  'the speech of 
australian adolescents: a survey'  angus and robertson  sydney  1. 
m. o'kane  'acoustic-phonetic processing for continuous speech recognition'  phd thesis  anu  canberra  1. 
m. o'kane  j.b. millar and p. bryant  'design and collection of an australian english database preliminary report'  technical note no. 1  school of information sciences  ccae  canberra  1. 
