 
an extremum principle is developed that determines three-dimensional surface orientation from a two-dimensional contour. the principle maximizes  he ratio of the area to the square of the perimeter  a measure of the compactness or symmetry of the three-dimensional surface. the principle interprets regular figures correctly  it interprets skew symmetries as oriented real symmetries  and it is approximated by  he maximum likelihood method on irregular figures. 
1. introduction 
　　an important goal of early vision is the computation of a representation of the visible surfaces in an image  in particular the determination of the orientation of those surfaces as defined by their local surface normals  brady 1  marr 1 . many processes contribute to achieving this goal  stereopsis and structure-from-motion being the most studied in image understanding. in this paper we consider the computation of shape-from-contour. figure 1 shows a number of shapes that arc typically perceived as images of surfaces which are oriented out of the picture plane. the method we propose is based on a preference for symmetric  or at least compact  surfaces. note that the contour does not need to be closed in order to be interpreted as oriented out of the image plane. also  in general  contours are interpreted as curved three-dimensional surfaces. 
　　we develop an extremuin principle for determining threedimensional surface orientation from a two-dimensional contour. initially  we work out thee extrcnium principle for the case that the contour is closed and that the interpreted surface is planar. later  we discuss how to extend our approach to open contours and how to interpret contours as curved surfaces. 
　　the extremum principle maximizes a familiar measure of the compactness or symmetry of an oriented surface  namely the ratio of the area to the square of the perimeter. it is shown that this measure is at the heart of the maximum likelihood approach to shape-from-contour developed by witkin |1  and davis  janos  and dunn . the maximum likelihood approach has had some success interpreting irregularly shaped objects. however  the method is ineffective when the distribution of image tangents is not random  as is the case  for example  when the image is a regular shape  such as an ellipse or a parallelogram. our extrcmum principle interprets regular figures correctly. we show that the maximum likelihood method approximates the extrcmum principle for irregular figures. 
　　kanade  1  page 1  has suggested a method for determining the three-dimensional orientation of skew-symmetric figures  under the  heuristic assumption  that such figures arc interpreted as oriented real symmetries. we prove that our extrcmum principle necessarily interprets skew symmetries as oriented real symmetries  thus dispensing with the need for any heuristic assumption to that 
this report describes research done at the artificial intelligence laboratory of the massachusetts institute of technology. support for the laboratory's artificial intelligence research is provided in pan by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense under office of naval research contract n1-c-o1. the office of naval research under contract number noot1o-c-1  and the system development foundation. 

figure 1. la. two-dimensional contours that arc often interpreted as planes that are oriented with respect to the image plane. the commonly judged slant is shown next  o each shape  lb. some unfamiliar shapes that are also interpreted as planes that are oriented with respect to the image plane  lc. some shapes that are interpreted as curved three-dimensional surfaces. 
effect. kanade shows that there is a one-parameter family of possible orientations of a skew-symmetric figure  forming a hyperbola in gradient space. he suggests that the minimum slant member of the one-parameter family is perceived. in the special case of a real symmetry  kanade's suggestion implies that symmetric shapes are perceived as lying in the image plane  that is having zero slant. it is clear from the ellipse in figure 1 that this is not correct. our method interprets real symmetries correctly. 
first  we review the maximum likelihood method. in section 
1  we discuss several previous extrcmum principles and justify our choice of the compactness measure. in section 1  we derive the mathematics necessary to cxtrcmi/e the compactness measure  and relate the extrcmum principle to the maximum likelihood method. in section 1  we investigate kanadc's work on skew symmetry. one approach to extending the extrcmum principle to interpret curved surfaces  such as that shown in figure lc  is sketched in section 1. 
　　this paper is an abbreviated version of  brady and yuille  1   which should be referred to for the details of derivations. in that paper we also discuss the psychophysical literature on slant estimation and lkcuchi's work on shape from texture. 
1. the sampling approach 
　　witkin  has treated the determination of shape-fromcontour as a problem of signal detection. recently  davis  janos  and dunn  have corrected some of witkin's mathematics and proposed two efficient algorithms to compute the orientation of a planar surface from an image contour. witkin's approach uses a 
　　geometric model of  orthographic  projection and a statistical model of  a  the distribution of surfaces in space  statistics of the universe  and  b  of the distribution of tangents to the image contour. we 

1 m. brady and a. yuille 
1. extremum principles. 
　　brady and horn  survey the use of extremum principles in image understanding. the choice of performance index or measure to 
be extremizcd. and the class of functions over which the extrcmi/ation takes place  are justified by appealing to a model of the geometry or 
photometry of image forming and constraints such as smoothness. for example  the use of extremum principles in surface reconstruction is based upon surface consistency theorems  crimson 1  yuille 1  and a thin plate model of visual surfaces  brady and horn 1  terzopoulos 1 . urady and yuille |1| discuss the relationship between extremum principles and pracgnanz theories in perceptual psychology. 
　　there arc several plausible measures of a curve that might be extremized in order to compute shape-from-contour. contrary to what appears to be a popular belief  given an ellipse in the image plane  / n'1ds is not extremed in the plane that transforms the ellipse into a circle  lirady and yuille 1  appendix a . since ellipses are normally perceived as slanted circles  we reject the square curvature 
as a suitable measure. 
another possible measure is proposed by barrow and tcncnbaum 
 1  p1 . assuming planarity  the torsion i is zero   it reduces to 

 the first strong objection to this measure is that it involves high-order derivatives of the curve. this means it is overly dependent on small scale behaviour. consider  for example  a curve which is circular except for a small kink. the circular part of the curve will contribute a tiny proportion to the integral even when the plane containing the curve is rotated. the kink  on the other hand  will contribute an arbitrarily large proportion and so will dominate the integral no matter how small it is compared with the rest of the curve. this is clearly undesirable. for example  it suggests that the measure will be highly sensitive to noise in the position and orientation of the points forming the contour. 
a second objection to the measure proposed by barvow and 
tcncnbaum is that it is minimized by  and hence has an intrinsic preference for  straight lines  for which dk/ds zero. this means that the measure has a bias towards planes that correspond to the  non-
general  sideon viewing position. these planes arc perpendicular to the image plane and have slant 
we base our choice of measure on the following observations. 
　　1. contours that arc the projection of curves in planes with large slant are most effective for eliciting a three-dimensional interpretation. 
　　1. a curve is foreshorted by projection by the cosine of the slant angle in the tilt direction  and not at all in the orthogonal direction. 
　　we conclude that three-dimensional interpretations are most readily elicited for shapes that arc highly elongated in one direction. another way to express this idea is that the image contour has large aspect ratio or is radially asymmetric. the measure we suggest will pick out the plane orientation for which the curve is most compact or most radially symmetric. specifically  our measure is 
		 1  
this is a scale invariant number charactcri/.ing the curve. for all possible curves it is maximized by the most symmetric one  a circle. this gives the measure an upper bound of  its lower bound is clearly zero and it is achieved for a straight line. it follows that our 
measure has a buikin prejudice against sideon views for which the slant is 
m. brady and a. yuille 1 


1 m. brady and a. yuille 
where 
		 1  
kanade  1  p. 1  further proposes that the vertices of the hyperbola  which correspond to the least slanted orientation  are chosen within this one-parameter family. this proposal is in accordance with a heuristic observation of stevens . in the special case that the skew symmetry is a real symmetry  that is in the case that  the hyperbola reduces to a pair of orthogonal lines  kanadc 1  page 1  passing through the origin. in such cases the slant is zero. in other words  kanade's proposal predicts that real symmetries are inevitably  interpreted as lying in the image plane  and hence having zero slant. inspection of figure 1 shows that this is not the case. a  symmetric  ellipse is typically perceived as a slanted circle  particularly if the major and minor axes do not line up with the horizontal and vertical. 
　　although kanade's minimum slant proposal does not seem to be correct  there is evidence  for example  stevens 1  for kanade's assumption that skew symmetries are interpreted as real symmetries. 
we can show that the assumption can in fact be deduced from our 
extremum principle  brady and yuille 1  section 1 . as a corollary we can determine the slant and tilt of any given skcwcd-symmetrie figure  brady and yuillc 1  appendix c ; only in special cases docs it correspond to the minimum slant member of kanade's oneparameter family. 
1. interpreting image contours as curved surfaces 
　　figure ie shows a number of contours that arc interpreted as curved surfaces. in this section we discuss one method for extending our extremum principle to this general case. the key observation  as it was for wilkin   is that our method can be applied locally. to do this  we assume that the surface is locally planar. at the surface boundary  corresponding to the deprojeclion of the image contour  the binomial coincides with the surface normal. the idea is to compute a local estimate of the surface normal by the extrcmum principle described in the previous sections and then to use an algorithm  such as that developed by terzopoulos  1j to interpolate the surface orientation in the interior of the surface. details of one implementation can be found in  brady and yuillc 1 . 
acknowledgements 
the authors thank ruzena bajcsy  chris brown  john canny  eric crimson  ellen hildreth  tommy poggio  demetri tcrzopoulos  and andy wilkin for their comments. 
