an expert system for understanding expressions 
from electric circuit analysis 
rostam joobbani and sarosh n. talukdar 
design research center  carnegie-mellon university 
schenley park  pittsburgh  pa 1 

abslract 
circuit analysis is central to electrical engineering. it is important that students master the skills it requires. most of cuaiit analysis is concerned with writing expressions that embody transtoamations  conservation laws and the electrical behaviors of various devices this paper describes work in progress or. an expert system that can examine the expressions that students write  diagnose the errors in them and suggest corrections. the expert system is implemented in ops1 and uses the strategies of divide and conquer  forward chaining and hypoihesize and-test the system can now recognise most of the common errors that students make in dealing with linear resistive circuits and operates at about the level of a competent human grader. 
1 circuit analysis 
the general form of a circuit analysis problem is: 
  given the configuration of a circuit and two subsets of its variables  one designated as known  the other as unknown ; 
  solve for the unknown variables in terms of the known variables. 
by  configuration  we mean p specification of the type and location of each element in the uicuit. by  variable  we mean the value of a circuit element or a voltage or a current. an example of a circuit problem is shown in figure 1. 
　the first stage in solving a circuit analysis problem is to assemble a set of equations relating the known and unknown variables. the second stage is to solve for the unknowns. programs embodying numerical and symbolic procedures for the second stage are widely available. therefore  in this paper we will address only the first stage. 
　equations relating the known and unknown variables are generated by invoking kirchhoff's conservation laws  the net current entering each and every node is zero; the net voltage around each and every loop is zero  and by using branch relations  that describe the electrical behavior of the elements in the circuit - for instance  voltage is equal to resistance multiplied by current in the case of a resistor . many more 
　*this work was funded in part by the desiijn research center of carnegiemellon univensty and by found for improvement of pout secondary education  fipse . 
r1 
figu re 1: an example: for the circuit above  express i 1 in terms of i  v and r 1  r1. 
equations can be generated than is necessary. therefore  part of the problem is to select a subset of all the possible equations such that the subset is complete and independent from the viewpoint of the unknown variables. such subsets are not unique. 
　the task of assembling equations can often be made easier by network transformations that replace portions of the circuit with electrical equivalents that have fewer elements1  as illustrated in figure 1. replacements can be represented by algebraic expressions of the form: 
　　　　　　replace sc1 r1 rm by sc1 s1 sn  where sc denotes subconfiguration and the r's and s's denote the element values in subconfigurations. 
　in summary  the first stage of solving a circuit analysis problem consists largely of writing expressions that represent network transformations  conservation laws and branch relations. 
1 intelllg 	computer-based tutors 
　circuit analysis is central to electrical engineering so it is important that students master the skills it requires. as with many other engineering and scientific topics  these skills are best learned through  doing   that is  through problem solving1. problem solving sessions are most effective when they are 

1 	r. joobbani and s. talukdar 

figure 1: replacing a pair of parallel resistors by a single resistor. 
guided by a tutor that is able to understand what the student is actually doing  not just what he ought to be doing. we are in the process of building such a tutor. among its components is an export system that understands the mathematical expressions that students write. the next section describes this expert further. 
1 the expression-expert 
 the purpose of this expert is to monitor each expression a student writes and quickly recognize any errors in it.  with beginning students we intend to print out and explain errors as soon as they occur. more advanced students will be allowed to complete attempts to solve entire prohle.ns before their errors are discussed.  
　an advanced prototype of the expression expert has been written in ops1 and franz-lisp1. a brief description of this expert follows. 
 the expression expert contains some basic mathematical knowledge  a fair amount of circuit analysis knowledge and an expanding store of student modelling/diagnostic knowledge. 
the mathematical knowledge covers: 
  the use of the operators: +   -   *   /  = and -   
 replace  
  the transitivity law  a + b = b + a a*b = b*a .   the associativity law  a +  b + c  =  a + b  + c . 
  equivalence  a + 1 = a  a*1 = a  a*1 = 1 . 
the circuit analysis knowledge covers: 
  simple network transformations  series and parallel equivalents as well as the removal of shorted elements but not  transformations and more complicated equivalents  
  kirchhoff's current law 
  branch relations for resistors  independent voltage sources and independent current sources 
　the student modelling/diagnostic knowledge has been collected from some of cmu's best teachers of circuit analysis and consists of a taxonomy of errors and the misconceptions most likely to cause them. 
1 approach 
 when presented with an expression  the expression-expert attempts to answer the following questions: 
  what is the expression supposed to represent1  current conservation  if so  for which node  a branch relation  if so  for which branch  a network transformation  if so  of what sort   
  is the expression correct  if not  what are the errors and what misconceptions on the part of the student are likely to have caused them  
　to answer these questions quickly and efficiently  the expert uses the strategies of divide-and conquer  forward chaining and hypothesizeand-test1. four steps are involved: 
1. dissect the expression into subexpressions. 
1. determine what each subexpression is supposed to represent  a voltage  current or resistance . if any subexpression is not immediately recognizable  move on to the next subexpression. 
1. from the recognizable subexpressions  identify the overall expression. 
1. generate and test hypotheses for the identities of the hitherto unrecognized subexpressions. 
　the following simple examples illustrate how the strategy works. doth examples are based on the circuit of figure 1. 
　in the first example the student enters a correct expression for current conservation at node n1. this expression is: 
 the expression expert proceeds 
as follows: 
1. the expression is dissected into the subexpressions 

1. each subexpression is examined separately.  v1-v1  is recognized as being the voltage difference between nodes n1 and n1. then  is recognized as being a current flowing in i i . similarly   is recognized as being the current in tesistor r1. 

1. knowing that the expression is a sum of currents  the expert reasons that it represents a current conservations and searches for an appropriate node s . this node is found to be n1. now the expert checks the overall expression to see that it is correct  that there are no missing currents and all the signs are right . 
	r. joobbani and s. talukdar 	1 
1 future work 
　our plans for continuing work include expanding the expression expert's store of knowledge on student models and diagnostics  and extending its capabilities to include circuits with dependent sources this work is part of a project designed to produce intelligent tutors for basic topics in engineering and 

　as a second example  consider the current conservation equation for node n1. a correct equation is: 
	suppose that a 
student makes the mistake of writing n instead of r1 in the equation. the expression expert proceeds as follows: 
i.the 	expression 	is 	dissected 	into 	the subexpressions: i  	and 
1. using reasoning like that described in the previous example  the expert recognizes i  and as currents. however  does not make immediate sense and is left unrecognized. 
1. the export ignores the unrecognized subexpression and concentrates on the others which  under examination  prove to be currents flowing out of a single node  namely  n1. thus  of all the possibilities  the expression comes closest to being a current conservation equation for node n1. 
1. in light of this information  it is clear that the unrecognized subexpression should represent the current through resistor r1  which it would if r1 were changed to r1.  one hypothesize-andtest cycle was required to achieve this   
two points are worth noting: 
  hypothesize-and-test cycles are time consuming and are used only for unrecognized subexpressions  not for subexpressions that are recognized but out of context. for example  suppose that a student replaces the current in resistor r1 with the current in resistor r1. these two currents are the same. the expert recognizes this without having to employ any hypothesize-and-test cycles. 
  to understand complicated mistakes the expert may have to use several hypothesize-and-test cycles. suppose  for instance  the student writes: 
 the first 
two terms of this expression are currents that could apply to either node n1 or n1. the second two terms are mistakes. to examine all the possibilities takes several hypothesize-and-test cycles. 
1 status 
　the existing version of the expression-expert can correctly identify most of the common errors made by students. it is written in ops1 and franz-lisp and uses macsyma1 for solving systems of equations. it and its supporting structure  consists of 1 ops1 rules  broken down as shown in table i. 

table 1: a breakdown of the types of rules used. 
science . the first of these tutors is targeted for completion in 1 when it will be deployed in a network of powerful work stations that will make it readily available to all the electrical engineering undergraduates at carnegie-mellon university. 
