 	daydream1 

       this paper examines daydreaming: spontaneously recalling or imagining personal or vicarious experiences in the past or future. the following functions of daydreaming  for both humans and computers  are discussed: support for processes of creativity  future planning and rehearsal  learning from successes and failures  emotion modification  and motivation. a computational theory of daydreaming is being implemented and tested in a computer program called daydreamer. a prototype version of daydreamer which produces several daydreams  in english  is currently running. 
i. i n t r o d u c t i o n 
       an intriguing aspect of humans is that we spend much time engaged in thought not directly related to the current situation or environment. this type of thought  usually called daydreaming  involves recalling past personal or vicarious ex-
periences and imagining what might have happened in the past or what might happen in the future. on the face of it  daydreaming may seem like a useless distraction from a task being performed. however  since daydreaming is so pervasive in human experience  pope  1   singer  1   we must ask ourselves what purposes it might serve  both for humans and intelligent computer systems. 
       we hypothesize several important roles of daydreaming in human and computer cognition. these roles will be discussed in the context of the following episode and daydreams which might result from such an episode:* 
nuart-episode 
last night i went alone to the nuart theater to aee a film. this actress whom i've always had a crush on also came alone and happened to sit down near me. i recognised her and started a conversation. at one point  she mentioned the obviously well-known director of the film we were about to see and i didn't know the name. i was embarrassed. i finally asked her if she*d like to go have a drink after the film. she said she had other plans. 
daydream1 
i feel embarrassed for not knowing who the director was. i should 've pretended to know who the director was. in the future i'll read up on the film before i go. 
daydream1 
i'm disappointed that she didn't want to go out with me. she 
might change her mind if i were to ask her out again. i would call her up  but i don't have her telephone number. i 
should've asked for her telephone number when i had the chance. i imagine that i find out her telephone number  call her up  and she accepts my offer for a date. i regret not having asked for her telephone number. but she's a movie star and out of my league. 
¡¡the work reported here was made possible in part by a grant from the keck foundation. the first author was also supported in part by an atlantic richfield doctoral fellowship and the second author by an ibm faculty development award. 
* these daydreams are a composite of several daydreaming protocols we obtained from subjects via immediate retrospective reports  see varendonck  1  pp. 1; ericsson & simon  1 . 
i'm disappointed that she didn't want to go out with me. i imagine that she accepted my offer and we soon become a 
pair. when she has to do a film in france  i leave my job and travel there with her. as we continue to travel  my career suffers. i become unhappy and feel unfulfilled. she loses interest in me  because i have nothing to offer her. it's good that i didn't get involved with her  because it would've led to disaster. i feel less disappointed that she turned me down. 
daydream1 
i'm angry that she didn't want to go out with me. i imagine that i pursue an acting career and become a star even more famous than she is. she remembers meeting me a long time ago in a movie theater and calls me up. i'm glad she admits she was wrong about me. i go out with her  but now she has to compete with many other women for my attention. i eventually dump ber. 
ii. support for creativity 
       a relationship between daydreaming and creativity has often been suggested; e.g.  see  freud  1 . we believe that the following attributes of daydreaming make this mode of thought useful as a form of support for creativity: 
relaxation of conttraints: daydreaming explores possibilities which would normally not have been pursued. some of these possibilities  while perhaps unlikely at first glance  may lead to a new and useful solution to a problem. this is similar to the idea of  brainstorming   osborn  1 . 
fortuitous analogy recognition: while daydreaming about one thing  it is possible to stumble into a solution to another problem. that is  daydreaming often includes the serendipitous recognition of analogies among problems. for example  suppose that the daydreamer is leafing through an alumni directory from the college he attended and notices that the telephone number and address of a famous astronaut is listed. he may then experience the following daydream: daydream1 
i thought famous people didn't list their telephone numbers. 
i am reminded of the actress i met. if i could find out where the actress went to college  and get an alumni directory from that college  i might be able to find out her telephone number. i'll have to find an article about her somewhere. 
revision: daydreaming occurs in the context of a selfmodifying episodic memory  called a  dynamic memory  by schank  1 . each time a problem is examined  new information may be available that will enable a better  different  or more creative solution. for example  in daydream1 the daydreamer does not figure out how to find out the movie star's telephone number  while in daydream1 after receiving new information he is able to move one step closer to a solution to this problem. the daydreamer now has more ideas about how to contact the movie star  and thus future attempts have more possibilities from which to proceed. 
motivation: daydreaming provides the motivation to create in the first place. for example  a daydream which anticipates aesthetic satisfaction or praise from others upon a successful creation provides a strong motivating factor to produce that creation. 
inspiration: finding an initial solution to a problem through daydreaming may inspire one to flesh out that solution. daydreams is an example of how daydreaming may spur new interest in a problem. 
       daydreaming is often plot-oriented and thus is ideally suited to story invention. for example  the plots of daydreams and daydream1 resemble those of several recent motion pictures. daydreaming can provide initial ideas for a story and  once the story is begun  can suggest continuations and further possibilities. 
iii. future planning and rehearsal 
       daydreaming is often concerned with planning for the future and rehearsal  singer  1 . daydreaming may generate future plans which are incorporated into memory. for example  in daydream1 the daydreamer plans to find and then read a magazine article about the actress. the next time he is near a newsstand or library  he may remember this plan and look for an article about the actress. 
       daydreaming often consists of the exploration of hypothetical future scenarios. this allows the consequences of possible future actions in possible future situations to be considered in advance. in this way  advantageous actions may be employed over less advantageous ones. for example  in daydreams the daydreamer considers the results of going out with the actress  which in this case he deems to be negative. simulating hypothetical future scenarios through daydreaming thus assists in decision-making and also provides an adaptive safety mechanism to avoid undesirable courses of action. 
       daydreaming aids not only in making life choices  but also in choosing among detailed alternative methods for carrying out a plan in the face of various contingencies. for example  before a job interview one may anticipate questions of the interviewer in order to prepare a good response for each question. rehearsing future actions through daydreaming may help increase the accessibility of planned actions and the skill with which they can be performed. 
       instead of shutting a computer down  its free time can be spent daydreaming about future tasks. although daydreaming cannot guarantee the best behavior in all situations  systems with daydreaming will always have an efficiency advantage over systems without daydreaming. 
iv. learning f r o m experience 
       daydreaming about a recalled failure or success is often concerned with the generation of alternatives which might have resulted in a different outcome. for example  daydream 1 contains the alternative of having pretended to know the famous director. each alternative that is generated highlights a reason for the failure or success. heider  1  has noted that one may learn by avoiding that to which failure is attributed or by strengthening that to which success is attributed. through the abstraction of generated alternatives to planning strategies for use in future similar situations  daydreaming enables learning from failures and successes. for example  in daydream 1 the daydreamer may learn to read up on films before going to see them or to pretend to know something he does not know in order to maintain a positive image. in daydream1  the daydreamer may learn to ask for a person p's telephone number while talking to p if he anticipates wishing to contact p in the future and there is no other way of contacting p in the future. the next time the daydreamer finds himself in a similar situation  he will probably remember to ask for the telephone number. 
       learning from an experience is not necessarily complete after that experience. nor does learning from an experience take place at one sitting afterwards. rather  learning from past experiences is an ongoing process carried out through daydreaming. often  this involves reinterpretation in light of experiences and knowledge that have been acquired in the meantime. this relates to the revision attribute of daydreaming previously discussed. 
	e.mueller and m.dyer 	1 
v . e m o t i o n modification a n d m o t i v a t i o n 
       daydreaming is often concerned with the reduction or elimination of negative emotions resulting from a recalled failure experience. for example  in daydream1 the failure is rationalized and the disappointment reduced through the generation of a daydream demonstrating that going out with movie stars is undesirable. in daydream1  the daydreamer gains a form of revenge against the actress  resulting in a positive emotion. thus a function of daydreaming is to make the daydreamer feel better. in effect  failures result in a form of  cognitive dissonance   festinger  1  which must somehow be reduced. however  sometimes an increase  rather than decrease  of negative emotion results from daydreaming about a failure. an example occurs in daydream1 when the daydreamer regrets not having asked for the movie star's telephone number. in general  daydreaming results in modification of emotional state since emotions may result from imagined as well as real events. 
       from a purely computational point of view  it may seem pointless to incorporate emotions of any type into a system. as long as computers are driven by human-specified tasks this may well be the case. independent agents  however  must find motivations to drive the creation and relative strength of their goals. we believe that emotions provide this motivational force. suppose  for example  that one loses a wallet. in a planning system  the loss of possession of an object would create a goal on the part of the planner to repossess that object  which would in turn cause the planner to select a plan for achieving this goal. with people  however  the situation is more complex. what if one does not feel unset over the loss of the wallet  in this case it does not seem nicely that effort will be expended in searching for it. that is  the activation and strength of the goal is based on the intensity of the emotional impact of an experience. without the need to reduce the negative emotions of fear or anger  there would be no motivation to plan avoidance or retaliation. without feelings of satisfaction arising from imagined goal accomplishment  there would be no motivation to achieve goals. thus emotions both set and reflect the relative importance of goals and the amount of effort expended in planning for them. 
v i . computational daydreaming theory 
       the daydreamer program is being constructed in order to implement and test a computational theory of day-dreaming. daydr descriptions  such as accidentally meeting a movie star  and produces as output 1  actions that it would perform in given situations  and 1  daydreams  all in english. daydreamer learns as it daydreams by indexing daydreams  planning strategies  and future plans into memory for future use. 
daydreamer is composed of: 
  an emotion component  in which daydreams initiate  and are initiated by  emotional states arising from goal outcomes  dyer  1  and personality traits  
  a relaxed planning mechanism  
  a personality model which provides the goals and control goals which guide relaxed planning  
  a dynamic episodic memory of experiences used by relaxed planning  and 
  domain knowledge of interpersonal relations and common everyday occurrences. 
       control goals are postulated to help direct daydreaming. four such goals are common in the transcripts we have examined: 
rationalization  activated by negative emotions resulting from a recalled failure  involves generating reasons for why an out-
come is satisfactory to the daydreamer in order to reduce the negative emotions and maintain self esteem. 
1 e.mueller and m.dyer 
revenge  activated by emotions of anger resulting from a recalled failure caused by another  involves imagining retaliations against that person in order to generate positive emotions. 
failure/success reversal  activated upon recall of a goal failure or success  involves altering reality by imagining scenarios in which failures were prevented or in which successes failed to come about in order to learn future planning strategies. 
preparation  activated upon recall of an event planned for the future  involves generating hypothetical future scenarios in order to learn planning strategies and/or specific actions to be used in possible future situations. 
       once a control goal is activated  the relaxed planner selects and executes a plan to achieve that control goal. plans for achieving control goals may often be captured by plot units  lehnert  1 . one plan for rationalization is expressed by the mixed blessing plot unit  which represents the abstract situation of a goal success leading to the failure of another goal. this plan is employed in daydream1 in order to achieve the rationalization control goal activated by the emotion of disappointment resulting from being rejected by the actress. here the mixed blessing plot unit is realized as a fantasy in which dating the actress leads to eventual failure of the relationship and the daydreamer's career. another plan for rationalization is captured by the success born of adversity plot unit  which represents the abstract situation of a goal failure leading inadvertently to the success of another goal. here we could imagine a daydream in which  as a result of being turned down  the daydreamer imagines drowning his sorrows at a bar and by chance meeting a more beautiful actress. 
     realization of plans for achieving control goals expressed as plot units may be simplified through reminding of appropriate episodes indexed by those plot units. for examle  in daydream1 a revenge control goal is first activated y anger toward the actress. a plan for revenge is captured by the retaliation plot unit  which represents the abstract situation of a person a achieving a positive outcome by causing a negative outcome for b  where b had originally caused a negative outcome for a. next  the retaliation plot unit along with other indices such as  rejection  might retrieve a vicarious episode such as the following: 
sarah applied to yale for graduate school but was rejected to she went somewhere else. years later she won the nobel prise. then when yale tried to recruit her as a professor  she spitefully turned them down. 
this episode may now be adapted through analogy to the situation of daydream1 in order to achieve the active revenge control goal. 
vii. current status and future work 
       a prototype of the daydreamer program has been constructed using gate  mueller & zernik  1   an integrated set of graphical artificial intelligence development tools for the t language  rees  adams  & meehan  1   a dialect of scheme running on apollo domain workstations. daydreamer currently 1  participates in nuart-
episode by receiving and performing actions in response to input phrases such as 'you accidentally meet your favorite actress at the nuart theater1 and 'she turns you down'  1  indexes the episode into memory under the denied request plot unit  1  generates versions of daydreaml  daydream1  daydream1  and daydream1 in simplified 
english  indexing the daydreams into memory via plot units and emotions  and indexing into memory the planning strategy formed during daydream1  i.e.  not to forget to ask for someone's telephone number  and 1  participates in another episode in which it demonstrates that it has learned the above planning strategy. the computational theory of daydreaming which we are developing and the daydreamer program are described in greater detail in  mueller & dyer  1 . 
       future plans call for the extension of daydreamer to enable it to 1  participate in a larger variety of input episodes  1  generate more daydreams in response to each episode  1  incorporate many daydreams  planning strategies  and future plans into memory  and 1  demonstrate the use of recalled daydreams  planning strategies  and future plans in future internal  daydreaming  and external behavior. we intend for daydreamer to be able to daydream continuously  stopping only to receive new experiences. 
viii. conclusions 
       the functions of daydreaming and a computational theory of daydreaming are being implemented and tested in the daydreamer computer program. we have argued that  far from being a useless epiphenomenon  daydreaming serves an important cognitive role in supporting creativity  future planning and rehearsal  learning from failures and successes  and emotion modification and motivation. truly intelligent computers should not be idle when left unemployed by their users  but daydreaming like ourselves. 
