 
even though logic has played an important role in knowledge representation  kr  research  there has been little effort expended on devising decidable logics for kr. most modifications to logic suggested for kr are either extensions to first-order logic  e.g.  to handle non-monotonicity  or ad hoc changes in its inference mechanism. this paper presents a variant of first-order relevance logic that has a decidable algorithm for determining tautological entailment. although this logic is considerably weaker than standard first-order logic  it can be used effectively in a kr system when semantically correct answers to queries are required within a finite amount of time. 
knowledge representation has always played a major role in 
artificial intelligence research. however  the exact nature of that role has been left undefined. so-called knowledge representation  kr  systems can range from packages for manipulating data structures to complete ai systems that plan or do resource management. the view of kr used here  similar to that espoused in  levesque  1a   is that a kr system is to provide a fact management service. that is  the job of a kr system is to manage a 
knowledge base  kb  in some representation language  including both syntax and semantics  and to answer questions about what semantically follows from the current kb.1 an important part of this view  when applied to kr  is that the kr system must not only be sound  it must also be complete. this means that every answer given by the system  including  answering'' 'unknown' or even refusing to answer  must be sanctioned by the semantics. one important effect of this formulation is that the behavior of the kr system cannot depend on extra-linguistic considerations  such as length of derivations or elapsed time. 
   the main problem in this formulation of kr is to select or create a suitable representation language  with an appropriate semantics. there are several properties desirable in such a language. first  the language should have expressive power sufficient to represent many situations. second  the semantics should correspond to our intuitive notions about the meanings of the constructs of the language. third  there should be a decidable and  moreover  reasonably fast procedure for computing whether some statement follows from a kb. 
   obviously a representation language in which it is impossible to formulate many problem definitions and questions is inadequate. however  frame-based kr systems  as popular as they are  suffer from just this inability. the kind of language typically used in such systems cannot adequately express most disjunctions or similar weak statements  which are required in many contexts. this shortcoming has often been sidestepped by adding extralinguistic hooks to frame-based systems such as user-definable procedures that perform some part of the inference process. such actions destroy the semantics of the representation language and 
1 this is in accordance with the view expounded by mcdermott  mcdermott  
1  and  more recently  by frisch  frisch  1 . however  most current kr systems do not satisfy this view. 
therefore systems that resort to such subterfuges do not satisfy the view of kr espoused here. 
   it is generally accepted in kr that the expressive power of at least standard first-order logic  fol  is needed in a representation language. fol itself is a good candidate because it has a semantics that corresponds well with our intuitive ideas about the world. unfortunately  this logic has a severe problem- determining whether one sentence follows from another is  in general  undecidable. this makes a kr system built on fol unsuitable for ai systems that depend on receiving answers. 
this problem with fol has led to many attempts to create 
kr systems based on fol that always produce answers. most of these systems retain the syntax of fol while modifying its inferences in some way. the crudest of them simply take a theorem prover for fol and place some ad hoc restrictions on it  such as terminating the search for a proof after a pre-set amount of time or a certain number of proof steps. such modifications produce systems that cannot be given an adequate semantics and have no means of completely characterizing answers except by referring to the actions of the modified theorem prover. this destroys most of the advantages of using logic in the first place. 
   a more principled approach is to devise a semantics for firstorder sentences that can model something like these limitations on inferences. for example  konolige's system  konolige  1  includes a bet of inference rules in the model structure and frisch and allen  frisch and allen  1  encode a variant of first-order logic back into fol  thus capturing a particular set of inferences. such systems have been characterised in  levesque  1b  as syntactic variants because their semantic structures have to include syntactic entities. because their semantics is used to model the inference process  every choice of how this process proceeds shows up in the semantics. this makes for a very complicated semantics which only reflects the inference process and does not give any guidance as to what the correct inferences should be. 
   what is needed is a semantics that does not involve the inference process but is instead based on the usual model theoretic ideas of interpretations and truth and falsity  thus allowing the semantics to dictate the correct inferences as opposed to vice versa. this semantics must correspond with some part of our intuitions about the world while also having decidable inference. it should also be weaker than fol so that all reasoning in it is sound with respect to fol. the semantics might not be as intuitive as that of fol but the idea is to develop a semantics that captures part of our intuitions and trade off whatever is lost for decidability and  hopefully  tractability of inference. 
	i 	relevance logic 
   one possible logic for this purpose is the logic of tautological entailments-a simple type of propositional relevance logic  anderson and belnap  1 . propositional tautological entailment has been used by levesque  levesque  1b  to model explicit propositional belief. relevance logic has also been used by shapiro  shapiro and wand  1  as part of a semantic network 
   
1 	p. patel-schneider 

   
	p. patel-schneider 	1 

1 	p. patel-schneider 
a/.  1 . a wrinkle in developing terminological reasoners for 
   
	i l l 	conclusion 
   so what has been gained from this new logic  in essence  the logic provides a decidable subset of implication that does not contain any of the harder types of inference. it does not have the rule of modus ponens so no chaining can be done. it also does not do reasoning by contradiction or reasoning by cases. what is provided is a simple set of inferences  derived directly from the semantics  that performs retrieval of first-order sentences from a knowledge base specified as first-order sentences  much as database systems perform retrieval of facts from a database. many inferences are not provided but this is the price that must be paid to guarantee decidability. 
   this decidability of entailment is not the only feature of the logic that makes it suitable for use in a kr system  although it is the most important one. the syntax of the logic is the same as that of fol so  in some sense  it is possible to state in the new logic anything that can be stated in fol. also  because a subset of implication is provided  knowledge-based systems can treat sentences as sentences of fol provided that they realise that the inferences provided are not complete. further  since the semantics of the logic is closely related to regular first-order relevance logic semantics  the logic does not suffer from some of the problems and paradoxes of implication. finally  the semantics is firmly based on the usual model theoretic ideas of truth and falsity and serves to dictate the allowable inferences and not vice versa. this allows a simple characterisation of entailment in terms of the truth of sentences. together these points make the logic more suitable for kr than systems built by ad hoc modifications to a theorem prover or systems based on a particular set of inferences  and otherwise semantically unmotivated . 
   however  the logic presented above is simply the start of work on a decidable first-order logic-based kr system. although this logic  especially t-entailment  has many of the right properties required for such a system there may be stronger logics that retain decidability. for example  there are stronger versions of relevance logic that might be used as the basis of such a logic. the search for such a logic is  of course  aided by this demonstration of one logic meeting the requirements. 
   one way to strengthen the logic developed here without destroying decidability is by adding to it a terminological reasoner like the terminological component of krypton  brachman et al.  1 . to do this correctly would require building a full semantics for the combination of terminological reasoning and t-entailment  perhaps similar to the semantics in  brachman et this new logic is determining which language to use. as shown in  brachman and levebque  1   terminological reasoning can be computationally intractable for even very simple terminological languages under standard semantics. if the kr system as a whole is to perform adequately  the terminological component must be tractable. one possibility for producing tractable terminological reasoners is to perform the same sort of reduction on the terminological component as the logic devised here does on the assertional component. this would produce a semantics of frame subsumption that only catches the easy subsumptions and leaves the hard and time-consuming ones out. 
   any kr system based on this new logic is going to be quite weak. one way of making such a system stronger is to make entailment be only the first method for answering questions. if entailment fails to produce an answer then a stronger method could be used  perhaps some domain specific method. the advantage of this is that entailment is a semantically motivated and well-defined notion so that it is possible to understand what its failure to produce an answer means. an interesting idea for the fall-back method is to use a stronger logical system. a first idea for such a fall-back is  of course  fol  but other logics  such as regular first-order tautological entailment  could be used. 
   in summary  the decidable first-order logic presented here forms an important first step toward building decidable semantically-motivated kr systems. 
