 
     counterfactuals arc a form of commonsense non-monotonic inference that has been of long-term interest to philosophers. in this paper  we begin by describing some of the impact counterfactuals can be exported to have in artificial intelligence  and by reviewing briefly some of the philosophical conclusions which have been drawn about them. philosophers have noted that the content of any particular counterfactual is in part context-dependent; we present a formal description of counterfactuals that is formally identical to the  possible worlds  interpretation due to david lewis and which allows us to encode this contextdependent information clearly in the choice of a sublanguage of the logical language in which we are working. finally  we examine the application of our ideas in the domain of automated diagnosis of hardware faults. 
뫫1. introduction 
     a counter factual is a statement such as   if p  then q  where p is expected to be false. typical examples are   if the electricity hadn't failed  dinner would have been ready on time   or  if the bedroom door were open  i could get the widget i left in there.  
     from the point of view of logical semantics  counterfactuals arc always true. thin is in contrast with our intuitive understanding of their content  which might well accept the statements in the last paragraph while rejecting  for example   if the power hadn't failed  pigs would fly.  
     indeed  the distinction between true and false counterfactuals seems to underly much of our use of knowledge. when planning the solution to a complicated problem  we reduce it to subproblems by realizing that we can prove a counterfactual of the form   if only thus-and-so were true  t would be able to solve the original problem.  the original problem reduces to proving the couuterfactual  in some suitable sense  and to arranging for thus-and-so to be true. 
       consider the problem of crossing a river if the only boat available has no oars. the countcrfactual   if i had some oars  i'd be able to cross the river   suggests replacing the original problem with that of finding something 
     research supported by the office of naval rescrach under grant number n1-k-1. 
with which to row. this is a fairly general phenomenon: counterfactuals suggest goal regressions. 
     counterfactuals also enable us to describe why plans fail. the example we have already mentioned   if the electricity hadn't failed  dinner would have been ready on time   is typical. the electricity did fail. but in spite of its lack of logical content  the statement does explain why the soup isn't ready. 
     dave smith has pointed out that additional applications can be found in the area of design. suppose that a machine contains an on-line representation of the design of a complex device. questions of the form   if i were to remove the pullup resistor connected to the output of the or gate  would the output of the circuit change   are countcrfactual in nature. 
     diagnosis is similar. the couuterfactual   if the device fails in this fashion  the and gate is not functioning   allows us to reason directly from the intended description of the design of the device in question  as opposed to reasoning from a description that explicitly allows for the failure of some component  as in . we will also see that the nature of countcrfactual implication is also such as to subsume the minimal fault assumption. 
     finally  counterfactuals will necessarily play a part in natural language understanding. the extent to which they pervade our communications makes it inevitable that we will eventually need a formal description of them. 
     there is also a very loose connection between counterfactuals and causality. in the planning examples we have given  the countcrfactual  if p  then q  corresponds to  -ip is a cause for -q  the electricity failure is the cause of the lateness of the dinner. the lack of oars prevents us from crossing the river. 
this connection cannot be pushed too far  however. 
suppose that after a mycin run   we want to know why the machine asked that a certain clinical test be taken. the response is that   if the result had been positive  the organism would have been rodlike.  this is a useful countcrfactual  but the causal connection is from the conclusion to the premise  as opposed to the reverse. 
     an example where there is no causal connection at all can be found in . suppose that olga attends a certain party  but that boris  who is trying to avoid olga  does not. if olga has no similar aversion to boris  we would have that    even  if boris had come  olga would  still  
have come.  here  the counterfactual describes the lack of a causal connection. 
     my aim in this paper is twofold  firstly  1 would like to describe briefly some of the existing philosophical work that has been done on counterfactuals  although with an eye toward eventual applications in artificial intelligence. secondly  1 will present a formal description of counterfactuals that is precise enough to admit a machine implementation. 
뫫1. properties of counterfactuals 
     in his excellent book on counterfactuals  lewis  clarifies the distinction between counterfactuals and standard logical implications by listing some of the properties that distinguish them. the results of this section are not new  but may be unfamiliar to an ai audience. a fairly complete treatment of this topic can also be found in . 
모모모contraposition is not necessarily valid for counter/actuals. if we denote the counterfactual   if p  then q  by  we cannot conclude  returning to our power failure example  it may well be the case that if the power hadn't failed  dinner would have been on time: the power didn't fail  dinner was on time. 
it does not follow from this that the electricity would have failed if dinner had been late-there may well be an alternative possible cause  such as tardiness on the part of the chef. 
     counterfactuals arc not necessarily transitive. from  we cannot necessarily conclude the standard example is due to stalnaker  1j: 
     if j. edgar hoover had been bom a russian  then he would have been a communist  and 
     if he had been a communist  he would have been a traitor 
do not together imply 
     //' hoover had been horn a russian  he would have been a traitor  
     finally  counterfactuals arc non-mono tonic. given  we cannot necessarily conclude in fact  
it is possible to have 	and m 	the two state-
ments   if the electricity hadn't failed  dinner would have been ready on time   and  if the electricity hadn't failed  but 1 had been elected president  dinner would have been late   are completely consistent. 
     glymour and thomason  seem to infer from this last observation that the study of non-monotonic inference generally can be subsumed to some extent under an investigation of counterfactuals  but in light of the breadth of the non-monotonic nature of commonsense reasoning  the frame problem  default rides  etc.   this seems to me to 
	m. ginsberg 	1 
miss the mark. counterfactuals in fact seem to be a distinct type of non-monotonic reasoning. 
뫫1. possible worlds 
     following an idea of stainaker's   most modern investigations of counterfactuals arc based on the notion of possible worlds. loosely speaking  we analyze a counterfactual  by considering the  possible world  that is as similar to our  real  world as possible  given that p is true in it. the counterfactual is true or not depending upon whether or not q holds in this world. 
모모모lewis  has observed that this  most similar possible world  may not be unique. he defines a counterfactual to be true if and only if it holds uniformly in the most similar possible worlds in which the premise holds. 
     this distinction is apparent if we consider the law of the counterfactual excluded middle: 

in stalnaker's view  either q or - q will hold in the nearest possible world where p holds  so that the disjunction above will be valid. lewis points out that this may not be the case by examining the counterfactuals   if bizet and verdi had been compatriots  bizet would have been italian   and   if bizet and verdi had been compatriots  bizet would not have been italian.  both of these appear to be invalid. 
     it is possible to understand the discussion of section 1 in terms of possible worlds; we will discuss only the nonmonotonic nature of counterfactuals here. the other two properties described earlier arc similar. 
	the basic reason that 	and 	are con-
sistent is that worlds where similar to our own than worlds where p alone holds. it is entirely possible that  holds uniformly in the nearest of the p-worlds while  holds uniformly in the  more distant  nearest of the p a  /-worlds. it is also possible that holds in some of the nearest of the worlds while holds in others. in this case we would have only and 

     returning to our power failure example  the nearest possible worlds in which the power remained on are worlds in which dinner was ready on time. in the nearest of the  much  more distant worlds where 1 was elected president  dinner was late. in still more distant worlds  such as those where the power remained on and i was elected president  but no one bothered to inform me  dinner will once again be prompt. 
뫫1. framework 
     from an ai perspective  the difficulty with the possible worlds interpretation of counterfactuals is that the notion of  similarity  is too vaguely defined. our main 
1 	m. ginsberg 
intention in this paper is to present a sharper definition of it. 
     intuitively  there are at least two measures of the similarity  or lack thereof  between different possible worlds. these correspond loosely to the number of propositions whose truth values change and to the relative importance of the propositions involved. 
     the latter is the most difficult to understand in any formal sense  since  as we will see in the next section  it is fundamentally dependent upon context. in fact  we will be able to do little more than to provide a way to encode information concerning the relative importance of the propositions being considered. it is of some interest to note that the scheme we will present can be used to define a notion of similarity that is unchanged from one possible world to another. 
     the other source of similarity is more syntactic. if the truth value of a proposition changes unnecessarily  in the sense that the possible world without the change is consistent  the possible world which incorporates the change should be deemed  more distant  from our own than the one which doesn't. 
     in order to understand this  we will work in a logical system that allows us to assign to a proposition the truth value  unknown   u  in addition to the more usual ones of  true   t  or  false   / . we therefore let  be the set of allowable truth values  take l to be the set of sentences in our language  and define a truth function to be a mapping 
intuitively  if we are uncertain as to the truth or falsity of p. 
     we will say that a truth function   is an extension of a truth function writing if  for all 
                   we will call  f  a simple extension if for only a single 
     we will also assume that we have some way of determining whether or not a truth function is consistent. in the predicate calculus case upon which we are modelling our analysis  however  the truth value of a compound sentence is defined recursively in terms of the truth values of its components; furthermore  the definition only applies if the truth values of these components are t or /  as opposed to it . the  consistent  assignment of the truth values t or 
/ to all of the sentences in l constitutes an interpretation forl. 
   this leads us to define a truth function  to be an interpretation 	if 	for all 	if a truth function is an interpretation that is an extension of the truth function 	we will say that 	is a complete extension of 
모모assuming that consistency is defined as a primitive for interpretations  we will say that a truth function  is consistent 	iff  has a consistent complete extension.-
     here are some examples. in the first two cases  is a consistent complete extension of . since  in the third case has no consistent complete extension  it is inconsistent. 

lemma 1. no extension of an inconsistent truth function is consistent. 
proof. the consistent complete extension of such an extension would be a consistent complete extension of the original  inconsistent  truth function. a 
equivalently  any truth function with a consistent extension is consistent. 


     related to the notion of closure is that of reduction: a truth function  will be called reduced if all of its simple extensions arc consistent. the idea is that a simple extension of corresponds to the acquisition of more knowledge about some specific proposition; if every such extension is consistent  the original truth function must have been minimal in the sense that it had no extensions which were  necessary  consequences of it. 
l e m m a 1. a consistent truth function is reduced if and only if it closed. 
proof. for any 	if 	and 	is reduced  
the truth function obtained by replacing with t  respectively /  is consistent and therefore has a consistent 

	m.ginsberg 	1 

1 	m. ginsberg 
뫫1. e x a m p l e : diagnosis 


theorem 1. with the above definition  our construction is formally identical to lewis* possible world interpretation. 
proof. see 	. 	a 

1 setting 
     genesercth has proposed  that it is possible for machines to be used in automated diagnosis  provided that the machines are given both a design for the device in question  and the ability to manipulate the device by varying its inputs and observing the results. he investigates the diagnosis of a full adder  top of next page  in considerable detail. 
     genesereth describes the design of the full adder in a variant of prefix predicate calculus. quoting him: 
sd1: 
sd1: sd1: sd1: sd1: 
sd1: sd1: sd1: 
sd1: 
sd1: 
sd1: 
sd1: sd1: sd1: sd1: sd1: sd1:  xorg xi   xorg x1  
 avndg a1  
 andg a1  
 org 1  
 conn  in 1 f1   conn  in 1 fl   conn  in 1 fl   conn  in 1 fl  
 conn  in 1 fl  
 conn  in 1 fl  
 conn  out 1 x1   conn  out 1 x1   conn  out 1 al  
 conn  out 1 a1  
 conn  out 1 x1  
 conn  out 1   in 1 x1   
 in 1 al    in 1 x1   
 in 1 a1   
 in 1 x1   
 in 1 a1   
 in 1 x1    in 1 a1   
 in 1    in 1   
 out 1 f l     
 out 1 fl   these axioms describe the structural description of the full adder. sd1  for example  states that x1 is an exclusive-or gate. sd 1 states that the first output of x1 is connected to the second input of a1. 
     cenesercth also states in a similar form results describing the behavior of the various sorts of gates  and describing what it means for two points in the circuit to be connected. using these additional axioms  it is possible to prove that if  for example  the first input to the full adder is on while the other two arc off  the first output should be on while the second should be off. 
1 diagnosis using predicate calculus 
     the situation of interest  of course  is that in which the outputs of the adder arc not as predicted by the design. 
gcnesercth assumes that we have: 
ac1:  val  in 1 fl  on  ac1:  val  in 1 fl  off  ac1:  val  in 1 fl  off  obi:  val  out 1 fl  off  1:  val  out 1 fl  off  
m. ginsberg 1 

a full adder is essentially a one bit adder with carry in and carry out  and it is usually used as one of n elements in an n bit adder. a graphical representation of its design is given  above . it has three inputs and two outputs and consists of two  xor  gates  x1 and x1   two  and  gates  al and a1   and an  or  gate  ol  ... in normal operation  the first output  the  sum  line  is  on  if and only if an odd number of inputs is  on ; the second output  the  carry  line  is  on  if and only if at least two inputs are  on .  

in other words  the values of the three inputs to the adder are as described at the end of the last subsection  but both of the outputs are off. 
     the observed behavior characterized by ob1 ob1 is inconsistent with the design given by sd1 sd1 and the inputs ac1-ac1. diagnosis is a matter of resolving this inconsistency. 
to do so using predicate calculus  gcnesereth assumes 
 correctly!  that the device in question does not satisfy the design description given earlier  but instead satisfies some weaker  device assumptions . in the example we are considering  he assumes that: 
 1  the connections are all as described in the design  and 
 1  at most one of the gates is broken  the single fault assumption . 
these device assumptions can be encoded by replacing the structural description axioms sd1-sd1 with axioms such as: 
 if  not  xorg x1    and 	 xorg x1   andg al  
 andg a1   org 1    
     these new axioms are consistent with the observed behavior of the adder  and lead to the conclusions that 
	 or  not  xorg x1    not  xorg x1    	 1  
and 
	 and  andg al   andg a1   org ol . 	 1l  
in other words  one of the exclusive-or gates is broken  and the remaining components arc functioning satisfactorily. 
the information about the functionality of the and and 
or gates is useful because it enables us to generate a test to determine which of the two exclusivc-or gates is in fact faulty. 
     the difficulty with this approach is that it requires us to generate device assumptions to replace the structural description sd1-sd1. it is possible that the fatilt s  in the device are such that these assumptions are invalid  in which case the system will be unable to diagnose the device without a replacement set of device assumptions. 
1 diagnosis using counterfactuals 
     the device assumptions in the last subsection were introduced to encode our belief that the wiring in the adder was correct  and to enable us to take advantage of the simplifying assumption that only one of the remaining components was damaged. both of these conditions can be recast naturally in the framework of counterfactuals. 
     to perform the diagnosis using the methods we have presented  we will assume the structural description ds1ds1 and the inputs achieved by a c l ac1  and examine the count erf actual consequences of the observed outputs ob1-ob1. there are three possible explanations for the fault: 
 j  one or more of the components is faulty. 
 1  the wiring is faulty. 
 1  the inputs were not as expected. 
we eliminate all but the first from our countcrfactual reasoning by including only the component assumptions sd1sd1 in our restricted language v. the wiring and input 

1 m. ginsberg assumptions sd1 -sd1 and ac1-ac1 are therefore assumed to be independent of the counterfactual assumptions corresponding to the observed misbehavior of the device. 
     the conclusion  1  that one of the two exclusive-or gates must be faulty is in fact a logical consequence of the behavior of the device: 

meanwhile  because the remaining components need not be contributing to the observed fault  their continued performance is counterfactually implied by the observed behavior: 

     this reappearance of  1  is especially useful. because of the non-monotonic nature of countcrfactual reasoning  it is of course possible that additional observations appended to the lefthand side of the above equation will invalidate its conclusion; this will happen whenever the single fault assumption is violated. in this case  however  rather than generating a contradiction  the counterfactual analysis will automatically produce a new diagnosis which once again involves failure for a minimal set of components. 
     it is possible  however  for a counterfactual analysis to suggest a violation of the single fault assumption when one is not required. if the observed behavior can be explained either by the failure of a single component  or by the failure of a pair of different components  both will be proposed. there is nothing counterintuitive about this  however-it is quite normal to assume that a group of normally undependable components has failed before questioning a single part of proven reliability. in any event  we can if necessary retain the single fault assumption by using it to select among the possible *s in the counterfactual construction itself. 
뫫1. conclusion 
     our aim in this paper has been to present a formal description of counterfactuals  describing them in terms of existing logical operators instead of following the usual practice of developing a  countcrfactual calculus  to describe their behavior. 
     the construction we have presented seems to meet this objective. it has indeed described coun terfactuals in terms of existing logical primitives  and reduces to the  possible worlds  interpretation of counterfactuals that is accepted by philosophers. 
     our construction also distinguishes clearly between the context dependent and context independent features of countcrfactual implication. it provides us with a precise method for selecting those aspects of our world which are to be considered inviolable even under a counterfactual assumption; having made such a choice  we proceed to generate possible worlds which respect it. 
     the biggest difficulty with the approach we have described is the rather heavy-handed nature of the choice described in the last paragraph. although it is possible to clearly recognize ambiguities remaining in the analysis of any particular counterfactual  they correspond to the choice of   in our construction   we have no method for choosing consistently between them. in any specific implementation  it will of course be possible to select a    when one is needed  but we have not considered the nature of the formalism that should govern this choice. 
acknowledgement 
     a preliminary version of this research was presented to mugs at stanford  and the author would like to thank the participants in that seminar for their useful comments on this work. mike genesereth and dave smith were especially helpful. 
