ion in the plan can influence not only the more specific levels that it dominates  but can also suggest opportunities to more abstract levels. thus  for example  upon planning to go to the store to buy milk  the planner will notice that another of its currently active goals is to buy eggs. it will then plan to buy both milk and eggs at the store.  hobbs  1  has pointed out the influence of something akin to this form of opportunism in conversational behavior.  
　　however  their model only exploits opportunities that arise while planning  not while executing plans. thus  new goals cannot be formed as a result of noticing opportunities to achieve them. the difference between these two varieties of 
opportunism can be illustrated with another story from the shopping domain. suppose a planner decides to go to the store to buy milk. in the course of executing that plan  while at the store  he notices that eggs are on sale. realising that he will need eggs in the near future  he checks to see whether he has sufficient funds  and if he does  he buys some. 
     wilensky's  1  theory of meta-planning comes closer to satisfying the requirements for full opportunistic behavior. the most salient feature of the theory is its emphasis on goal detection as a central issue in planning and problem solving. that is  a planner must be able to figure out what its goals should be in a given situation. in wilensky's model  the chief application of this ability is in noticing some interaction between several active goals  for example  that two goals are in conflict   and as a result formulating a new goal to deal with that interaction. however  the ability to determine what goals are relevant is crucial to opportunism as well. in order to exploit an opportunity  one must first recognise that it is an opportunity; and to do that  one must realise that the opportunity serves some goal that might be worth achieving. a goal-detection mechanism must therefore be able to suggest relevant goals upon the detection not only of problems  but also of fortuitous opportunities. 
　　after an opportunity is noticed  the next step is clearly to decide whether or not to pursue the opportunity. in actuality  this must be a decision as to whether or not to pursue the goal that the opportunity can further. this in turn depends on what other goals the planner has active  including both previously active goals and those presented by other new opportunities  and of course  the time and resources that will be necessary in order to achieve each of these goals. in other words  much of the effort required for opportunistic planning must be devoted to reasoning about goals: their desirability  their cost  and their interactions. 
     the application of these ideas to planning in arguments requires identifying argument goals  and strategies that choose among several possible goals. a very simple example of such a strategy might be to always exploit an opportunity to attack an erroneous factual claim of your opponent's. this strategy would be cheap to use  because most such opportunities would arise during the attempt to understand the erroneous claim. thus  the work of determining that the claim was false  and why  would already have been accomplished. because it is cheap  it would easily satisfy the general imperative of responding to your opponent's last utterance in a relevant way. if effectively pursued  the strategy would satisfy the goal of casting doubt on your opponent's credibility  and adding to your own. in this respect the strategy is quite aggressive. but in another sense  the strategy is rather passive: it would allow your opponent to set the agenda by making provocative claims. thus  the unconditional use of this rule would reflect a decision  whether explicit or not  to set a higher priority on the goal of attacking the opponent than on the goal of controlling the topic of discussion. 
conclusions 
　　in this paper  we have seen that conversational behavior  indeed intelligent behavior in general  requires the ability to seize opportunities to satisfy goals. in order to seize an opportunity  a planner must first be able to recognize one. that is  it must be able to recognize when a situation seems to facilitate the achievement of a worthwhile goal. such an opportunistic planner must set its goals not only as a result of planning to achieve previously active  higher-level goals  but also by assessing the goals that its current situation presents opportunities to pursue. 
　　the ability to recognize when a situation offers the fortuitous opportunity to achieve some goal puts a heavy burden on the perceptual  inferential  and memory capabilities a planner uses to understand and assess the situation in which it finds itself. to some extent  this burden can be eased if the planner has a general characterization of the sorts of opportunities that might arise in a given situation. for example  it seems reasonable that  when going to a grocery store  a planner should expect that some items may be on sale  although exactly which items will be unknown. however  in order to notice truly unexpected opportunities  a planner must be able to infer new goals from features of the situation not necessarily related to its currently active goals. this entails a fairly substantial capability for  bottom-up  inference. 
　　the application of these ideas to conversational behavior offers the promise of a model that avoids many of the problems inherent in previous approaches. an opportunistic conversationalist would be able to set conversational goals in part on the basis of what its inferential processing uncovered in the course of understanding the content of the discourse. in particular  this would lead to a less top-down approach to the formation of responses  since the discovery of a potential response would determine which conversational goal to pursue as often as  if not more often than  the reverse. it is also worth noting here that the situations which provide these opportunities for response are themselves the result of the 
	l. birnbaum 	1 
inferential memory processing that constitutes understanding. opportunities exist not just in the world but in our thoughts. 
acknowledgments: i thank mark burstein  gregg collins  natalie dehn  margot flowers  drew mcdermott  rod 
mcguire  and roger schank for useful discussions and for comments on earlier drafts of this paper. this work was supported in part by the defense advanced research projects agency  monitored by the office of naval research under contract n1-k-1. 
