 
the component oriented language comodel for the description of technical systems is presented. it represents technical knowledge by means of functions and geometric properties of components in a uniform way based on a small number of elementary concepts. components together with interactions between components can be composed to aggregates  and a whole technical system is viewed as a big aggregate consisting of a hierarchy of subaggregates. functions and geometric properties of aggregates can be derived from those of the subaggregates. thus  a technical system can be modelled by a set of comodel expressions  and diagnosis and prognosis in the system may be performed by means of these expressions. 
1. introduction 
the first and most well-known expert systems were developed for medical and scientific applications. only since a few years technical applications came in sight. this type of application requires in first place new types of knowledge representation. thus  a number of papers appeared on this topic following the ideas of the basic work of hayes   1  . they deal mainly with the modelling of physical processes going on in technical systems  cf.   1  1  1 1 1 1 . all of them reason about physical processes making use of a qualitative description of physical entities. as possible applications are considered diagnosis and prognosis in technical systems and control of technical processes. 
in our approach we stress attention to the system theoretical principles of knowledge modelling and on the representation of geometric knowledge. on the basis of some principles of the modelling of technical systems  section 1   we give an introduction to the knowledge representation language comodel  section 1 . its main feature is the component oriented description of technical systems and processes covering geometrical and process knowledge by the same means of description. its application will be illustrated by some examples  section 1 . 
1. modelling of technical systems 
the different works on modelling of technical systems mentioned above have in common that they do not describe a technical system globally  rather they start from context independent descriptions of single parts and their functions and try to infer descriptions of aggregates from those of the parts. the descriptions are based on variables  e.g. temperature  pressure  cross-section etc.  values of variables and constraints. forbus  1  1  1   takes the process  causing changes of physical situations  as the basic concept of his description  in de kleer's and brown's approach   1  1   the physical component  whose behavior is characterized by confluences  plays this role  and kuipers' and kassirer's work   1  1  1   is based on  universal  constraints  related to different types of variables. raulefs   1   attaches importance to different degrees of granulation in the qualitative description and to reasoning about time. 
our approach has the following basic features: 
1. component oriented descripton. a technical system is regarded as composed of a finite number of components that correspond to the parts of a real system and can be accumulated to aggregates. 
1. qualitative and quantitative representation of the properties of physical objects. 
1. system theoretical taxonomy for classifying the variety of components and their connections  component types  interaction types . 
1. uniform description of the function and the geometric properties of components. 
with respect to 1. and 1.  our approach is related to that of de kleer and brown and of kuipers and kassirer. component orientation allows modular descriptions of large aggregates  therefore such a description can be easily modified and adapted to other configurations. the behaviour of components and aggregates is defined by means of constraints 

1 	w. dilger and j. kippe 
on physical  properties  or variables. with respect to 1. and 1.  we differ from the works mentioned above. as a consequence of a component oriented approach  the components can and should be classified in a systematic way according to the principles of system engineering. geometric properties of components are of interest in so far as they are essential parts of the behaviour of the components  and for this reason they are described in the same way as the functional properties. 
1. elements op comodel 
in the component oriented description language  comodel  a technical system is viewed as a set of phenomenons  that may be observable by automatic measurement or by human senses. phenomenons can be connected by relations. this results in a network consisting of phenomenons as edges and two types of nodes  called components and interactions  cf. figure 1 . components  interactions and phenomenons are the basic objects of our description language  they are related to the parts of a technical system  the connections of these parts and the observable physical properties in the real world. 
a comodel-description of a real technical system consists of a number of object-definitions  defining the three basic objects and a compound object called aggregate . 
object-def  -  defobj identifier basic-object  * 
basic-object* phenomenon i component i interaction i aggregate 

fig. 1: a sample network. 
a phenomenon is a collection of a finite number of physical properties  combined from a particular point of view. 
phenomenon  - phenomenon-name i 
phenomenon-descr phenomenon-name  - identifier i phenomenon 
phenomenon-descr  -  phenomenon-type  phyprop...   * 
phenomenon-type  - phenomenon-name 
a physical property is a part of a phenomenon. it may be observable or not. 
phyprop  -  phyprop-name phyprop-type  
a component is an object with a finite number of gates and relations. to each gate a phenomenon is assigned. the gates serve as links between components and interactions. the relations describe connections between values of different physical properties in the gates' phenomenons or define values of physical properties. 
component  - component-name i component-descr component-name  - identifier i component 
component-descr  -  component-type  gate...  
 rel...   
component-type  - component-name 
an interaction is an object with a finite number of gates and relations  like a component. it differs from a component by the fact that its relations cannot define values  i.e. interactions do not have characteristic or intrinsic values. 
interaction  - interaction-name i interaction-descr 
interaction-name  - identifier i 
interaction 
interaction-descr  -  interaction-type  gate...  
 rel...   
interaction-type  - interaction-name 

* preterminal symbols are underlined  there are no further definitions on account of clearness. 

* repetition is symbolized by '...' 
	w. dilger and j. kippe 	1 
fig. 1: the nitric acid cooler. connection of components and interactions results in larger entities called aggregates. in the same way aggregates are combined to form bigger aggregates up to the whole technical system  that can be viewed as one aggregate consisting of a hierarchy of  sub-  aggregates. in order to show the applicability of comodel to describe a broad variety of technical mechanisms we choose two parts of the nitric acid cooler - the heat exchanger as energy flow system and a piston and cylinder  taken from the cooling water pump  which is assumed to be a piston pump  as an gates are parts of components and interactions and are used as links between both. the connection of a component with an interaction by corresponding gates induces identity on the corresponding phenomenons of the gates. 
gate  -  gate-name phenomenon-name  
relationships between physical properties are described by relations. simple relations are equal  unequal  proportional etc. 
senting the taxonomy of system theoretical terms. each object describes some aspects of a part of a real system at a particular level of generality. 
1. sample application of comodel fig. 1: the heat exchanger. example for geometric interactions. 
heat exchanger 
the heat exchanger is an aggregate with four gates  two fluid streams passing through and interchanging heat energy. it can be viewed as constructed of two equal components  each a fluid stream with heat energy flowing off or flowing to  cf. figure 1 . therefore  such a component is an object with three gates  two fluid streams  and one energy stream  cf. figure 1 . 
in the definition of phenomenons  components  interactions and aggregates one may refer either to build-in types  phenomenon  component  interaction  aggregate  or to user-defined objects  symbolized by the preterminal symbol identifier . these objects form a hierarchy repre-
as a paradigm for the representation of technical systems we take the nitric acid cooler of lapp/powers   shown in figure 1. the function of this process is to cool a hot nitric acid stream before reacting it with benzene to form nitrobenzene. one top event for the system is a high temperature in the nitric acid reactor feed  since this could cause a reactor runaway. 
fig. 1: the heat exchanger component. 

1 	w. dilger and j. kippe 
the relevant physical properties  flow direction  temperature  heat stream  are combined to phenomenons. 

the heat exchanger component he is 

the heat exchanger component has three gates: two for the fluid stream  ml  m1  and one for the heat stream  e1 . the fluid stream passes through the gates ml and m1 in opposite directions with respect to the centre of the component  i.e. at one gate it enters the component and at the other it leaves the component. this is stated by the first relation. the other relations define some relationships between the heat stream and the temperature of the fluid stream. the heat stream is proportional to the difference of temperatures  i.e. to the loss or gain of temperature of the fluid stream. if the entrance temperature is greater  less  than the exit-temperature then the heat stream leaves  enters  the component. the average temperature of the fluid stream is equal to the temperature of the heat stream. 
fluid stream and heat stream are described by interactions. 

the interaction fluidstream has two gates  ml  m1 . the relation states that the values of corresponding physical properties occurring at gate ml and gate m1 respectively are equal  except for the values of the flow directions. 

the interaction heatenergy has the two gates 
el and e1. the relations define some relationships between the physical properties included in the phenomenon energyflow occurring at the gates of heatenergy. the difference of the temperatures at both gates determines the heat stream. no heat is lost between both gates  therefore el.q = e1.q. the heat flows from higher to lower temperature  i.e. it enters  leaves  the interaction at e1 if el.t       e1.t. the same holds for gate e1 because of the opposite directions. 
the aggregate heatexchanger  cf. figure 1  consists of two components of type he and one interaction of type heatenergy. the list of gate-pairs define how the constituents of the aggregate are composed  because a gate-pair represents an identification of two gates. for example he1 ist composed with hf by identification of the gates he1.e1 and hf.e1. a pair like  he1.m1 m1  says that gate ml of he1 is  free   i.e. not used for composition  and becomes therefore a gate of the aggregate. the description of the aggregate gates is adapted from the description of the corresponding component gates. 
 defobj heatexchanger 
 aggregate 
  he1 he  he1 he   
  hf heatenergy   
  he1.m1 m1  he1.m1 m1  
 he1.m1 m1  he1.m1 m1  
 he1.e1 hf.e1  
 hf.e1 he1.e1   
	  ml 	materialflow  
 m1 materialflow   m1 materialflow  
 m1 materialflow     

fig. 1: the heat exchanger aggregate. 

fig. 1: piston and cylinder. 
piston and cylinder 
piston and cylinder are the basic elements of the piston pump. they are viewed as two components and modelled by the two objects full cylinder and hollow cylinder  cf. figure 1. the phenomenons join together geometric and kinematic properties. 
 defobj fullcylinderproperties 
 phenomenon 
  r radius  l lengthkv volume  
 fr degrees-of-freedom  
 pos position     
 defobj hollowcylinderproperties 
 phenomenon 
  r radius  l lengthkv volume  
 fr degrees-of-freedom  
 pos position  
 num-bot number-of-bottoms     
	w. dilger and j. kippe 	1 
a hollow body  e.g. a cylinder  can have no bottoms 
 pipe   one bottom  opened can   or two bottoms  closed can . 
the two components are 
 defobj piston 
 fullcylinder 
  p fullcylinderproperties   
  p.r = xr  p.l = xl  
 p.v = ttr l  
 p.fr= trans-fr r  trans-fr l  trans-fr  rot1 r   rot-fr r  rot-fr l  
rot-fr  rot1 r        
 defobj cylinder 
 hollowcylinder 
  c hollowcylinderproperties   
  c.r = xr  c.l = xl  
 c.v= r1l  
 c.fr =  trans-fr r  trans-fr l  trans-fr rot1 r   rot-fr r  rot-fr l  
모모모모rot-fr rot1 r      c.num-bot = 1     
in the definition of piston and cylinder radius  length  degrees of freedom and number of bottoms are bound to particular values   x r   xl  
trans-fr ...  1 . every piston and cylinder has six degrees of freedom: translation along the r-axis  along the l-axis  and along the r-axis after a 1뫢rotation  rotation around the r-axis  around the laxis  and around the r-axis after a 1뫢-rotation. these definitions describe aspects of individual objects from the class of all fuilcylinders and all hollowcylinders respectively  only the values for the position in space are left open. 
the fullcylinder-in-hollowcylinder-interaction describes the geometric relationship  if the full cylinder is put into the hollow cylinder. it creates a new hollow cylinder  called pump chamber  with the length depending on the position of the piston. the piston retains two degrees of freedom in the resulting aggregate  cf. figure 1. 
 defobj fullcylinder-in-hollowcylinder 
 interaction 
  f fullcylinderproperties  
 h hollowcylinderproperties  
 r hollowcylinderproperties   
  r.r = h.r  r.l = f.pos l  -h.pos l   
 r.num-bot = 1  
 f.fr =  trans-fr l  rot-fr l       

1 	w. dilger and j. kippe 
the fullcylinder-in-hollowcylinder-interaction has three gates  f  h  r . it combines the phenomenons fullcylinderproperties and hollowcylinderproperties to form a new phenomenon hollowcylinderproperties. 
gates r and h have the same radius  i.e. the radius of the interaction as a whole depends on the hollowcylinder which it is composed with. a similar relation holds for the length. the number of bottoms is 1. only two degrees of freedom are left: translation along and rotation around the l-axis. the aggregate pumpchamber consists of two components of type cylinder and piston respectively 	and 	one 	interaction 	of 	type fullcylinder-in-hollowcylinder. 	here  the interaction plays a central role. gate fit.r is the gate of the aggregate. the composition of the three constituents is obvious. 
the definition of the aggregate reflects the fact that the behaviour of a pumpchamber can be described mainly by the interaction of a piston and a cylinder. 
 defobj pumpchamber 
 aggregate 
  case cylinder  piston1 piston   
  fit 
fullcylinder-in-hollowcylinder   
  fit.r pc  case.h fit.h  
  piston1.f fit.f     pc hollowcylinderproperties     

fig. 1: the pump chamber aggregate. 
s. conclusion 
comodel is a component oriented approach to the representation of knowledge about technical systems. in our description of comodel we have attached importance to its ability to represent function and geometric properties of components in a uniform way. 
it is our intention to use comodel as a technical description language for expert systems for the area of technical systems  in particular for interpretation of the states of those systems and diagnosis of failures. 
for this purpose a comodel-description represents a model of a technical-system. this model together with process signals should be processed by an inference engine. at this point additional heuristic knowledge about symptoms of defects as well as strategies for the search for interpretation and diagnosis is needed. 
