* 
　　　this paper describes how grammars of native languages can be used is tutoring systems to facilitate instruction in a second language. the grammar functions as a user model  which enables the system to customise its responses by addressing problems that may be due to interference from the native language. its correction strategy is based upoa comparison of the native language model with a model of the target language. the problems and solutions presented in this paper are related to the more general question of how modelling previous knowledge facilitates instruction in a new skill. 
1 . i n t r o d u c t i o n 
　　　people learning a second laaguage sometimes kave problems that caa be attributed to interference of their native language. this interference shows up in systematic errors in both speech and written text. our concern is with syntax and syntactic interference. we waat to capture a student's knowledge of his/her native grammar that leads to this interference and use it to assist the student in learning that of the second laaguage. 
　　　much research in ai has been devoted to the development of question answering systems  expert systems  and tutorial systems. part of this research has involved enabling these systems to produce more  natural    cooperative  responses  to recognize misconceptions and to provide explanations. one approach to improved interaction has been to incorporate a user model  e.g. |1  1  1 . the claim we make in this paper is that grammars can serve as user models. we address the question of how correspondences between the grammars of two languages can provide an account of syntactic errors made by native speakers of one language attempting to learn a second one. this account can then be used in correcting the student. as aa example of this  we describe a computer tutoring system  vf* which focusses on the acquisition by non-english speakers of english constructions formed from a verb plus particle or verb plus prepositional phrase. 
　　　it has often been claimed that people rely heavily on their previous knowledge when learning a new skill  1  1 . while this previous knowledge caa sometimes help their learning  it caa oftea hinder it as well: halast and moraa  1   for example  describe a case ia which people reasoa incorrectly by analogy from a previous skill. ia learning a second language  one's native language may be a source of both correct and incorrect analogies. thus vf* includes a grammar of the native language in order to detect and correct errors due to incorrect analogy. this grammar also enables vps to explain the differences and similarities ia the verbal constructs of the two languages in focus. 
　*this work is partially supported by nsf grant ist1 and by aro grant daag1-k-1. 
1. our approach to second language 
　　　the fundamental claim of one theory of second laaguage acquisition  the contrastive analysis theory  ca  |1j  is that when people are learning a secoad language l1  the patterns of the language to be learned are matched with those of the native language l1. those that match are fairly easy to learn while those that do not  become more difficult and result in errors. 
　　　the work presented here has been developed along the lines of ca theory. since interference errors reflect differences between the grammar of the student's native language and that of the target laaguage  they are oftea predictable from a contrastive analysis of the two grammars. this work focusses on one problem that appears on the syntactic level of l1 acquisition  that is  the use of the complex construction verb plus preposition/particle  ia the english of non-native speakers.** 
　　　consider the following interaction between a tutorial system for english and a student: 
tutor: 	translate 	the following sentence: 
	e1 penso' 	en viajar 	a 	europa ahora. 
student: he thought in travelling to europe nov. 
tutor: 	incorrect. the correct answer ia 'he thought of travelling to europe now.' or 'he thought about travelling to europe now'. in english  you can use the verb  to think  aa in the following cases: 
- 'there is l i t t l e opportunity to  think out  what the long-tern solution nay be' 
- 'with the beginning of the new day we had to  think  things  over  again' - 'she haa to  think up  a catchy nana for this system' 
　　　the system here provides the correct answer but it fails to recognise that the user has translated directly from spanish.*** it leaves students to determine the relationship between the use of certain structures or patterns ia the new domain  or laaguage  by themselves. here  the tutorial system could have provided a more adequate explanation by informing the user why the error occurred. 
　**note that we are dealing only with second laaguage acquisitioa  aot third or fourth. here the learner generalises only from his/her native language. 
　***by 'direct translation' we mean the most common translation used for a certain word  that is  the first one found when looking up that word ia a dictionary. this is different from the 'corresponding translation' which is the actual translatios of the words and which varies in the context of the sentence. for example  the direct translation of   e n   is   i n   while the corresponding translation of   e n   when used with the verb  pensar     t o think   is   o f   or  about . 

that is  it could have added: 
note that  en  is often translated as  in  in english  but here it is not. 
in order to provide such an explanation  a tutorial system must have some model of the user's knowledge of his/her native language  and of what features might cause interference. this is the point of departure of this work: to see what role learners' familiarity with one language  spanish  plays in their learning a new language  english . 
1 . 1 . user m o d e l in 
　　　instead of having individual user models for each user  has a canonical user model describing the grammar of the native language  in this case spanish. one may argue that there are several dialects of spanish and that the grammar represented in the system does not exactly correspond to the one any particular user has. we have assumed a grammar of standard spanish for this system because the issues it addresses do not focus on idiomatic expressions but on specific language structures which do not show as much idiolectal variation. 
　　　when the student's previous knowledge of a verb-particle or verb-prepositional phrase construction can be seen to interfere with his/her learning new information   has been designed to recognize the error and correct it. consider the following: 
	translate the following sentence 
　　　　　moris penso en comprar un carro. student: moris thought in buying a car. 
 you used the incorrect preposition  in . in english you can use  think of  or  think about  in this sentence. note that 
the direct translation of 
  think of  -- pensar de ~- does not exist in spanish. in english you can also use  think up   an excuse  invent ;  think over   review ;  think out   consider  examine . 
　　　providing this helpful response requires the system to maintain a model of the way verbs and prepositions are paired in both the student's native language  spanish  and in english. for example   pensar en  in spanish translates directly to the english   think in  but corresponds to  think of  or   think about . therefore  a spanish sentence that has  pensar en  translates to english as  think of  or  think about . the same goes for  sonar con  which directly translates to  dream with  but corresponds to the english  dream of  or  dream about . another class of errors come from the fact that a verb in spanish corresponds to a verb with particle in english  as in  recoger  corresponds to  pick up ;  escoger  to  pick out  and so on. thus the student may either forget to include the particle  use a incorrect particle or insert the correct particle in the wrong place. 
　　　the user model in  anticipates the possibility that the student may overlook the differences and use a one-to-one correspondence mechanism. if the student does use this kind of one-to-one correspondence  the user model enables to recognize the error and deal with it in a satisfactory manner. 
1 . t h e v p * s y s t e m 
     presents students with a sequence of spanish sentences to translate into english. after presenting a sentence  the system reads in the student's translation and extracts its verb and preposition  assuming that the translation is grammatical. if the 
	e. schuster 	1 
student misspells a word or provides an answer that the system cannot understand   gives him/her another chance to answer. if the english parse fails due to an incorrect or missing preposition  the system looks at the verb phrase to try to extract the verb  and the preposition  in the case of an incorrect one . in either case  vp* then looks into the user model to obtain information about the spanish verb. from there  it may hypothesize the source of the error. if interference from spanish could be the source of error  the system provides the correct answer along with information that indicates the error is due to this interference. if the system cannot identify the error as one caused by interference  it provides the student with the correct answer and proceeds to the next exercise. 
1 . 1 . i m p l e m e n t a t i o n 
      has been implemented in unh prolog version 1. prolog was chosen as an implementation vehicle because it provides good pattern matching mechanisms and parsing techniques. vp* uses two grammars - one grammar for spanish and one for english. each grammar includes a dictionary and information about the verbs in each language and their associated prepositions. the system also has a table of direct translations of verbs and prepositions. in addition  a parse tree is stored for the correct answers to each exercise. these parse trees are matched against the user's answers in order to locate any errors in those 
　　　     answers. 
     presents the student with spanish sentences to translate into english. for each exercise the system accepts as input the student's english translation  which it attempts to parse using the english grammar. if this attempt fails  then an attempt is made to parse the sentence using spanish grammar rules in order to provide a parse tree for the system to analyze. if this latter attempt also fails  i.e. the translation contains unknown words or misspellings  then allows the student to try again. 
　　　if a parse is obtained  using the english grammar  the system compares it with the stored parse tree for the sentence in order to determine if it is indeed the appropriate translation. if the translation that the student provides can be parsed but it is not the translation of the given sentence  the system allows the student to try again. if the parse has succeeded and corresponds to the stored parse tree   acknowledges the correct translation and offers additional information about the verb and/or preposition in english or spanish. for example  if the student types: 
       translate the following sentence: con 	el viaje. student: i dreaatd of the t r i p . 
the system provides an answer such as: 
correct i 
note that the direct translation of -- dreaa with -does not exist in english. in english you can also use  dream about  in this sentence. 
　　　if the parse does not correspond to the stored parse but it is correct by spanish rules  the system matches the verb phrase from the failed parse against the previously stored correct parse to figure out the differences between the correct stored parse and that of the student's. from this comparison  it finds the wrong prepositions and/or missing particles. if it finds an incorrect preposition with a correct verb  it looks up the direct spanish translation of the incorrect preposition. for example  if in the previous example the 
　**** for now  we have chosen to store these parse trees because the system only has a few exercises. if the system is expanded to work with a larger number of exercises  we will allow the system to generate the correct parse trees instead of having them stored. 
1 	e. schuster 
student typed: 
i dreamed with the t r i p . 
the system obtains the incorrect pair   dream with   looks it up in its table of direct translations nnd finds it to be  sonar con . 
proceed to its user model nnd finds this pnir in it. therefore it is able to explain the incorrect preposition. it generates an error message indicating the error as being due to interference from spanish. it then goes to the english grammar nnd looks np the correct preposition s  that go with the verb nnd provides the student with more information  e.g. other prepositions thai can be used and so on. for example   provides the student with information about other preposition s  that may be used with a verb: 
in english you can une  dream of  or  drean about  in thin sentence. 
1   p o s s i b l e e x t e n s i o n s 
　　　while has been designed to provide corrective responses in tutoring the use of verb and prepositions in english to spanish speakers  the method presented here of using grammars as user models can be extended to other language features as well. for example  in english  attributive adjectives typically precede the nouns they modify  while in spanish  they typically follow them.***** hence it is common for native spanish speakers to say in english: 
  tht house small   a ear green 
 can be extended to deal with this type of syntactic interference. a second example concerns english question patterns for spanish speakers. since spanish marks subject agreement on verbs  non-emphatic subjects may be deleted. english  however  requires an overt subject which standardly precedes the verb. now  english and spanish have a similar question pattern as in the following: 
	evglish 	spanish 
	it he a student  	es 	un estudiants  
  i t a student   
in english  the auxiliary is moved to the start of the sentence and the subject is required. in spanish  a subject pronoun is not required  there are restrictions on the verbs that use this pattern  and usually both the auxiliary and verb are moved to the beginning of the sentence. thus spanish speakers learning english may have the following problems: they may not place be before he  may omit the subject pronoun  or may use the same pattern with verbs other than be and have.  may deal with these interference problems given the information about spanish question patterns in its user model. 
　　　most importantly  we believe we can generalise this approach. that is  instead of having to hand build special mechanisms for each case  we can derive predictable errors from the grammars themselves  along with a general mechanism for taking the particular difference lending to the current interference error and generating an appropriate response. this is the most challenging direction for research. 
　*****there is a small  closed set of spanish adjectives  e.g. gran  burn  which may also precede the noun  although their use entails some change in semantic referent  1  p. 1 . 
1 . c o n c l u s i o n s 
　　　earlier work has shown that people often rely on their knowledge of one domain when learning a new similar domain. a similar situation seems to be the case for language learning where students learning a second language use much of the knowledge they have of their native language. 
      has addressed the question of how we can represent the knowledge of certain aspects of a language in a computer system and use this knowledge to provide the student of a second language with information tailored to his/her knowledge. in particular  it has focused on the problem of how correspondence of grammars of two languages can provide a sufficient basis for explaining the possible origin of grammatical errors made by native speakers of one language when learning a second one. 
a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s 
　　　i would like to thank bonnie webber  kathy mccoy  and julia hirschberg for their many helpful comments concerning this paper. 
