* 
　an approach is described for developing methods for  data fusion : given how events a & b occurring by themselves influence some measure  estimate the influence  on that measure  of a and b occurring together. an example is  combine the effects of evidence on the belief  likelihood  of some hypothesis.  this approach also deals with the opposite problem of estimating the effects on a measure of a and b by themselves when only their combined effects are known: data fission. the methods developed will both 1  try to make intuitive estimations at information not given  and 1  not conflict with any information given  unless it is inconsistent . 
1. introduction 
　an approach is described for developing methods for  data fusion : given how events a & b occurring by themselves influence some measure  estimate the influence  on that measure  of a and b occurring together. examples include: 1  combine the effects of evidence on the belief  likelihood  of some hypothesis  and 1  combine the effects of pollutants on public hearth measures. the opposite problem of estimating the effects on a measure of a and b by themselves when only their combined effects are known  data fission  is also discussed. 
data fusion problems can be characterized by two properties: 
1. in combining events' influences  a whole range of answers consistent with the given information exists. 
1. often  one or a few intuitive ways exist to combine the influences which tends to  work.  
for example: one wants p a&b   the probability of a and b occurring   but only has p a  and p b . then p a&b  can range from 1  the two are mutually exclusive  to min p a  p b    a implies b or vice-versa . furthermore  given that a & b are 
 typical  events  one might guess that p a&b  - p a p b   a and b are independent  a case between the two extremes . 
past efforts in this area include fuzzy sets and logic   the 
　 this report describes work done st the mit laboratory for computer science. it was supported in part by the national institute of health  under contract # nih-1-hl1. dempster-shafer rule of combination  orthogonal sum    simplified rules of probability in prospector   and the certainty factor idea in mycin . they have concentrated on intuitive methods of combination  figuring rightly that asking people giving knowledge  to the system  to give the effects of every combination of events would be impossible. however  with these efforts  when the  intuitive  method fails on some case  and the correct answer is known  there is no clean way to tell the system. often  one misrepresents some value s  in the system so that when they combine  they more or less give the correct answer. for example  let the mycin interpreter have the two rules 
1. event a is evidence for event c: cf c a  ＊ 1  a positive value indicates evidence in favor  a negative value indicates evidence against . 
1. but  both events a and b occurring is evidence for c not occurring: cf c a&b  =-1. 
now when both a and b occur  both rules will be active  and the net evidence for c will be the two figures added together  1.1 = 1  and not -1  the intended figure. to fix this  one might make cf c a&b =-1. for a further discussion of these systems  see . 
　to avoid this problem  methods for data fusion  and fission  should supply both the intuitive answers for combinations lacking more specific data  and the appropriate answers for known combinations. 
1. general approach 
　the following is a general approach for developing a data fusion/fission system: 
1. determine the form s  of information you and others want to give the system  it should be easy to provide   and the form s  the system should be able to output. 
1. determine the realm of all legal possibilities for combinations of given and requested information. that is  determine when a group of given statements  information  should be considered consistent. 
1. determine a criterion  rule of thumb  to make estimations when information given to the system is not specific  discussed below . 
1. find a specific method  implementation  that: 
a. treats the given information as constraints on the possible results  and reports inconsistencies. 
b. uses the rule of thumb to find the estimate when 

	a. yeh 	1 
the given information is not specific enough to  force  a result. limit the result to one that is consistent with the supplied information. 
c. does not require too much storage. a simple way make all system estimates overridable is to always store an overwritable estimate for each possible 	combination 	of 	events 	to 	be considered. 	however  often an exponential number of such combinations exist. 
a method meeting these criteria 1  provides estimates where precise information is lacking  and 1  permits the use of precise information when it is available. 
these steps may have to be iterated a few times because 1  the information and/or criterion in the first three steps turn out to be not quite what you want  or 1  a specific implementation eludes 
you in step 1. 
 some heuristics for finding a  rule of thumb  in step 1 are the following: 
1. it will 'typically' give the correct answer or something close. if you find such a rule of thumb  this heuristic takes the highest priority. 
1. when given a range of choices  it will tend towards the middle ground  as opposed to the extremes . this way it will not be too far wrong. 
1. it is simple conceptuually  maybe easier to debug and anticipate effects . 
an often applicable rule of thumb for fusion is non interaction between entities. examples include assumptions of independence in probability  and similarly  maximizing entropy  see    and linearity  the total is just the sum of the parts  in many fields. justifications for using this include: 
1. users  people  tend to notice and mention strong interactions 	 such 	as 	a 	causes 	1  	or seeing c indicates not d  etc.   so what tends not to be explicitly given are the noninteractions  
1. it is in the middle between positive and negative interaction  
1. it is more conceptually  simple  than interaction. 
an often applicable rule of thumb for fission is to divide evenly  and as if things did not interact. justifications for the former are 
1. users tend to notice and mention inequities  so what is left tends to be equitably distributed  
1. it is in between favoring any one thing. 
justifications for non interaction are the same as the ones in fusion. 
1 	a. yeh 
lower the storage requirements   describes ways to organize the events to take advantage of forms of independence between them. these forms let one find probabilities involving two or more sets of events jointly from probabilities involving those sets separately. a very simple example: if the events a b are independent from the events d e  then p a b c d =p a b p d e   where a is a or ~a  b is b or ~b  etc. this lets the 1 event distribution be found from two 1 event distributions. 
1. summary 
　an approach for developing flexible data fusion and fission methods is presented. such methods will both 1  try to make intuitive estimations at information not given  and 1  not conflict with any information given  unless it is inconsistent . past work has concentrated on the intuitive estimation for  fusion  aspect  and more or less ignored the nonconflict aspect. an example of using this approach to develop a method for likelihood inference is given. the method has yet to be fully implemented  so doing this  as well as trying the approach on new examples remain as possible work for the future. 
