 
　a good part of medical diagnosis can be modeled as classification problem solver producing a  differential   working in conjunction with an abductive component that performs differential diagnosis by synthesising a  best  composite hypothesis out of the hypotheses in the differential list. classification problem solving itself can be viewed as having a control component which selects hypotheses to consider  and a decision component associated with each selected hypothesis in this paper we study the family of control regimes that are useful in classificatory problem solving. we start with mdx  a 
　classification system organized as a hierarchical collection of hypothesis specialists  critique its control behavior  and by considering a set of situations involving multiple diseases  show how elements can be added to the control regime in a modular way to handle a large variety of situations. 
1. introduction 
　as the field of knowledge-based systems is maturing  a clear movement is taking place from relatively flat and uniform representation systems and associated inference regimes  to an appreciation of the multiplicity of knowledge structures and problem solving types that typically play a role in complex real world tasks  1  1 . there is also an increasing awareness that the problem solving behavior of knowledge-based reasoning systems is best understood at what marr  has called the information processing /eve/  or the knowledge level as it has recently been called by newell . e.g.  at the implementation language level mycin's diagnostic action can be thought of as backwardchaining  while at the information processing level its activity is best understood as a form of classification. in our group we have persistently emphasized the information - processing level analysis of knowledge-based tasks: in   1   we identified certain aspects of medical diagnosis with classification problem solving  and in  we propose a taxonomy of knowledge-based reasoning tasks at the information processing level. clancey  1| has recently taken a similar perspective and shown that a number of knowledge based systems which appear to be doing different kinds of things at the implementation language level  can be in fact seen to be performing variants of the classificatory task. 
　medical diagnostic reasoning is a complex activity  and can be decomposed into a number of different types of problem solving  each with specific kinds of knowledge structures and control regimes. depending upon the subdomain  the basic task may differ considerably: a knowledge-level statement of the tasks 
　*this work has been supported by nsf grant mcs-1  and biomedical computing and information processing training grant nlm 1lm1. 
faced by casnet/glaucoma  or abel   viz.  put together a  causal  story  is bound to be different from those describing tasks faced by mycin  internist or mdx. as a general statement  however  one may say that medical diagnosis is an abductive process. peirce   and following him  pople  have viewed the abductive enterprise as the generation of hypotheses  which  if true  would explain some collection of observed facts. 
　in medicine the diagnostician is presented with a patient who has a set of signs and symptoms  collection of observed facts   and proceeds to reason toward a set of diseases that can account for the observed signs and symptoms  a set of hypotheses that explain the observed facts  
　if a given abductive reasoning task involved the selection of hypotheses from a small set of candidates  then it would be reasonable to directly compare all of the candidates but since the number of potential medical hypotheses is enormous  the medical diagnostic process is observed to consist of two components: 
1. the selection of a limited number of candidate diseases  and 
1. a decision on which members of the candidate set are required to account for patient signs and symptoms. 
the work of feltovich et al  supports such a distinction  and goes on to suggest that much of the difference between novice and expert diagnostic behavior is due to a difference in how the limited set of possibilities is formed  factor 1 above . in medical terminology  step 1 is often called forming the differential while step 1 is called differential diagnosis. 
　classification problem solving is useful in forming the differential. the mdx system  l  1  can in this sense be thought of as forming a differential  since it produces a list of disease classes into which the signs and symptoms of the case can be classified. neomycin uses classification explicitly  and a large part of mycin's work in diagnosis can also be viewed as implicitly classificatory. 
　the mdx approach  while concentrating on the classificatory part  envisaged a component called the overview critic for performing step 1 above. as a result of recent investigation by josephson  et al.  ll  of our group  we now have a first cut theory of how this component should work. the differential diagnosis process is viewed as the process of assembling a composite hypothesis from the list of classificatory hypotheses produced by the classificatory component  such that the composite hypothesis  best explains  all the data. this theory is presented in detail in . 
　the purpose of this paper is to discuss the control issues in the classificatory component of diagnostic reasoning. we will briefly review the mdx approach  discuss the essential aspects of its current control strategy  some of the difficulties faced by it  and discuss extensions to the mdx viewpoint by systematically considering examples of increasing difficulty  especially examples involving multiple diseases. 
1. the mdx approach 
the hallmarks of the mdx approach to date have been 
  a cognitively plausible  hierarchical decomposition of diagnostic domain knowledge into a number of cooperating  classificatory specialists  each representing a diagnostic hypothesis   1| 
  a reliance on the individual specialist's ability to determine on a local basis the applicability of the diagnostic hypothesis  represented by the specialist  to the current case 
 1  1   and 
  an overall control regime callestablish/refine in which classification is begun at the top of the classification hierarchy  and at each step establishes a specialist before going on to refine the specialist by examining less general subordinate specialists . 
figure 1 shows a fragmentary high level level decomposition of medical knowledge. 

	figure 1: 	sample mdx specialist hierarchy 
　suppose that a patient problem consisting of cholestatic liver disease is presented to the mdx-style system in figure 1. the control of the system will proceed in a top down fashion: internist will first establish  then refine itself. the establish step consists of internist utilizing locally available domain knowledge to determine if the patient is sick at all. the refine step consists in internist sending to its subordinate specialists  heart  liver  ...  the composite message  establish/refine . for the hypothesised case  only liver will be established. hence all subordinates to heart  ... will not be considered. the liver specialist  in contrast  will establish and subsequently refine itself. finally  cholestasis will receive an establish/refine message and establish itself. note that when a hypothesis is rejected  all its successors are also rejected: this is the pruning power of hierarchical classification. also  typically  many hypotheses may be 
 suspended ; i.e.  may not have enough data to positively establish them or rule them out. it will be in general combinatorially prohibitive to explore all of them further. 
1. two sets of control issues in classification systems 
　in classification problem solving in the style of mdx  we can see two distinct kinds of control activity: 
1. invocation of different classificatory hypotheses for evaluation.  control issue: what are the potential paths of invocation  and what are the potential tasks that may be requested   we shall refer to this type of control activity as classificatory control. 
1. once a hypothesis is invoked  making decisions about the relevance or applicability of the hypothesis to the case at 
j. sticklen et al. 1 
hand  e.g.  reject  establish  decide what data it can account for  etc.  control issue: what knowledge sources can help in this  and how and when to invoke them   
　for 1 above  the current version of mdx uses a fairly straightforward pattern-matching mechanism using  compiled  knowledge to map from a subset of patient data to qualitative decisions about the hypothesis. but there is no reason why this task cannot use other kinds of knowledge and problem solving such as causal reasoning  or table look up  or resolution theorem proving for that matter.  in fact  the dart system of genesereth et al. does precisely that: its higher level architecture is classificatory  closely following the design component/subcomponent hierarchy  while the presence of a component fault is determined by a theorem prover working with the test values and the axioms that define the component.  thus  how a decision is made within a hypothesis  so to speak  is irrelevant from the point of view of classificatory control  as long as the information that is needed is available after an invoked hypothesis has completed its action. 
　thus the control issues in 1 above are issues intrinsic to classification problem solving  while control issues in decisions within each hypothesis are issues for a different type of problem solving. our concern in this paper is with the former. we call this set of issues classificatory control issues. 
1. classificatory control in mdx 
it is convenient to study control in distributed systems such as 
mdx  which are implemented as a community of specialists which coordinate their work by exchanging messages  by examining the constraints on message channels and the contents of the message types. there is no implication that classificatory problem solving need necessarily be implemented in this way  or that our discussion of control is relevant only for classificatory problem solvers implemented in this way. the message language is merely a convenient device to talk about which hypothesis can invoke which others  requesting or providing which information. 
　classificatory control in mdx was provided by the following elements: 
1. the hypothesis hierarchy sets invocation paths  or message channels  as between parents and children. a hypothesis may invoke its children in order that the corresponding hypotheses may be evaluated for their presence or absence  message types:  establish  and  refine   
or it may invoke its parent reporting on the results of its activity 
	 message type: 	 establishedat  confidence level    . 
1. each hypothesis  after its establishment  may use any knowledge it has to order its successors for invocation. 
this ordering may be based on likelihood  risk  etc. 
1. a hypothesis may also have knowledge corresponding to which hypothesis  one or more levels below its immediate successor  may be considered at that time in order to 
   although the control issues of classification may be viewed independently of the message passing paradigm  at the level of cognitive organisation it is very useful to understand a complex cognitive agent in terms of the interactions of many simpler agents via well constrained message types and communication channels; but this is another issue. 
1 j. sticklen et al. 
increase problem solving efficiency  i.e.  it may use contextdependent suggestion rules. these provide economy of effort by suggesting hypotheses which are highly plausible  but which would not be immediately considered within the purely hierarchical regime. 
 message type: 
	 refine 	 suggest 	 subordinate 	specialis    . 
the introduction of suggestion rules can potentially cause difficulties in control if improperly used. in the hierarchical control regime  when a hypothesis is invoked for the purpose of establishing it  it can be assumed that its parent has been established. this provides a context for its establishment activity. but the suggestion rule mechanism will typically result in the invocation of hypotheses whose parents have not been established  and it is possible that without this context  the establishment activity of the invoked hypothesis will be erroneous. thus the use of the suggestion rule mechanism will need to be restricted to hypotheses that are able to arrive at decisions without significant dependence on the context provided by the parent. 
1. limitations of the mdx control regime 
three kinds of limitations are worth mentioning at this point. 
1 as a classification problem solver  mdx outputs a simple list of disease hypotheses which are considered to be likely as mentioned earlier  the mdx approach is currently being extended to provide a differential diagnosis component  which assembles the best composite hypothesis out of the output list from the classifier using information about what those hypotheses can explain the availability of this abduction component can contribute to better classification problem solving by providing the following control possibilities: 
as mentioned in the section on how mdx works  it is often the case that many hypotheses are suspended; i.e.  there is not enough data to establish or reject them. typically it will be quite prohibitive to  expand  all of the suspended hypotheses by considering their successors in the hopes that they may be able to find data to reject or establish themselves. however  after the assembler has put together a composite hypothesis based on the current output list from the classifier  it can produce a list of manifestations that still remain to be explained.  for how this is done  see .  if this list is empty  the problem is  done . if not  a selection can be made of the suspended hypotheses  on the basis of which of them can potentially explain the remaining unexplained findings  and only this subset need now be further explored. thus the abduction assembly machine and the classifier can work in close collaboration  and the former can provide focus to the classification problem solver. 
1. lack of establish knowledge for some hypotheses: in some domains  the only way to establish or reject a classificatory 
   it may be possible to to tag that part of the establishing knowledge that is needed for context setting of underlying specialists and test it before considering the suggested specialist. in the original mdx implementation   all the specialists in the path towards the suggested specialist were required to establish. 
hypothesis  call it h  is by invoking its successors to see if any of them can be established  or whether all of them can be rejected. this might be either because there simply is no domain knowledge available about h  or because data at the level of h are not available in the case at hand. in the former case  this fact can be explicitly made available in h  which can then be made to invoke its successors 
 ordering them if information for that is available . in the case where data are not available for the case at hand  the hypothesis in question would have been suspended  and the approach in 1 above could be useful. 
1. limitations of hierarchical invocation for multiple diseases: selective communication/invocation outside the hierarchical channels is often needed in the case of multiple diseases  where the decision status of one classificatory hypothesis may be needed for making decisions about another hypothesis. problems of this sort will be discussed in the next sections. they provide some of the most interesting challenges in the control of classification problem solving 
1. cases of multiple patient diseases 
　for purposes of illustration  in this section we will present examples of medical situations in which multiple disease hypotheses are required to fully account for patient data. successful solutions for cases involving multiple disease hypotheses have been difficult to achieve in most medical ai diagnostic systems. 
1. multiple independent diseases 
　referring to figure 1  suppose that a patient has both valvular disease and cholestasis. the output list from mdx of possible patient diseases would contain both valvulardisease and cholestasis  each typically accounting for different findings. thus the control component of mdx responsible for differential formation is adequate for this task. 
1. when one hypothesis needs the establishing status of another - example:  secondary to  diseases 
　consider two classificatory specialists  spl and sp1. many times in order for spl to establish itself  it is useful for the establishing status of sp1 to be available. note that given this situation  it is not necessary for spl to know the detailed problem solving that sp1 used to determine its establishing status; i.e.  how sp1 determined its establishing status. 
　in medicine an example of the control problem posed in the above paragraph takes place when two disease hypotheses stand in a secondary to relation. at a pathophysiological level  there is often an expression of medical knowledge that one disease can either 
1. be caused by another via some disease process  or 
1. is temporally preceded by another statistically. 
in compiled diagnostic knowledge  such a relation between two diseases is called the secondary to relation. although at the compiled level  there will not be any knowledge about how the one disease causes the other  or why there is a statistically significant temporal ordering  still the knowledge that the one is secondary to the other can be useful in diagnosis. in most instances  if a is secondary to b  then knowing that a is established or rejected can directly contribute to a determination of a. 
　in figure 1 we have expanded the diagnostic hierarchy of figure 1 to include one disease hypothesis  cardiacclrrhosis  

that is secondary to another  tricuspidlnsufficiency .* suppose that the original exploration path in a given case was as follows. 
internist -  liver 
-  cirrhosis 
-  cardiac cirrhosis 
the hypothesis cardiaccirrhosis cannot establish unless the hypothesis it is secondary to  tricuspidlnsufficiency  can first establish. 

	figure 1: 	example of  secondary to  hypothesis 
　the inverse relation to secondary to is can have complication. for example  
tricuspidlnsufficiency 	canhave complication cardiaccirrhosis. 
suppose the exploration path of the diagnostic system of figure 1 was 
internist -  heart -  valvulardisease 
-  tricuspidlnsufficiency. 
in this example  the establishing values of either tricuspid insufficiency or of cardiac cirrhosis can have direct bearing on the establishment of the other. 
　in   the problem of a given classificatory specialist needing to know the establishing value of a second specialist is solved by positing a blackboard in which the decision status of hypotheses are written as soon as they are available. the solution also involved parallel invocation of successors of a hypothesis that has been established. thus both of the exploration paths above  viz.  from internist to cardiaccirrhosis and from internist to tricuspid insufficiency would be performed in parallel if the patient had both the diseases. but since tricuspidlnsufticiency can be established independent of cardiaccirrhosis  it will not need to refer to the status of the latter. however the latter hypothesis can obtain from the blackboard the information regarding the status of tricuspidlnsufflciency. if  say  in a particular case heart is ruled out  the rejection of its grandchild  tricuspidlnsufticiency  can also be inferred on the blackboard. 
　in a serial implementation  there will be some problems that would need special attention. if the internist to 
cardiaccirrhosis path had been preferentially pursued  either 
　* medically  cardiac cirrhosis can be secondary to a number of diagnostic alternatives under the heart category. for simplicity here  we will discuss only tricuspid insufficiency. 
j. sticklen et al. 1 
because of a suggestion rule or because liver had a higher ordering than heart as more likely  there would be a need for the other line of exploration to be activated. there are some straightforward ways this can be done  and we forego further discussion of it here. 
　it is also possible to solve this version of the multiple disease situation by explicitly providing an invocation path from cardiaccirrhosis to tricuspidlnsufticiency; i.e.  when the former hypothesis is invoked it checks the status of the latter by directly invoking it  with the message establish. however  this solution requires additional work  since  as in our earlier discussion on suggestion rules  tricuspidlnsufticiency cannot in general use its decision knowledge without knowing that its parent has been established. eventually at some point the heart specialist's establishment status will need to be known. it is fairly straightforward to come up with additional message types to invoke the appropriate chain. 
　to reiterate  although we have motivated this section by explicating the control capabilities necessary to handle the secondary to example  these same elements of control will be needed to cope with any situation in which one diagnostic specialist needs knowledge of the establishing values of other specialists in order to undertake its own establishment. 
1. when reconsideration is called for - example: multiple diseases with additive symptoms 
　in this section  we will consider patient situations that can be successfully explained only by hypothesizing two diseases  each associated with the same patient sign being higher than the normal range or lower than the normal range. for example  again referring to figure 1  suppose that a patient has both cardiac cirrhosis and cholestasis. also assume that cardiac cirrhosis can typically account for an elevation of up to 1 mg/dl of bilirubin in the blood  and that the presence of cholestasis can account for bilirubin in excess of 1 mg/dl. finally  suppose that a blood test of the patient shows 1 mg/dl of bilirubin. 
　a physician's understanding of this case might be captured in outline by: 
1. relying on relevant patient signs and symptoms  it appears likely that the patient has cholestasis. 
1. it also appears likely that the patient has cardiac cirrhosis  although only part of the bilirubin is explainable by the hypothesis of cardiac cirrhosis alone. the problem with not accounting for the total observed bilirubin reduces the overall confidence in this hypothesis somewhat. 
1. but a coherent understanding of the current patient state is that she has both cardiac cirrhosis and cholestasis. by deciding that the patient state is best characterized by these multiple diseases: 
a. the total bilirubin elevation is explained as the sum of contributions associated with cardiac cirrhosis  1 mg/dl  and cholestasis  1 mg/dl   and 
b. the confidence that the patient has cardiac cirrhosis is restored. 
bilirubin is a blood chemical that is cleared by the liver. 
elevated bilirubin is associated with many liver diseases. the medical situation for the example shown is complicated here by the need to do a base line study to determine how much bilirubin can be accounted for by cardiac cirrhosis. for simplicity  we assume that the base line study shows that for this case of cardiac cirrhosis  1 mg/dl is a reasonable elevation. 

1 	j. sticklen et al. 
　reasoning steps 1 and 1 can be construed as normal establishing behavior for disease hypotheses. in step 1  cholestasis is established at +1  likely   because the signs and symptoms associated with cholestasis are matched relatively well in the patient data. in step1  cardiac cirrhosis is established at +1  possible . signs and symptoms associated with cardiac cirrhosis match the patient data well too  except that the bilirubin is too high. 
reasoning step 1 requires the addition of new control elements. 
step 1a requires that a higher level specialist integrate results from the subordinates cholestasis and cardiac cirrhosis. in particular  those two subordinates must return information to liver to enable an integration. 
if cholestasis returns to liver the result 
  establishedat +1   canaccountfor 
 bilirubin 1    
and cardiaccirrhosis returns to cirrhosis and subsequently to liver the result 
  establishedat +1   canaccountfor 
 bilirubin 1    
then liver will have the necessary information for understanding that the elevated bilirubin can be explained by hypothesising multiple diseases  assuming that liver knows that bilirubin levels combine additively. 
　step 1b is the most interesting step above. the local establishing knowledge of cardlacclrrhosls yielded an establishing value of +1 because even though most knowledge  fit  the patient data  the value of bilirubin was higher that would be expected in a case of cardiac cirrhosis only. but after reasoning step 1a  we see that the high reading for bilirubin can be understood as coming from two sources. hence  cardiaccirrhosis need account for only part of the elevated bilirubin. 
　step 1b is then a re-establishment of cardiaccirrhosis with the assumption that only part of bilirubin value need be accounted for. this step requires that a new message type: 
 re-establish 
 assume 	. . .     . 
in the case above  we want cardiaccirrhosis and cholestasis to receive the messages 
to cardiaccirrhosis. 
 re-establish  asanas  bilirubin 1       . and 
to cholestasis: 
 re-establish  assuae   b i l i r u b i n 1       . 
on receiving this message  cardiaccirrhosis will establish in the usual method  except the value of bilirubin will be assumed 1. sending the above message to cholestasis was crucial. we at least suspected that by forcing cardiaccirrhosis to assume a bilirubin level of 1  that its establishing value would be raised. but it also had to be demonstrated that by lowering the bilirubin value that cholestasis sees to 1  that the multiple disease hypothesis would remain viable. 
　a partial message trace for the problem discussed in this section is shown in figure 1. 
from liver  to cardiaccirrhosis: from cardiaccirrhosis  establish/refine   to liver: from liver  { cardiaccirrhosis established-at +l   can-account-for 
 bilirubin 1  }|  to cholestasis: from cholestasis  establish/refine   to liver: from liver  { cholestasis established-at +1   can-account-for 
 bilirubin 1  }|  to cardiaccirrhosis: from cardiaccirrhosis  re-establish 
 assume bilirubin 1    to liver: from liver  { cardiaccirrhosis established-at +1   can-account-for 
 bilirubin 1  }|  to cholestasis: from cholestasis  re-establish 
 assume bilirubin 1   to liver:  { cholestasis established-at +1   can-account-for 
 bilirubin 1  }| 	figure s: 	message trace for multiple disease 
with additive symptoms 
thus we have expanded the control aspects to include: 
1. message channels: a specialist may send a re-establish message to any subordinate specialist. 
1. message types: 
a. can-account-for: used to indicate what the specialist once established can account for of the observed patient signs  
b. re-establish-assume: used to force a specialist to assume a certain patient sign and symptom. 
1. when reconsideration is called for - example: multiple diseases with canceling symptoms 
　in this section  we consider patient states which can be explained by multiple disease hypotheses in which the presence of both diseases cancel some particular patient sign or symptom. 
consider for example a patient who has both osteo myelitis secondary to a staph aureus infection  and a generalized gram negative sepsis. 
　the osteo myelitis is typically associated with an increased blood platelet count  while the gram negative sepsis is associated with a decreased platelet count hence the patient suffering from both diseases will typically have a normal platelet count. 
　a critical point in understanding this situation is to realize that the establishment of any specialist will in general depend on many patient signs and symptoms. thus both the hypotheses osteo myelitis and gram negative sepsis will be established  although both should  point out  that expectations for the patient platelet count are not realized. 
　the situation here is conceptually very similar to the one discussed in the preceding section on multiple diseases with additive symptoms. there  the specialist reported how much of an observed anomaly could be accounted for; here the specialist must report that some expected sign or symptom is not observed. to capture this idea  we introduce the message type 
 expected-but-not -found ... . 
for example  the specialist representing the osteo myelitis hypothesis should return 
  established-at +1  
 expected-but-not-found 
　　 plateletcount high     and the gram negative sepsis specialist should return 
  established-at +1   expected-but-not-found 
 plateletcount low   . 
　as in the case with multiple diseases with additive symptoms  once a possible multiple disease hypothesis has been composed by a specialist above osteomyelitis and gramnegsepsis  then both will be forced to re-establish assuming appropriate platelet count. for example  in subsequent processing  osteomyelitis and gramnegsepeis will receive the messages 
to osteomyelitis: 	 re-establish 
 assume  plateletcount high     
and 
to gramnegsepsis: 	 re-establish 
 assume  plateletcount low    
　in this section  to handle cases of multiple diseases with canceling symptoms  we have added to the set of message types the possibility 
 expected-but-not-found 	...  
1. discussion 
　this paper is based on identifying classification as a generic problem solving activity with a set of control issues that are particular to it. by considering a number of examples  we have shown how we can add control elements to the control structure of mdx  a hierarchical classification-based diagnostic system  to deal with situations where multiple  dependent classificatory hypotheses are appropriate; e.g.  in medical diagnosis when a patient has multiple diseases. these extensions have been described in terms of two sets: 
	j. sticklen et at. 	1 
  the set of possible paths by which control can go from consideration of one classificatory hypothesis to another  
  the kinds of operations that can be performed on hypotheses and their effects on the control behavior of the problem solver. 
　the existence of other generic tasks in our framework suggests that a similar analysis of the relevant control issues for them would also be fruitful. 
　there is another aspect of the thrust of our work that is worth remarking on. the control problem intrinsic to classification was defined as that which delineates the possible invocation paths that will be available  and the requests that can be made along those paths. thus the language of hypotheses as agents seemed a natural one since it provided the right level of analysis to capture the essence of classification problem solving. this approach may be more than a metaphor  however. it may provide a way to discuss the knowledge level architecture of classification  and by extension  other kinds of generic problem solving as well. if that is true  the analysis method we have utilized would be an alternative to newell's proposals in   1   in which he is concerned precisely with how an agent can be described independent of implementation. 
1. acknowledgments 
	we 	wish 	to 	thank 	drs. 	jack 	smith 	and 	john 	svirbely  
pathology department  ohio state university  who  by giving us many examples of reasoning in the medical domain  provided the raw data that any theory of classificatory medical diagnosis must account for. our thanks in addition to tom bylander for critical readings of earlier drafts. finally  we wish to express our thanks to the reviewers for their comments. 
