 
in the field of law  decisions in previous cases often play a significant role in the presentation and outcome of new cases. lawyers are constantly recalling old cases to aid them in preparing their own briefs. how do lawyers remember cases  what are the features they use to organize and retrieve past decisions  how do lawyers learn which features are important  to address these questions we are constructing a model of legal novices  i.e. first year law student  and the processes by which they learn contract law. our model is embodied in a computer program called stare  from the latin  stare decisis which refers to the principle of using past cases to decide current disputes . stare will read descriptions of contractual situations and attempt to predict the decision based on its general commonsense knowledge of agreements  the previous cases stored in an episodic memory  and knowledge of some basic legal concepts. 
i. introduction 
       we are interested in constructing a mode  of first year law students learning contract law. law students already have a great deal of commonsense knowledge about the social interactions between people  agreements   right and wrong  justice   and the world in general. they are taught new concepts with specific legal meanings and how to relate these concepts to their commonsense knowledge. they are also taught how to reason analogically from new cases to previous cases and use these reasoning chains to predict and support the decisions in the new cases. to better understand what stare will face  let's consider an example case that a law student might encounter: 
case-l:larue a police officer  promises frank  a merchant who owns a store on larue's beat  that he will keep an eye on frank's store during his lunch hour if frank will pay him $1 a month. frank agrees. 
       is there a contract in case-1  answering this question requires knowledge about social roles  role tnemes  such as policemen  merchants  and public servants  what it means to promise to do something  to keep an eye on someone else's property  and to agree to something. in addition  we infer certain facts from the situation: larue has a goal of earning extra money  frank believes that larue has the authority to perform his promise  and there is an agreement between frank and larue. we can now tentatively answer the question based on whether we believe that larue is free to moonlight during his lunch hour. if we know that policemen are obligated to act if they witness a crime  even if they are not on duty  then we would probably say there is not a contract. we have a commonsense heuristic which 
* this research supported in part by a grant from the keck foundation. the first author was also supported in part by a rand corporation ai fellowship  the second author by an ibm faculty development award  and the third author by a hughes ai center grant. 
states that one cannot assume a new obligation if it conflicts with an existing obligation. 
       assume that we have the above case in memory along with the decision that there was no contract and the supporting reasoning chain for the decision. now we read the following case: 
case-1:fred  a police officer  promises barney  a merchant who owns a store which is not on fred's beat  that he will keep an eye on barney's store instead of walking his beat if barney will pay him $1 per month. barney agrees. 
given that case-1 is in episodic memory  we have no trouble deciding that there is no contract in case-1. this assumes that we were able to get to case-1 to use it for the current situation. how cases are organized and indexed in episodic memory is crucial to our ability to understand new situations. the reminding of case-1 could have occurred from the role themes  both situations involved a policeman and a merchant   the nature of the agreement  protection   or because the same commonsense knowledge was used to understand both cases. in reality it is a combination of these elements. 
       our memory now contains case-1 and case-1 
       which are indexed together. now we read next situation: 
case-1'hara  a police officer on vacation in florida  promises alfred  a store owner  that he will keep an eye on alfred's store during alfred's lunch hour if alfred will pay him $1 a day. alfred agrees. 
we should be reminded of either case-1  case-1  or both  since we only have two cases in memory  and must now decide if case-1 is similar. we know that there was no contract in the previous cases because of a conflict with a pre-existinff obligation. in case-1 no such obligation exists so we should conclude that there is a contract. 
       what kind of knowledge is necessary to 1  recognize the presence or absence of an obligation  and 1  build the appropriate indices into episodic memory  
n . k n o w l e d g e a n d m e m o r y 
       as we have just seen  understanding and reasoning about contractual situations requires interaction between a variety of knowledge sources. the following abstract constructs are essential to understanding case-1  case1  and case-1: goals  wilensky  1a   plans  schank & abelson  1   themes  wilensky  1b   interpersonal relationships  schank & abelson  1   events  dyer  1   social acts  schank & carboneii  1   and role themes  dyer  1 . we must also be able to represent legal concepts corresponding to offer  obligation  promise  and accept. in the following sections we shall address the issues of representing general knowledge  legal knowledge  and their integration in memory. 

1 s. goldman et al 
a. general knowledge 
       in the introduction  we identified some of the commonsense knowledge we must represent. there is knowledge about social roles. we represent this knowledge using role themes  rts   dyer  1 . rts are organized in an inheritance hierarchy and contain knowledge about societal relationships. consider what we know about policemen: policemen are public servants  paid by our tax dollars  whose task is to enforce our laws. they are often assigned a particular area to patrol  beat  and are responsible for protecting the people and property within that area. 
       actually we know much more  for example  we know that policemen  firemen  and paramedics all have a responsibility to the public. therefore  in addition to rt-
policeman  rt-fireman  and rt-paramedic  we have a more eeneral role theme  rt-public-servant which supersedes these three. we conclude that it is the knowledge contained in rt-public-servant which tells us that there is a pre-existing obligation in case-1 and case-1. once we recognise the obligation  we apply commonsense rules such as: 
rule-1: 
if 	a pre-existing obligation conflicts with a new obligation 
then the new obligation is invalid 
b. legal knowledge 
       the first chapter of a contract law text book generally attempts to define what a contract is  calamari & perillo  1 . unfortunately this attempt is bound to fail because there is no complete definition. what the introductory definitions serve to do is provide the student with basic conceptual entities and some weak relations between them. the semantics of these entities evolves as a function of the student's experience and in a sense is defined by the actual cases. we begin by defining basic legal con-
cepts which can be used to represent cases and decisions. these concepts  such as right  duty  offer  accept  and breach are used to organize knowledge structures in memory. 
       as with social acts  schank & carbonell  1   these are basic concepts  decomposable into more primitive entities. for example  an offer consists of the offerer communicating to the offeree that the offerer will do something  possibly achieving a goal for the offeree  if the offeree will do something  possibly achieving a goal for the offerer . however  we are interested in inferences made at the level of the offer and not at the level of communication  unless the method of communication is important to our understanding of the situation. the idea of proposing basic legal concepts and expressing laws using these concepts is not new. hohfeld defined a set of concepts and the relationships between these concepts early in this century  hohfeld  1 . however  the usefulness of any set of basic concepts derives from the inferences they permit. here are some examples: 
offer: gives the offeree the power to create a duty for the offerer. duty: x must perform or face punishment. accept: creates a duty for both parties. breach: the non-breaching party is entitled to compensation and/or the breaching party faces punishment. c. episodic memory 
       the interactions between the different knowledge abstractions  the basic legal concepts  situations  and decisions are important in defining and computing indices for episodes. another important consideration in deciding what indices to use is the issue of remindings  schank  1 . we want to use indices which will enable us to recall related situations. recalling our three cases  what indices should we use so that: 
  case-1 reminds us of case-1 as we read it because the parties and the circumstances are similar. 
  case-1 gets indexed with case-1 because the decisions and the support for the decisions is similar. 
  case-1  while possibly reminding us of either case-1 or case-1  actually is indexed separately because the decision is different. 
       clearly the role themes are one index we want to use. rt-policeman allows us to recall each situation from any other. however  we cannot merely assume that role themes are always an appropriate index. for example  suppose we have: 
case-1:harry  a police officer  promises joe that he will paint joe s garage on his day off if joe pays him $1. 
we do not want to index this case by rt-policeman because the information is not important to the decision. the fact that harry is a police officer doesn't matter because it his day off and painting a garage is not part of his job. however we have already been reminded of the other cases. another problem arises when several cases share an index. chances are that we do not want to use that index for remindings because there is no discrimination from the result. to constrain the proliferation of indices  the following strategy applies: 
if feature f is used to support a decision in situation s 
then use f as an index to s 
thus we must index cases by their decisions  and more importantly  by the reasons which led to the decisions. 
       the components of a contract can be roughly defined as: 
offer + a c c e p t a n c e + 
performance + t e r m i n a t i o n 
decisions generally cite the failure of the situation to fit the definition of one or more of these components. in case-1  larue has failed to make a legitimate offer  the reason is the existence of a prior obligation. the same holds for case-1. we've now learned something about the legal concept offer  namely that an saying you'll do something if someone else does something is not necessarily a contractual offer. 
       case-1 should be indexed as a valid contract. if we did not recognize the existence of the offer in this situation and were later informed that a contract exists  then we must modify our concept of offer to handle the new situation. 
iii. methodology 
　　　　there have been different research projects over the past decade investigating the applications of ai to law  each with its own methodology. one of the earliest projects took a frame-based approach  trying to instantiate frames from the current situation and soliciting additional information to fill the missing slots  meldman  1 . others have taken an expert systems approach using large numbers of rules to encode knowledge  peterson & waterman  1 . understanding in this case consists of applying various rules to reach a decision. 
　　　　there has also been some work on developing a formal representation for statutes and standard documents which would reduce the amount of ambiguity they contain  debessonet & cross  1; stamper  1; sprowl  1; allen & enghold 1 . finally  there are projects which begin to address the problems involved in representing and identifying legal issues and decisions  mccartv & sridharan  1; gardner  1  1 . a survev of six law and ai projects is found in  cook  et. al.  1 . 
　　　　our approach substantially differs from most of those above in that we are primarily interested in the cognitive issues involved in understanding legal situations and decisions. contract law provides a rich domain for studying: 
  the organization  storage  and retrieval of episodes in memory 
  how knowledge is acquired and refined 
  the 	interactions 	between 	different 	kinds 	of knowledge 
  how remindings occur and are used during processing 
  the relationship between law and commonsense notions of right and wrong 
　　　　we are constructing a process model of how first year law students learn to understand contractual situations which focuses on the role of episodic memory and the interactions between knowledge structures. this model is being implemented in a computer program called stare. stare is being designed to read contractual situations in english  build a conceptualization of the situations through integrated parsing  dyer  1   connect the conceptualization into episodic memory  dyer & flowers  1   and decide whether a contract exists based on general knowledge and the indices in memory. in the event of ambiguous decisions  stare may solicit additional information or present multiple interpretations. stare will also be able to answer questions about its processes and knowledge structures. it will be able to retrieve episodes using conceptual indices. 
i v . c o n c l u s i o n s a n d f u t u r e w o r k 
implementation of stare is currently underway. 
initially stare will accept situations as bare conceptual fragments. it will use these fragments to build up the actual conceptualization of the situation and then index the situation in episodic memory. in order to complete this phase  we are constructing a taxonomy of basic legal concepts  representing commonsense knowledge of role themes  societal and interpersonal goals  social acts  and modelling the interactions between these knowledge sources. finally  we must address the issues relating to episodic memory  how episodes are organized  what the indices are  the effect of new episodes on the existing organization  and remindings. 
	s. goldman et al. 	1 
r e f e r e n c e s 
allen  l. e. & enghold  c. r.  1 .  normalized legal drafting and the query method.  journal of legal education 1-1. 
cook  s.  et. al.  1 .  the applications of artificial intelligence to law: a survey of six current projects.  in proceedings afips-1. 
debessonet  c. g. & cross  g. r.  1 .  representation of some aspects of legal causality.  in proceedings of the first law and technology conference. houston  tx. 
calamari  j. d. & perillo  j. m.  1 . the law of contracts. st. paul  mn: west publishing co. 
dyer  m. g.  1 .  $restaurant revisited or 'lunch with boris .  in proceedings ijcai-1. vancouver  bc. 
dyer  m. g.  1 . in-depth understanding. cambridge  ma: mit press. 
dyer  m. g. & flowers  m.  1 . 	 toward automating 
legal expertise.  in proceedings of the first law and technology conference. houston  tx. 
gardner  a. v.d.l.  1 .  the design of a legal analysis program.  in proceedings aaai-1. 
gardner  a. v.d.l.  1 . in proceedings of the first law and technology conference. houston  tx. 
hohfeld  w. n.  1 .  fundamental legal conceptions as applied in judicial reasoning.  yale law journal 
1-1. 
mccarty  l. t. & sridharan  n.s.  1 . a computational theory of legal argument.  technical report lrptr-1 . laboratory for computer science research. rutgers university. 
meldman  j. a.  1  a preliminary study in computeraided legal analysis.  technical report mac-tr-1 . phd thesis  massachusetts institute of technology. 
peterson  m. a. & waterman  d. a.  1 .  evaluating civil claims: an expert systems approach.  in proceedings of the first law and technology conference. houston  tx. 
schank  r. & abelson  r.  1 . scripts  plans  goals  and understanding. hillsdale  nj: lawrence erlbaum. 
schank  r. c.  1 . dynamic memory. cambridge: cambridge university press. 
schank  r. & carbonell  j. g. jr.  1 .  re: the gettysburg address: representing social ana political acts  in findler  n.  ed . associative networks. new york: academic press. 
sprowl  j. a.  1 .  automating the legal reasoning process.  american bar foundation research journal  
stamper  r.  1 . 	 legol: modelling legal rules by 
computer.  in 	niblett  	b.  ed . 	computer science and 
law: an advanced course. cambridge: cambridge university press. 
wilensky  r.  1a .  why john married mary: understanding stories involving recurring goals.  cognitive science 1  1 . 
wilensky  	r. 	 1b . 	understanding 	goal-based stories. 
 technical report 1 . phd thesis  yale university. 
