 
　　　we present a semantic model for knowledge with the following properties:  1  knowledge is necessarily correct   1  agents are logically omniscient  i.e.  they know all the consequences of their knowledge  and  1  agents are positively introspective  i.e.  they are aware of their knowledge  but not negatively introspective  i.e.  they may not be aware of their ignorance. we argue that this is the appropriate model for implicit knowledge. we investigate the properties of the model  and use it to formalize the notion of circumscribed knowledge. 
1. introduction 
     planning sequences of actions and reasoning about their effects is one of the most thoroughly studied areas in ai. realistic planning requires  however  not only the ability to reason about the real world  but also the ability of the planning agent to reason about the information it has about the real world. in other words  intelligent agents need to be able to reason about their own knowledge as well as other agents' knowledge.  planning  in fact  requires a theory of knowledge and action. see  mo1    mo1 .  
　　　a theory of knowledge requires a robust mathematical model of knowledge. starting with hintikka  hi1   knowledge was traditionally modelled by kripke structures  kr1   e.g.   mo1  mo1  mshi1  sa1  . more recently  however  the adequacy of kripke structures to model propositional attitudes  and in particular epistemic attitudes  has been questioned on several grounds  fhv1 fv1j. fagin et al. introduced modal structures  fv1j  called knowledge structures when applied to knowledge  fhv1   which captures hintikka's possible worlds semantics in a set-theoretic way  rather then a graph-theoretic way as in kripke structures. it turns out that modal structures not only a fortiori justify the use of kripke structures to model possible worlds  but they also enable a much more refined analysis of several notions  fhv1 fv1 . we shall use modal structure in our model-theoretic analysis of knowledge. 
　　　it is well known that there is not really such a thing as the concept of knowledge  but rather a whole continuum of  concepts of knowledge   cf   le1 oc1  . fagin et al.  fhv1| chose to use a notion of knowledge where the agents are logically omniscient  i.e.  they know all the consequences of their knowledge  and are fully introspective  they are both positively introspective  aware of their knowledge  and negatively introspective  aware of their ignorance . one way to explain the logical omniscience of these agents is to view their knowledge as implicit  i.e.  the agents implicitly know everything that logically follows from their explicit knowledge  hm1a le1 rp1|. from this point of view  however  it is hard to justify the assumption that the agents have negative introspection. 
     the above argument motivates a model-theoretic study of a notion of positively introspective knowledge  where the agents are introspective of their knowledge but not of their ignorance. such a 
     concept of knowledge was advocated  on other grounds  by hintikka  hi1  and moore  mo1 . a fully introspective knowledge is nonmonotonic  since ignorance leads to knowledge  by introspection . this lead to several difficulties in trying to circumscribe this kind of knowledge  cf.  hm1b pa1 st1  . in contrast  the concept of knowledge studied here is monotonic. in terms of modal logic  fully introspective knowledge correspond to the modal logic s1  while positively introspective knowledge correspond to the modal logic s1. 
　　　our treatment here of positively introspective knowledge closely resemble the treatment of fully introspective knowledge in  fhv1 . nevertheless  there are several significant differences  upon which we elaborate in the paper. the most important point is that in our framework we can study comparative knowledge and circumvented knowledge. our framework enables us to assign precise meaning to the notion of  to know more   which in turn enables us to circumscribe knowledge  i.e.  to assign precise meaning to the notion of  all one knows . 
1. knowledge structures 
     we now define knowledge structures that capture the essence of hintikka's  hi1  possible worlds approach towards modelling knowledge. 
     before we formally define knowledge structures  let us discuss them informally. the basic idea underlying knowledge structures is that there are different levels of knowledge. consider the following example  taken from  fhv1 . assume there are two agents  alice and bob  and that there is only one atomic proposition p. at the oth level   nature    assume that p is true. the 1st level tells each player s knowledge about nature. for example  alice's knowledge at the 1st level could be  i  alice  don't know whether p is true or false   and bob's could be  i  bob  know that p is true . the 1nd level tells each player's knowledge about the other player's knowledge about nature. for example  alice's knowledge at the 1nd level could be  i know that i don't know about p  but i know that bob knows whether p is true or false   and bob's could be  i know that 1 know p  but i don't know whether alice knows p  thus  alice knows that either p is true and bob knows it  or else p is false and bob knows it. at the 1rd level  alice's knowledge could be  i know that bob does not know whether i know about p . this can continue for arbitrarily many levels. 


1 	m.vardi 

this restriction says that the  k-l -ary worlds that agent a thinks are possible are prefixes of the k-ary worlds that a thinks are possible. that is  a's higher-order knowledge extends a's lower-order knowledge. 
     notice that the only difference between k1 and k1' is that the inclusion is replaced by an equality. as we shall see later this subtle difference carries substantial implication. we call knowledge structures that satisfy k1' fully introspective knowledge structures. 
   a natural question that one may ask is whether worlds can be viewed as partial specifications of structures. this would be very desirable since worlds are finite while structures are infinite. mccarthy  mc1  posed essentially this question as an open problem in 1. it turns out surprisingly  that not every world can be extended to a knowledge structures. the following theorem characterizes the extendible worlds. 

	m.vardi 	1 
   theorem 1 shows that knowledge structures and kripke structures have the same theory  as we already know from theorem 1 and the results in  hm1  about axiomatization of validity in kripke structures   but its implications are deeper. it shows that knowledge structures and kripke structures complement each other in modelling knowledge: knowledge structures model states of knowledge  and kripke structures model collections of knowledge states. in particular a state t is possible for a in a state # if a knows in t at least as much as it knows in a. correspondence between fully introspective knowledge structures and kripke structures for fully introspective knowledge was shown in  fhv1 . 
1. circumscribed knowledge 
     in principle there is no difference between positive information  the facts that are stated to be true  and negative information  the facts that are stated to be false. indeed  in logic  a truth-assignment is a function from the set of atomic propositions to the set {true false}  and the roles of true and false are completely symmetric. in common sense reasoning  however  we tend to use mostly the positive facts while ignoring a whole plethora of unstated negative facts. circumscription  mc1  is a formal tool to capture this paradigm of common sense reasoning. our goal in this section is to circumscribe knowledge  that is  we want to give precise meaning to informal statements such as  i know that  and this is alt i know . 
     we start by analyzing a simple case. suppose that we are given a jb-ary world w as a description of the agents' state of knowledge  and we are told that this is all the agents know. for example  suppose that we are told about alice and bob in section 1 that this is all they know. strictly speaking  this cannot be true. since bob knows p  he knows that he knows p  he knows that he knows that he knows p  etc. ad infinitum. what we want to find is some knowledge structure f  such that w is a prefix of f  i.e.  and such that the knowledge contained in w is 
circumscribed  i.e.  there is no knowledge in f unless it follows  in some sense  from the knowledge in w. 
     the answer to that problem depends in part on the underlying model of knowledge acquisition. for example  is it possible for alice to know that bob knows about p without being told so by bob  say by tapping into bob's database  we consider here the most  permissive  situation  where agents have no knowledge about how other agents acquire knowledge. in this case fk a  should include all the jbary worlds that are possible for a in w  i.e.  all the jb-ary worlds where a knows at least as much as he knows in w. 
     this leads to the following definition  where we use the convention that /1 a  is the empty set: fk a  is the no-information extension 
     intuitively  the no-information extension of fk 1 a  describes what a knows at level k+1  given that she has no information besides that already described at fk-1 a  and given the underlying  permissive  model of knowledge acquisition described above. 
     to justify our definition of the no-information extension we have first to prove that w* is indeed a knowledge structure  which is not a priori clear   and then we have to show that the knowledge in w is indeed circumscribed in w*. 
theorem 1: let w be a jb-ary world. then 
 1  w* is a knowledge structure  and 
 1  if f is a knowledge structure such that w is a prefix of f  then w* af  for all 
consider now a jb-ary world  in such a 
world the agents have knowledge of depth k-1. thus in w* we would expect the agents to have knowledge of depth k-1 and no more. now we have to be careful how we define depth of knowledge. if a knows p  then she knows that she knows p  she knows that she knows that she knows p  etc. this does not seem  however  as genuinely deep knowledge. if  on the other hand  a knows that b knows that a 
knows p  then it seems that a does have deep knowledge. we characterize depth of knowledge by the following definitions. 
     an a-formula  where a is an agent  is a formula that describes the knowledge of a. formally  

1 	m.vardi 

1. concluding remarks 
     we have defined a model-theoretic framework for positively introspective knowledge  which we argue is the right model for implicit knowledge. this framework provides precise means to compare knowledge states  which enabled us to define the notion of a minimal model. we have shown that using the notion of minimal models we can circumscribe knowledge. 
acknowledgements. the research reported here was supported by gift from the system development foundation. much of the work was completed on computer equipment provided by the xerox corporation. i'd like to thank r. fagin  y.o. moses  j.y. halpern  and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper. 
