: several new logics for belief and knowledge are introduced and studied  all of which have the property that agents are not logically omniscient. in particular  in these logics  the set of beliefs of an agent does not necessarily contain all valid formulas. thus  these logics are more suitable than traditional logics for modelling beliefs of humans  or machines  with limited reasoning capabilities. our first logic is essentially an extension of levesque's logic of implicit and explicit belief  where we extend to allow multiple agents and higher-level belief  i.e.  beliefs about beliefs . our second logic deals explicitly with  awareness   where  roughly speaking  it is necessary to be aware of a concept before one can have beliefs about it. our third logic gives a model of  local reasoning'*  where an agent is viewed as a  society of minds   each with its own cluster of beliefs  which may contradict each other. 
1. introduction 
   as has been frequently pointed out in the literature  see  for example   hi    possible-worlds semantics for knowledge and belief do not seem appropriate for modelling human reasoning since they suffer from the problem of what hintikka calls logical omniscience. in particular  this means that agents are assumed to be so intelligent that they must know all valid formulas  and that their knowledge is closed under implication  so that if an agent knows p  and knows that p implies qt then the agent must also know q. 
   unfortunately  in real life people are certainly not omniscient! indeed  possible-world advocates have always stressed that this style of semantics assumes an  ideal  rational reasoner  with infinite computational powers. but for many applications  one would like a logic that provides a more realistic representation of human reasoning. 
teilhard de chardin 
   various attempts to deal with this problem have been proposed in the literature. one approach is essentially syntactic: an agent's beliefs are just described by a set of formulas  not necessarily closed under implication   eb mh    or by the logical consequences of a set of formulas obtained by using an incomplete set of deduction rules   ko  . another approach has been to augment possible worlds by non-classical  impossible  worlds  where the customary rules of logic do not hold  see  for example   cr ra rb  . the syntactic approach lacks the elegance and intuitive appeal of the semantic approach. however  the semantic rules used to assign truth values to the logical connectives in the impossible worlds approach have tended to be nonintuitive  and it is not clear to what extent this approach has been successful in truly capturing our intuitions about knowledge and belief. 
   recently  levesque  lev1  has attempted to give an intuitively plausible semantic account of explicit and implicit belief  where an agent's implicit beliefs include the logical consequences of his explicit belief   essentially by taking partial worlds and a threevalued truth function rather than classical two-valued logic. while we have a number of philosophical and technical criticisms of levesque's approach  these are detailed in the next section   it seems to us to be in the right spirit. 
   part of the reason that previous semantic attempts to deal with the problem of logical omniscience have failed is that they have not taken into account the fact that it stems from a number of different sources. among these are: 
1. lack of awareness. how can someone say that he knows or doesn't know about p if p is a concept he is completely unaware of  one can imagine the puzzled frown on a bantu tribesman's face when asked if he knows that personal computer prices are going down! the animal  in the quotation at the beginning of the paper  

1 	r. fagin and j. halpern 
does not know that it knows exactly because it is  presumably  not aware of its knowledge. similarly  a sentence such as  you're so dumb  you don't even that you don't know p!  is perhaps best understood as saying  you're not even aware that you don't know p . 
1. people are resource-bounded: they simply lack the computational resources to deduce all the logical consequences of their knowledge  we still don't know whether fermat's last theorem is true . 
1. people don't always know the relevant rules. as pointed out by konolige  ko   a student may not know which value of x satisfies the equation x + a = b simply because he doesn't know the rule of subtracting equal quantities from both sides. 
1. people don't focus on all issues simultaneously. thus  when we say  a believes p   we more properly mean that in a certain frame of mind  when a is focussing on the issues that involve p   it is the case that a believes p. even if a does perfect reasoning with respect to the limited number of issues on which he is focussing in any given frame of mind  he may not put his conclusions together. indeed  although in each frame of mind person a may be consistent  the conclusions a draws in different frames of mind may be inconsistent. 
   in this paper we present a number of different approaches to modelling lack of logical omniscience. these approaches can be viewed as attempting to model different causes for the lack of omniscience  as suggested by the discussion above. our first approach is essentially an extension of levesque's  levi  to the multi-agent case  which in addition avoids some of the problems we see in levesque's approach. this approach is one that attempts to deal with awareness   1  above . our second approach combines the possible-worlds framework with a syntactic awareness function; it seems to be more appropriate for dealing with resource-bounded reasoning  which has a strongly syntactic component. by adding time into the picture  we can extend the second approach to one that can capture how knowledge is acquired over time  perhaps through the use of a particular  possibly incomplete  set of deduction rules as in  ko . finally  we present an approach that could be called the society-of-minds approach  mi bi do   which attempts to capture the type of local reasoning discussed in  1  above  a similar idea has been independently suggested by a number of authors  including levesque  lev1   stalnaker  st   and zadrozny  za  . the second and third approaches can easily be combined to give a semantics which captures both awareness and local reasoning. 

	r. fagin and j. halpern 	1 


1 r. fagin and j. halpern 
propositional connectives. for example  suppose that the agent is unaware of the primitive proposition p  so that neither hold. thus  by the semantic definitions given above   does not hold either. yet we can still imagine an agent that is unaware of p yet but is aware of some propositional tautologies  in particular ones like  it is interesting to note that in the classical threevalued logic of lukasiewicz is usually taken to be a primitive along with and and the semantics is defined so that p=p is a tautology  even though  is not. even though levesque's semantics could be redefined in this way  the question of motivating the semantics of the connectives still remains. 
1. as vardi observes  va   although an agent in levesque's model does not know all the logical consequences of his beliefs  if we understand  logical consequence  to mean consequence of classical propositional logic   it follows from levesque's results  lev1  that agents in levesque's logic are perfect reasoners in relevance logic  ab . unfortunately  it seems no more clear that people can do perfect reasoning in relevance logic than that they can do perfect reasoning in classical logic! 
   besides the criticisms mentioned above  the current presentation of levesque's logic suffers from another serious drawback: namely  it deals with only depth-one formulas and with only one agent. but a viable logic of knowledge or belief should be able to capture - within the logic! - meta-reasoning about one's own beliefs and reasoning about other agents' beliefs. meta-reasoning is crucial for planning and goal-directed behavior  since one has to reason about the knowledge that one has and needs to acquire. and a knowledge representation utility that does not have certain information may need to reason about where that information is located  and thus about the knowledge of other systems. such reasoning can quickly get quite complicated  and it is not immediately obvious how to extend levesque's model to deal with it. 
¡¡in the next three sections we present three other approaches to dealing with the problem of logical omniscience  each of which attempts to solve aspects of the problem. all of them deal with the multi-agent case  and are presented in a kripke-style possibleworlds framework. kripke-style structures were chosen because of their familiarity to most readers; we could just as well have used the modal structures framework of  fhv fv . 
1. a logic of awareness 


	r. fagin and j. halpern 	1 

1 	r. fagin and j. halpern 


	r. fagin and j. halpern 	1 

1 thus we have taken time to be linear rather than branching  discrete rather than continuous  and with no endpoint however  easy modifications can be made to the model presented above to allow us to deal with all of the possibilities  cf.  hcj . 

1 r. fagin and j. halpern 
that obey the restriction  **   although it is still an open question whether  *  characterizes such models . as pointed out to us by elias thijsse   *  is not immediately applicable to belief. for example  i may believe now that i may finish writing this paper by tomorrow  but tomorrow i may realize that this belief is false  and no longer believe it. but even with regards to knowledge   *  is not often not a realistic assumption. people certainly forget! and   *  seems to have rather unpleasant consequences for the decision procedure of the resulting logic  see section 1 . 
   recall that one interpretation we gave the awareness function in the previous section was in terms of the formulas whose truth could be computed within a certain amount of time. since we are dealing with a decidable language  we can imagine a program that will eventually be able to compute the truth value of every formula. we can capture this very easily in our present framework by simply requiring that the awareness functions satisfy the following constraints: 

1. a logic of local reasoning 
   although the logic of general awareness discussed in the previous two sections is quite flexible  it still has the property that an agent cannot hold inconsistent beliefs. in this section we present a logic in which agents can hold inconsistent beliefs  but without making use of incoherent situations. 
   our key observation is that one reason that people hold inconsistent beliefs is that beliefs tend to come in non-interacting clusters. we can almost view an agent as a society of minds  each with its own set  or cluster  of beliefs  which may contradict each other. 
this phenomenon seems to occur even in science. 
the physicist eugene wigner  wi  notes that the two great theories physicists reason with are the theory of quantum phenomena and the theory of relativity. however  rb  p. 1   wigner thinks that the two theories may well be incompatible! 


s if we with to capture knowledge rather than belief  then we need to add the further rettrieuon that $ if a member of every member of vi s . 

	r. fagin and j. halpern 	1 
¡¡note that in both the general and narrow-minded cluster mode  an agent's beliefs are closed under valid implication and agents believe all valid formulas. this is because we have assumed that agents can do perfect reasoning within each cluster. we can easily combine the ideas of the cluster model with those of the general awareness model to get a model where agents do not necessarily believe all valid formulas. the details are straightforward and left to the reader. 
1. decision procedures and complete axiomatizations 
   in the case of the classical logics of belief and knowledge  ss and kd1  it is known that the problem of deciding whether a formula is satisfiable is np complete in the case of one player  and pspace complete if there is more than one player  see  hm  for a discussion of these results . despite the apparent extra machinery we have introduced in our models  we can show that the decision pro-
cedures get no harder. 
theorem 1. for levesque's model of implicit and explicit belief  and the one-knower version of the logics of awareness  the logic of general awareness  and the narrowminded version of the logic of local reasoning  the problem of deciding satisfiability of formulas is np complete  and hence the problem of deciding validity is co-np complete . for the many-knower versions of all these logics  the oneknower and many-knower versions of the logic of general awareness with time  and the unrestricted version of the logic of local reasoning the problem of deciding satisfiability 
and validity of formulas is pspace complete. 
we remark that once we add condition   *  to the semantics of knowledge and time  things seem to get much worse. there the best-known results are a double-exponential decision procedure in the case of one knower; the problem for many knowers is 
still open.1 
   using standard techniques of modal logic  we can also provide complete axiomatizations for all the logics we have discussed. we discuss a complete axiomatization for the logic of general awareness here to show how the usual axioms of belief must be modified. axiomatizations for the other logics we have discussed and further details of proofs will appear in the full paper. 
1 note that this restriction is not possible in general when dealing with knowledge rather than belief. you cannot refnte to know the truth  although you can refuse to believe it! 
1 the proof in the case of one knower is a modification of the techniques of  leh1  in that paper  lehmann also claims a double-exponential decision procedure for the logic of knowledge and time with many knowers  but his proof techniques seem to fail  leh1 . 
	1 	r. fagin and j. halpern 


1. acknowledgements 
   we would like to thank elias thijsse for his detailed reading of the paper and numerous pertinent comments and criticisms. we would like to thank kurt konolige  hector levesque  yoram moses  peter van emde boas  moshe vardi  and ed wimmers  for their helpful remarks. 1. 