 
　　　genetic algorithms  gas  are powerful  general purpose adaptive search techniques which have been used successfully in a variety of learning systems. in the standard formulation  gas maintain a set of alternative knowledge structures for the task to be learned  and improved knowledge structures are formed through a combination of competition and knowledge sharing among the alternative knowledge structures. in this paper  we extend the ga paradigm by allowing multidimensional feedback concerning the performance of the alternative structures. the modified ga is shown to solve a multiclass pattern discrimination task which could not be solved by the unmodified ga. 
1- introduction 
　　　pattern classification is a central task in flexible systems which incorporate an arsenal of problem solving techniques. for example  a given problem instance may need to be classified in order to decide which problem solving method should be applied. this paper concerns the task of multiclass pattern discrimination in a learning system. as in mitchell   we view learning as a search process. but rather than searching a space of concepts  we consider a learning system which searches a space of production system programs for programs which adequately accomplish the desired pattern classification. the search is accomplished by means of a genetic algorithm  ga . gas are powerful adaptive search techniques which have been used successfully in a variety of learning systems  1 1 . in this paper  gas are extended in order to perform multi-objective learning in a pattern classification domain. 
1  learning via genetic search. 
	this section contains a brief 	description 	of 
gas. more detailed descriptions are available in the literature  1 1 . briefly  gas may be viewed as adaptive generate-and-test procedures. gas are adaptive in the sense that the candidate solutions generated reflect and exploit information 
obtained by earlier tests. a ga maintains a population of knowledge structures  e.g. alternative sets of production rules for a given task  and repeatedly  1  selects structures on the basis of observed performance  and  1  applies idealized genetic operators to the selected structures to construct new structures. for example  one important genetic operator is crossover  by which subsets of rules may be exchanged between two alternative knowledge structures. this results in a sophisticated search in which subsets of rules which contribute to good performance are propagated through the population. other genetic operators are described in smith . in this paper  we concentrate on the influence of the performance feedback on step  1  above  the selection of knowledge structures for reproduction. 
　　　the characterization of the power and limitations of gas is an active research area  but preliminary theoretical results are available. for example  the number of structures in the population which contain a given subset of rules can be expected to increase or decrease over time at a rate proportional to the average observed perfor-
mance of a l l knowledge structures which contain that set of rules . thus  all subsets of rules appearing in the population of knowledge structures are explored simultaneously in a near-optimal fashion  a phenomenon which is called implicit parallelism by holland. bethke describes some properties of search spaces which may be especially hard for gas. 
　　　smith implemented a ga-based machine learning system called ls-1. in ls-1  each structure maintained by the ga represents a production system  ps  program. each ps program is evaluated on the learning task by a c r i t i c which assigns a numerical measure of fitness to the evaluated program. when a l l of the ps programs in the current population have been evaluated  the ga is invoked to construct a new population of ps programs  and the cycle is repeated.  see figure 1.  ls-1 successfully learned ps programs for maze tasks and for draw poker. our work extends the ls-1 system in order to achieve multi-objective learning. 
1  the task domain 
　　　multi-class pattern discrimination was selected as a representative multi-objective learning task. the specific task under investigation was to classify muscle activity patterns for five human gait classes  representing one normal and four abnormal gait types. a training set of 1 
test cases was obtained from the literature   1     eaoh training case consisting of a 1-blt string derived from emg signals from leg muscles while walking. as in ls-1  we used a ga to search a 

1 	j. schaffer and j. grefenstette 

space of knowledge structures   i . e .   rule sets . the goal of the learning system was to find a 
knowledge structure which correctly classifies the 1 training cases. the performance of the learning system was measured by the number of knowledge structures tested before obtaining a solution. by choosing subsets of the training cases  we derived 1-class  1-class  1-class  and 1-class discrimination problems. each experiment was started with an i n i t i a l population of randomly generated knowledge structures  in order to test the power of the ga with no i n i t i a l knowledge.  our implementation system does allow the incorporation of heuristic knowledge into the i n i t i a l population of knowledge structures.  
1. the need for multidimensional feedbaok 
　　　a series of experiments was performed in which a ga using a scalar c r i t i c was applied to multiclass discrimination problems. although the ga could solve 1-class problems  it could not solve the f u l l five-class problem. an analysis of the individual ps programs generated by the ga at various times during search revealed a common pattern. knowledge of how to recognize a particular class was frequently absent from later ps programs  even when such knowledge was present in earlier programs. the problem is that structures which contain complementary knowledge are forced to compete by a ga using a scalar c r i t i c . consider this simple example: suppose that the c r i t i c measures the fitness of each structure by counting the number of training cases which were correctly classified. suppose program p1 contains rules which correctly classify classes a and b  and program p1 correctly classifies only instances in class c. if a l l classes are equally represented in the training set  then program p1 appears to be twice as   f i t   as program p1. since the ga selects programs for reproduction on the basis of the fitness assigned by the c r i t i c   p1 w i l l tend to contribute rule subsets to twioe as many new programs in the next population as w i l l p1. as the number of classes increases  specialized knowledge  like that in p1  
may tend to suffer extinction  finally resulting in suboptimal performance for the learning system as a 
whole. 
　　　our solution was to modify the o r i t i c so that a vector of performance measures was computed for eaoh struoture  with one slot in the fitness vector for each class represented in the training set. we then modified the ga so that complementary knowledge structures would share knowledge  through the genetic operators  rather than compete directly. 
　　　an interesting question emerges at this point which was never an issue with scalar c r i t i c s . where should any punishment for incorrect behavior be applied  consider a knowledge structure which incorrectly classifies a class a case as class b. by applying the penalty to the a slot of the reward vector  we are punishing the failure to do the right thing. by applying it to the b slot  we are punishing doing the wrong thing. the former strategy was adopted for all subsequent experiments  arguing that class x training cases should contribute  positively or negatively  only to the x slot of the reward vector. 
　　　the modification to the basic ga is as f o l lows: instead of selecting structures for reproduction on the basis of a single fitness measure  a portion of each new population is selected on the basis of each slot in the fitness vector. note that if a structure scores well on several measures  then it w i l l tend to be chosen in several selection phases. however  structures which perform well on even one measure w i l l be given the opportunity to pass along their specialized knowledge. after the selection phases  structures are combined via genetic operator just as in ls-1. as a result  our modified ga performs multiobjective optimization in the space of knowledge structures . 
1. the critic 
　　　one important property of the c r i t i c in a gabased system is that the fitness reported by the c r i t i c must reflect more than just success or failure on the task. otherwise  the ga is unable to identify promising programs in the early stages when successes are rare  and cannot discriminate the better programs in the later stages when they are plentiful. one source of information of this type is the amount of uncertainty exhibited by a ps program while attempting the task  where uncertainty is defined as the extent to which conflict resolution is required in the decision process. a good c r i t i c should not discourage this uncertainty in the early stages but should discourage it in the later stages. some experiments with different c r i tics of this sort revealed something of the power of the ga to exploit subtle features in the c r i t i c . for example  a c r i t i c which applied a desirable uncertainty correction  but only rewarded success  was found to yield populations rioh in programs we called specialists. a specialist was a program which achieved a maximum score in one slot of the fitness vector  but zero in a l l others. it appeared to  know  only one aspect of the task. unfortunately  these specialists were actually ps programs which were wildly guessing in the sense that they contained an overly general rule which suggested the same classification for every t r a i n ing case. a modified c r i t i c   designed to punish this indiscriminate guessing  was found to be too s t r i c t . by making risk-taking behavior too 

dangerous  it led the ga to evolve programs which produced no classification. this strategy at least scores zero  which is better than being excessively punished. finally  a judicious balance of reward and punishment was achieved by incorporating in the c r i t i c a scoring scheme inspired by the scholastic aptitude test  sat scoring . this scheme led the 
ga to consistent success on problems involving 1  1  1 and 1 classes. 
1. results 
	j. schaffer and j. grefenstette 	1 
the c r i t i c is too lax  only rewarding successes  the ga evolves programs which guess wildly to maximize the possibility of success. when the c r i t i c is too s t r i c t   the ga quickly learns than doing nothing is a good strategy. only judicious balancing of reward and punishment leads to effective 
learning. 
