 
　more is a tool that assists in eliciting knowledge from domain experts. acquired information is added to a domain model of qualitative causal relations that may hold among hypotheses  symptoms  and background conditions. after generating diagnostic rules from the domain model  more prompts for additional information that would allow a stronger set of diagnostic rules to be generated  more's primary value lies in its understanding of what kinds of knowledge are likely to be diagnostically significant. by formulating its questions in a way that focuses on such knowledge  it makes the most effective use of the domain experts' time.1 
i.the more system 
　more elicits diagnostically significant knowledge from domain experts; it is similar in spirit to systems like teiresias  davis 1  and ets  boose 1 . like these systems  more provides a mechanism for interviewing domain experts and makes use of several strategies for facilitating the interview process  more differs in that it takes a model-theoretic approach to the acquisition of diagnostic knowledge. it uses a qualitative model of causal relations together with a theory of how causal knowledge can be used to achieve more accurate diagnostic conclusions to guide the interview process. thus  it can go farther in diagnosing weaknesses in a knowledge base than its predecessors. as these weaknesses are identified  more elicits from the domain expert information that can lead to stronger diagnostic conclusions. 
　more evolved from our experience handcrafting mud  a diagnostic system in the drilling fluids domain  kahn 1 . in reflecting on the nature of our interactions with the drilling fluids experts  it seemed to us that we had used a set of quite broadly applicable knowledge acquisition strategies  more embodies those strategies. 
　more has the capacity to build domain models from a fixed set of qualitative relations that may hold among hypotheses  symptoms  and background conditions. the content of any particular model is provided by a domain expert in response to its prompts  more generates diagnostic rules from the domain model. after a rule is constructed  the user is asked to associate positive- and negative-support values with each rule. more's procedure for constructing and evaluating rules is described elsewhere.  kahn 1 . the focus of this paper is on the nature of the domain model more constructs and on more's knowledge acquisition strategies. 
　more plays three roles while interacting with a user. its first role is as an information solicitor. as the user enters the names of hypotheses and symptoms  he is asked for additional information that may result in a stronger diagnostic assessment. among other things  more will ask about events that may affect the expectation of the hypothesis occurring  the likelihood of seeing the symptom given that the hypothesis has occurred  and distinguishing characteristics of the symptom that may identify it as having been caused by a particular hypothesis. 
　once an initial knowledge base is built up  more looks for weaknesses in the rules it has generated. as a result of evaluating the diagnostic strength of these rules  more prompts for additional information that would allow a stronger set of diagnostic rules to be generated. for instance  if there is no rule assigning a high positive-support value to a symptom  s  that bears on hypothesis  h   more asks if there are distinguishing characteristics of  s  when it is caused by  h . this strategy is called symptom distinction  it is one of eight strategies discussed below. 
　in it's third role  more looks for potential inconsistencies in the way a user has assigned confidence factors to diagnostic rules  determining if the assigned weight is appropriate given the weights of other rules already in the system. although more does not have sufficient information to recommend precise value assignments  it knows enough to formulate expectations regarding the direction in which weights ought to vary across different rules. for instance  if background condition  c  is known to increase the likelihood of observing symptom  s  when hypothesis  h  occurs  then the negative-support of a rule whose evidential focus is  s  and just  s   should be lower than the negative-support of a rule whose evidential focus is  s  and  c . if the user assigns weights that violate this expectation  more issues a warning and asks the user if he wishes to change the weights of any of the conflicting rules. 
　
1 	g. kahn et al. 
1. more's domain model 
　as domain experts are interviewed by more  a representation of their responses is built into a 'domain model'. each domain model built by more consists of five representational entities: hypotheses  symptoms  conditions  links  and paths. a hypothesis denotes an event whose identification will be the result of a diagnosis. a symptom is any event or state consequent to the occurrence of a hypothesis  and whose observation disposes toward the acceptance of the hypothesis. a 
　condition is an event or state in the environment which is not directly symptomatic of any hypothesis but which can affect the diagnostic significance of some other event. links are used to join entities in the model  including other links. a path is a special type of link that joins a hypothesis to a symptom. states or events represented as symptoms may also be hypotheses. figure 1 provides a schematic representation of the key representational objects and relations used by more. 
　five kinds of conditions can be represented in a more model: frequency-conditions  tests  test-conditions  symptom-conditions  and symptom-attributes. frequency-conditions are used to represent anything that can affect the a priori expectation of a given hypothesis. such conditions are assumed to be independent of observing any particular symptom. thus  in a 
　more model  they are linked directly to an affected hypothesis. 
　tests represent procedures or devices used to determinine the occurrence of a symptom; test-conditions represent events or states that bear on the accurate use of a procedure  device  or observation. since the expected accuracy of a detection procedure may affect the evidential significance of a symptom with respect to any of its explanatory hypotheses  tests are linked 
directly to their corresponding symptoms. as test-conditions are conditions which affect the confidence in the results or accuracy of a given test with respect to a particular symptom  they are attached to the link joining a test and symptom. 
　symptom-attributes are specific characteristics of a symptom that tend to make it more or less likely to be caused by a particular hypothesis. an example would be the contiguity of datacheck reports for a disk  if the datachecks were on contiguous sectors this would indicate a radial scratch more strongly than if the datachecks were randomly distributed. symptom-attributes provide a way of refining the description of a 
　symptom into one of a number of subclasses  each subclass providing greater discrimination among causes of the symptom. since these conditions refine a symptoms description with respect to the kind of thing which could cause it  they are attached to the path connecting the hypothesis and symptom. 
　symptom-conditions represent states or events which affect the likelihood of a symptom occurring if the hypothesis has. external events which could  for example  mask or preclude the realization of a symptom even if the hypothesis occurs are represented as symptom-conditions. since these conditions affect the causal link between a hypothesis and symptom  they are attached to the path connecting the hypothesis and symptom. 
1. strategies for improving diagnostic performance 
　more's suggestions on how to augment the existing knowledge base such that stronger and more accurate diagnostic conclusions can be obtained result from its use of eight different 

strategies: 
  differentiation 
  frequency conditionalization 
  symptom distinction 
  symptom conditionalization 
  path division 
  path differentiation 
  test differentiation 
  test conditionalization 
　the differentiation strategy leads more to actively seek symptoms that provide leverage in distinguishing among diagnosable events  more scans its current domain model looking for pairs of hypotheses for which there is no differentiating symptom. when it finds such a pair  the user is ask for a symptom that will differentiate the pair of hypotheses. with respect to mores model a symptom  s  is said to differentiate one hypothesis  h1  from another  h1  when there is a path from h1 to s  and no path from h1 to s. since increased differentiation in the knowledge base also results from incorporating symptoms which are explainable by a set of causes different  at least in part  from those underlying previously reported symptoms  more also scans for triples of hypotheses  h1 h1 h1  for which there is no symptom which differentiates h1 from both h1 and h1. the identification of such symptoms makes it more unlikely that a set of symptoms could be explained erroneously by two co-occurring hypotheses. 
　for instance  in the mud domain  both an influx of water and an insufficient use of emulsifier can have the same effects on measurable mud properties. however  an increase in mud volume is usually associated with the former. while this effect can also result from a hydrocarbon influx  other shifts in mud properties distinguish hydrocarbon from water influxes. thus  the knowledge base can be further differentiated by adding the fact that an increase in volume is a confirming observation with respect to a water influx. 
　
　path differentiation is another means of finding symptoms with greater diagnostic significance. under this strategy  more asks if a symptom  which may result from one of several causes  does so via  at least partially  non-overlapping causal pathways. intermediary events on non-overlapping portions of these pathways are expected to have greater diagnostic significance than symptomatic events on shared pathways. thus  if there is a link to s from both h1 and h1  more asks about the existence of more proximal symptomatic events which lie on the the causal path from h1 to s  but not on the path from h1 to s. such symptoms would be associated with stronger positive-support values as there are fewer hypotheses which could explain their occurrence. 
　in the mud domain  for example  an increase in plastic viscosity in an oil mud can result from either shale or water contamination. these effects  however  do not result in entirely the same way. 
shale contamination causes an increase in plastic viscosity by increasing the percentage of solids in the mud system; water causes an increase by its behavior in a partially emulsified solution. the mud engineer can determine which of these mechanisms accounts for increased plastic viscosity through the use of additional tests. these tests measure the amount of unemulsified water and the solids content of the mud. positive results on these tests provide stronger confirmation of the respective causes than does the shared symptom of increased plastic viscosity. 
　path division similarly requires eliciting a symptomatic event that lies on a causal path from the diagnosable event to an already reported symptom. in this case  however  the new symptom is selected such that it is more expected  given the 
cause  than the former more distal symptom. path division is attempted when no rule with a symptom  s  immediately linked to a hypothesis  h  has a high negative-support value. when this is recognized  more prompts for a symptomatic event  s1  that lies on the causal pathway from h to s  such that s1 is more proximally caused by h and causes s. as such  the failure to observe the new proximal symptom will be of greater disconfirmatory value ceteris paribus than failing to observe symptoms later in the causal chain. 
　an increase in bentonite  for example  can be considered an intermediate step between shale collapsing into the bore hole and a change in viscosity. thus  as expected  it was found that the failure to observe an increase in viscosity is less disconfirmatory with respect to shale contamination than the failure to observe a significant increase in free bentonite through the use of a methylene blue test. 
　symptom conditionalization requires seeking out events that effect the likelihood that a symptom will occur  given that the hypothesis has. negative-support values typically vary with the expectation that a diagnosable event will indeed give rise to a particular symptom. this expectation can be low if  for instance  the appearance of a symptom requires the cooccurence of an unlikely background condition. 
　for example  some viscosity effects normally associated with salt contamination of a water based drilling fluid will appear only if the fluid has not been pretreated with surfactant thinners. if there has been a pretreatment of this kind  the failure of viscosity symptoms to appear cannot count as evidence against the hypothesis of salt contamination. however  if one knows that the system has not been pretreated in this way  then the 
g. kahn et al. 1 
disconfirmatory significance of failing to observe these viscosity symptoms is much greater than it would be otherwise. 
　symptom distinction seeks to further distinguish a symptom so it may more closely be identified with a particular cause. under this strategy more asks about symptom-attributes which are capable of dividing a symptom into finer classes  with each class more likely to be associated with one particular cause  or hypothesis  than any other. as a symptom is distinquished by characteristic attributes  the number of explanatory hypotheses goes down  and the positive support contributed by the observation of such a symptom goes up. similarly  if a symptom is always characterized by a certain attribute when it is caused by a particular hypothesis  h   then the observation of the symptom without these characteristic attributes should lead to a stronger disposition to reject h. for instance  both an influx of water and an increase in low specific gravity solids can cause a decrease in density. however  if density has decreased rapidly  it is more likely to have been due to an influx of water. 
　both symptom-conditions and symptom-attributes are represented in mores domain model as conditions attached to the path joining the hypothesis and symptom. this permits similar attributes to have different effects with respect to different hypotheses. 
　in test differentiation more seeks to determine if there are procedures or observational instruments that can detect the existence of the symptom with greater accuracy. if there are  the expectation is that reference to them will increase the evidential significance of the symptoms on which they bear. tests  as represented in more's model  are attached by a link directly to the symptom whose evidential significance may be affected. the significance of changes in ph level  for instance  differ slightly depending on whether ph is measured by litmus paper or the more accurate ph meter. 
　similarly  in pursuing test conditionalization  more inquires about conditions which can affect the confidence in the results or accuracy of a test. these conditions are represented as testconditions in the model and are attached to the test whose accuracy they modify. 
　finally  more will  under certain conditions  engage in frequency-conditionalization. with this strategy  more looks for conditions that affect the expected likelihood of a hypothesis' occurrence. these are represented as frequency-conditions in the domain model  and are attached directly to the hypothesis they modify. frequency-conditions are mapped into rules which will enhance or diminish the measure of belief provided by a set of symptoms  depending on whether these conditions increase or diminish the expectation of the hypothesized cause. for instance  in the mud domain  an increase in viscosity often results from drilling through one of a number of contaminants  some of which may be expected  others unexpected  in the location being drilled. thus  one would like the evidential significance of a symptom  such as an increase in viscosity  to be dependent on local knowledge about the likelihood of encountering various contaminants. 
1. a little concreteness 
　more seeks diagnostically significant information by prompting its user with questions such as: 
　
1 	g. kahn et al. 
1. are there any conditions under which the problem referred to by shale-contamination would be more or less likely to occur  
1. are there any conditions that affect the accuracy  or confidence  of observing increaseinviscosity  
1. are there any distinguishing features of decrease-in-density which would make it more or less likely to be caused by water-influx  
1. can you provide a symptom associated with water-influx that cannot be explained by shale-contamination  
　the above questions are driven respectively by strategies of frequency conditionalization  test conditionalization  symptom distinction  and differentiation  more uses a number of heuristic rules in deciding when it is appropriate to pursue one strategy or another  kahn 1 . 
　as diagnostic knowledge becomes available  more maps it into its underlying domain model. for example  in discussion above  several hypotheses  symptoms  and conditions relevant to the diagnosis of drilling fluid problems were mentioned. these included three hypotheses  shale contamination  water influx  and salt contamination   five symptoms  an increase in low specific gravity solids  an increase in viscosity  a decrease in density  an increase in unemuslified water  and an increase in chlorides   two symptom attributes  a gradual and a rapid decrease of density   a symptom condition  the use of an oil mud   a frequency condition  the expection of salt formations   and finally  a test  a high mbt reading . within the current implementation of more  each of these is represented as a separate data structure linked within a network of causal relations 
as illustrated in figure 1. 
1. concluding remarks 
　more assists in knowledge-base construction using the eight strategies described above. in the course of its development  more has been applied to parts of the drilling fluids domain as well as to sample diagnostic problems provided by a physician. our next step is to use more to develop a number of knowledgebaaed consultation systems in a wide variety of domains  more is currently being used to build systems to diagnose computer disk faults  computer network problems  and circuit board manufacturing problems. these efforts should give a good indication of the power of more's strategies. 
