 
   while the task of language generation seems to separate quite naturally into the two aspects of language generation  text planning and text production   it is necessary to have the planning and the production interact at generator decision points in such a way that the former need not contain explicit syntactic knowledge  and that the latter need not contain explicit goal-related information. this paper describes the decision points  the types of plans that are used in making the decisions  and a process that performs the task. these ideas are embodied in a program. 
1 introduction: the problem 
   our current understanding of language generation includes text planning and text production. in generation work of a decade ago  simmons & slocum 1; goldman 1   no text planning phase ever appeared. in the last few years  much work has been done developing text planners. the issue of interaction between planning and production phases was addressed in various ways. this paper suggests a better way to achieve the necessary interaction. 
   in the simplest systems  planners make only very highlevel decisions  such as selecting appropriate speech acts  cohen 1; jacobs 1   and play no further role in text expansion. 
   in systems with more elaborate plans  the text can be planned out in considerable detail before actual production is started. in this approach  there is a one-way flow of information from the planner to the generator  mcdonald  personal communication ; mcdonald 1; appelt 1 . the production process requires this information whenever it must decide how to expand a generator instruction into a series of more detailed instructions. if the decision criteria are based purely on syntactic and rhetorical grounds  using notions such as sentence focus and stress ; it is comparatively easy to 
   this work was supported in part by the advanced research projects agency monitored by the office of naval research under contract n1-k-1 
build them into a pre-expansion planner  since they are relatively simple and only impinge on expansion at a small number of points  such as subject choice and clause content . 
   however  when you want the decisions to take into account pragmatic considerations such as speaker intentions  conversational setting  and hearer characteristics  it is much more difficult to plan all the decisions before commencing actual expansion. for example  suppose the generator wants to create in the hearer sympathy for a 1-year old beggar. in the sentence ¡öthe  say-age age-instance-1  woman is homeless   say-age should return  old- or even  ancient  rather than  1-year old . for the planner to precompute this decision  it will have to compute all the decisions  via say-sentence and say-subject  etc.   such as selecting a subject  a head noun  and adjectives  before it will be in a 
   position firstly to realize that age is to be said as an adjective  and secondly to determine what the options are in this case. in order to do this computation  the planner will have to have access to information which one would like to claim is properly the exclusive concern of expansion  such as syntactic and lexical knowledge.  for instance  appelt's planner contains grammatical knowledge spread throughout. appelt alludes to the problems that this causes in  appelt 1 .  furthermore  if the planner is going to do this computation down to the level of individual words  it may as well do the generation simultaneously. one can try to get around this problem by having the planner assemble a set of injunctions upon which the expansion can base its decisions. to do so  the injunctions would have to span the space of possible locutions arising from the representation; assembling them would be a very large task. 
   a better solution is to perform planning only when necessitated by the expansion. this approach is characterized by a two-way communication at decision points. as the example in section 1 shows  five decision points enable a generator to produce flexible yet good text. these decision points are: topic choice; sentence content; sentence organization; clause organization; and word choice. 
there are good reasons why this approach is desirable: 
  modularity: the planner need not precompute all generator decisions  but must simply be able to furnish answers when required by the generator that means it need not contain knowledge about the generation process itself. 
  parsimony: it is unnecessary to make more decisions than exactly and only those the generator requires. 
  opportunism: it should be possible opportunistically to take advantage of possibilities of locution that arise due to syntax  of which the planner should have no knowledge  and which the production mechanism cannot decide by itself. this can be done only if the planner can make decisions during the actual production. 
1 plans 
   the generator described here tries to satisfy multiple pragmatic goals. it can be given a goal to affect the hearer in each of the following areas: his knowledge; beliefs  affective values attached to knowledge ; future behaviour; emotional state  aspects: hearer's own; toward topic; toward conversation ; relation wrt the speaker  aspects: social; emotional . it requires a set of hearer characteristics  and is able to reason about relatedness of concepts to those in the model. unfortunately it is impossible to describe the goal structure and plan selection process here.  related work was done in  cohen 1  and  hermann #. faucht 1 .  
   some of the plans this program contains are sets of injunctions  among others  describe-object  
describe-cause/history  	correct-
misconception  convince ; they are similar to 
mekeown's 	 mckeown 	1  	generational 	scripts 
 schemata . these plans are used by a depth-first network traversal planner to make topic-related decisions and instructions. for example  the convince plan serves the goal to get the hearer to attach a certain affective connotation to some concept. to do this  it directs the 
story representation traversal by selecting for consideration and  if further criteria are met  for inclusion in the text  concepts that help to support the connotation. analysis of various written arguments  taken from communist newspapers  pro- and anti- labour strike leaflets  etc.  indicates that the convince plan contains  at least  the following suggestions about a topic: 
  consider the topic if speaker and hearer agree over its connotation 
  consider the topic if it opposes a concept accepted by both 
e. hovy 1 
  consider concepts the topic is a subgoal to 
  consider concepts the topic is an instance of 
  consider the topic's results 
  consider the current state of affairs relating to the topic 
  minimize difference between speaker's desire/interpretation and reality  if it is small 
  minimize difference between hearer's desire/interpretation and reality  if it is small 
  find someone hearer respects who agrees with speaker's interpretation 
this plan is described further in the next section. 
   other plans are suggestions for achieving a goal. for example  the relation plan make the hearer dominant contains  amongst others  the instructions: 
  topic choice: don't change the topic; follow his lead  i.e.  don't select unrelated topics  
  sentence content: don't include in a sentence clauses about concepts he doesn't know 
  sentence organization: focus on what he deems important 
  sentence organization: make questions rather than assertions; ask his opinion 
  word choice: use words he knows 
whereas the increase-knowledge plan teach the hearer contains: 
  topic choice: change the topic when required 
  sentence content: don't include in a sentence concepts he doesn't know  unless they are the topic 
  sentence organization: make short  simple sentences 
  word choice: use words he knows 
   clearly  there is a potential conflict in the two plans given: one calls for never changing the topic and the other explicitly calls for the opposite. for planners such as noah  sacerdoti 1  this poses a serious problem. 
however  this is what gives generation its spice! people holding contradictory goals and plans can speak; a generator must be able to hold conflicting plans and merge their instructions into one sensible generator instruction or decision. 
   the integrated method of generation proposed here is well suited to manage such contradictory demands. 

1 e. hovy 
rather than being mandatory instructions  an activated plan's steps become suggestions on suggestion lists. since the guidance which the expansion process requires from the planner always takes the form of selecting one of a 
number of options  a suggestion is some criterion for evaluating a list of alternatives and preferring one  or more . for example  if the speaker's goal is to teach the hearer  one of his plan-suggestions is to use words that the hearer knows. given a list of possible words  the suggestion will select only such word s . if none exist  no suggestion is made  and the decision is made by whatever other criteria apply. thus  when the expansion has to make a word-choice decision  a query containing the syntactically obtained alternatives is sent to the appropriate suggestion list for pragmatic and rhetorical evaluation. 
   merging conflicting preferences can be achieved in various ways. some alternatives are: most popular option; result of the suggestion serving least recently served goal; using some fixed ranking of goals. woolf's program  woolf & mcdonald 1  contains  meta-rules  to guide the planner through its network of plans  in effect  a planner planner! ; similar criteria can be defined in this scheme under which one of the active suggestions will be preferred over other  conflicting ones. my program currently uses the  simplistic  first alternative. 
1 an example 
   tracing through an example will make clear the decisions and the planning criteria required to produce text. the example is part of a story denoting one of the primary elections in the carter-kennedy presidential nomination contest in 1. outcome-1 is one of the results of the election. a similar result  outoome-1  denotes kennedy's getting 1 delegates. in the conversation  the hearer has been defined to be antipathetic toward carter and sympathetic toward kennedy  while the program has the opposite sympathies.  this is accomplished by including the relevant concepts among the interlocutors' sympathy and antipathy characteristics.  the program's goal is to convince the hearer that  even though kennedy won  carter didn't do badly. this goal activates the convince plan. 

where vote-outcome  carter-1  election-1  etc.  are concepts further defined in a property inheritance network. 
1 topic choice and change 
   outcome-1 was nominated for consideration by the convince plan's fifth rule during scrutiny of the representation of the election. when outcome-1 itself is considered by the topic choice suggestions  the seventh rule fires and builds a say-sentcncc instruction to make a sentence that stresses the small difference between the actual outcome  outcome-1   to which the hearer is sympathetic  and the speaker's desired outcome  a hypothetical outcome  also represented  to which the hearer is antipathetic . the stress information min will enable say-stress to generate an appropriate adverb or adjective. in more detail  rule 1 contains: 

1 sentence content 
   since both outcome-1 and outcome-1 are selected by the convince plan  and since their sentence instructions are both sent to the expander only when a satisfactory end to the line of argumentation has been found  the expansion has the options of making two sentences  or of combining them into a relational sentence such as: 
¡öwhile kennedy got 1 delegates  carter got 1  
 carter only got 1 delegates fewer than kennedy  the decision is made by the planner's sentence content suggestions. if most suggestions call for long or complex sentences  the relation will be said; otherwise  two sentences will be formed. typically  suggestions to make long or complex sentences are activated by the goals to confuse or bore the hearer  or to make him feel inferior. similar criteria decide whether or not to include the clause  in the election on feb 1 . 
1 sentence organization 
   in a typical sentence  you can usually select almost any clause to be the sentence subject. mckeown describes rules concerning focus or stress in order to make subject choices which resulted in natural  flowing text. additional criteria you can take into account are pragmatic; for example  if it is your intention to anger the hearer  and you know he does not like some aspect of the topic  you may select that aspect as the subject  to give it prominence. 
   the example contains at least three possible sentence subjects  the actor  amount-got  diff-amount aspects : 
¡öcarter lost the election  
¡ö1 delegates were won by carter  
 1 delegates was the margin by which carter lost  
1 clause organization 
   within a clause  the generator has to decide which aspects of the representation to say and how to order them. for example  when making a noun group  it must select the head noun and then decide whether to describe it in full  only give unsaid information  or give an abbreviated version. it then has to select and order the modifiers  both pre- and post-nominal  and some modifiers can appear in both positions   before it can return a form from which the eventual noun group will be built. 
   some possibilities are ruled out by text flow rules  one doesn't say  the georgian male 1-year old jimmy carter  the president    other decisions can be based upon goal-related criteria  and therefore can form another point of interaction between planner and generator. for example  if your goal is to calm the hearer  you should not explicitly include aspects about an object that you know he disapproves of. 
1 word choice 
   this decision must be made in any representation system rich enough to associate more than one word with a concept. like  goldman 1   the program uses discrimination nets attached to the representational primitives; here the discriminations depend both on features of the particular instance of the concept  and on the pragmatic issues mentioned  for example  interaction of word affect with the hearer's sympathies: saying ¡öterrorist  to an ira soldier may get you shot; saying ¡öfreedom fighter  certainly will not! . 
   selecting a verb has implications for sentence content and organization. for example  when the subject has been said  say-predicate has to select a verb and build up say-function instructions for the rest of the sentence. the discrimination net for the concept vote-outcome contains  among others  the verbs  win    lose   and  get . while  win  is inappropriate  either of the others can be said: 
 carter got 1 delegates  
¡öcarter lost the election  
the two verbs are passed to the word-choice suggestions of the planner  which  in this case  prefer the former option  since the convince plan's sugggestions call for preferring words with connotations that match the speaker's interpretations.  since outcome-1 is the failure of an event which the program was sympathetic to  and since  lose  has negative connotations which would oppose the sympathy  it is rejected.  
e. hovy 1 
1 conclusion 
   the final text  generated from the whole representation  is: 
kennedy only got a small number of delegates in the election on 1 february. 
carter just lost by a small number of 
delegates he has several delegates more than kennedy in total. 1 acknowledgements 
thanks to lawrence birnbaum and rod mcguire. 
1 