: the brightness patterns in two successive image frames are used to recover the motion of a planar ob-
ject without computing the optical flow as an intermediate step. based on a least-squares formulation  a set of nine nonlinear equations are derived. a simple iterative scheme for solving these equations is presented. using a selected example  it is shown that in general  the scheme may con-
verge to cither of two possible solutions depending on the initial condition. only in the special case where the translational motion vector is perpendicular to the surface does our algorithm converge to a unique solution. 
1. introduction 
the problem of determining rigid object motion and surface structure from a sequence of image frames has been the topic of many recent research papers in the area of machine vision. much of the theoretical work has been restricted to using the optical flow  the apparent velocity of brightness patterns in the image three types of approaches  discrete  differential  and least-squares  have been commonly pursued. 
   in the discrete approach  information about a finite number of points is used to reconstruct the motion  1 1 . to do this  one has to identify and match feature points in a sequence of images. the minimum number of points required depends on the number of image frames. in the differential approach  one uses the optical flow and its first and second derivatives at a single point  1 . in the least-squares approach  the optical flow is used at every image point  1 1 . 
   in general  to compute the optical flow  one exploits a constraint equation between the optical flow and the image brightness gradients. locally  the brightness variations in time varying images only provide one constraint on the two components of the optical flow. therefore  an additional constraint will be required to compute the local flow field. for instance  one may assume that the flow field varies smoothly  1   or that it is locally quadratic . 
   in this paper  we restrict ourselves to planar surfaces where only three parameters are needed to specify the surface structure. we determine the motion and surface parameters directly from the image brightness gradients  without having to compute the optical flow as an intermediate step. 
s. negahdaripour and b. horn 1 


1 s. negahdaripour and b. horn 
parallel to the line of sight. in this case  the dual solution can be viewed as a degenerate one. 
1. experimental results 
in the following example  we will demonstrate the sensitivity of the scheme to the initial condition. the image brightness function was generated using a multiplicative 
sinusoidal pattern  one that varies sinusoidally in both x and y directions   a 1бу field of view was assumed  and the brightness gradients were computed analytically to avoid errors due to quantization and finite differencing of brightness values  in practice  the brightness values in two image frames are discretized first  and are then used to compute the brightness gradients using finite difference methods . table 1 shows the results of two tests using different initial conditions. in each case  the algorithm converges to one of the two possible  true or dual  solutions. the results show that the error in each parameter after less than 1 iterations is within 1% of the true value. 
   in similar tests  with various motion and surface parameters  accurate results have been obtained in less than 1 iterations with a variety of initial conditions. more importantly  the algorithm eventually converged to one of the two possible solutions. the results have not been as satisfactory for the particular case where the translational 
motion component is  almost  perpendicular to the planar surface  the solution is unique in this case . in these cases  several hundred iterations were required to achieve reasonable accuracy. it appears that the behavior resembles that observed when the newton-raphson method is applied to a problem where two roots are very close to one another. 
1. summary 
the problem of recovering the orientation of a planar surface and its motion from a sequence of images was investigated and formulated as one of unconstrained optimisation. using conditions for optimality  the problem was reduced to solving a set of nine nonlinear algebraic equations and an implemented procedure based on an iterative scheme for solving these equations was presented. through a selected example  it was shown that the algorithm could converge to either of two possible solutions  or the only solution when the translational motion vector is perpendicular to the surface . in practice  once a solution is obtained  the dual solution can be computed from equation  1 . in 
several other cases tested  solutions with good accuracy have been obtained after 1 iterations. 
1. acknowledgments 
this report describes research done at the artificial intelligence laboratory of the massachusetts institute of technology. support for the laboratory's artificial intelligence research is provided in part by the system development foundation. 

s. negahdaripour and b. horn 1 
 hildreth  e.g.  the measurement of visual motion  mit press  1. 
|1j horn  b.k.p.  schunck  b.c.   determining optical flow   artificial intelligence  vol. 1. pp. 1  1. 
 longuet-higgins  h c.  a computer algorithm for reconstructing a scene from two projections '1 nature  vol. 1  
pp. 1  1. 
 1  longuet-higgins  h.c.  prazdny  k.   the interpretation of a moving retinal image   proceedings of the royal society of london  series d  vol. 1  pp. 1  1. 
 maybank  s.j.   the angular velocity associated with the optical flow field due to a single moving rigid plane   proceedings of the sixth european conference on artificial intelligence  pp. 1  september 1. 
 negahdaripour  s.  horn  d.k.p.   direct passive navigation   a.i. memo 1  mit a.i. lab  february 1. 
 ii  sugihara  k.  sugie  n.   recovery of rigid structure from orthographically projected optical flow   tr 1  department of information science  nagoya university  nagoya  japan  october 1. 
 1| tsai. r.y.  huang  t.s.  zhu  w.l.   three-dimensional motion parameters of a rigid planar patch  1: singular value decomposition '' ieee trans  on acoustics  speech  and signal processing  vol. assp-1  no. 1  august 1. 
 tsai  r.y.  huang  t.s.   uniqueness and estimation of three-dimensional motion parameters of rigid objects with curved surfaces   ieee transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence  vol. pami-g  no. 1  january 1. 
 waxman  a.m.. ullman  s.   surface structure and 1-d motion from image flow: a kinematic analysis   car-tr-1  comp. vis. lab  center for automation research  univ. of maryland. college park. md  october 1. 
 waxman. a.m.  wohn  k..  contour evolution  neighborhood deformation and clobal image flow: planar surfaces in motion.  car-tr-1  comp. vis. lab  center for automation research  univ. of maryland  college pnrk  md  april 1. 
 1g| wohn  k.  davis. l.s.  thrift  p.   motion estimation based on multiple local constraints and nonlinear smoothing   pattern recognition  vol. 1g  no. g  pp. 1 1  1. 
1. 