 
a new algorithm is proposed which transforms f-structures into discourse representation structures  drss . its primary features are that it works bottom up  that it is capable of translating f-structures without pre imposing any arbitrary order on the attributes occurring in it  and that it handles indeterminacy of scoping by using sets of translations. the 
approach sheds light on how an efficient interaction of different components of a natural language processing model can be achieved. 
i introduction *  
the informational content of a sentence is determined not only by its linguistic form  but also by a number of contextual factors. thus within any compositional approach to semantics the control structure for the functional composition must not 
be determined exclusively by the syntactic structure of the phrase. the present approach is based on two levels of representation  that 'mediate' between the linguistic form of a 
sentence and its denotation s   in a model . 
f-structures constitute  the first level. they have the property that the unraveling of the grammatical roles of a 
sentence is already achieved  while the quantifier scope relations are not yet represented. this is basically due to 
the use of grammatical functions as theoretical primitives 
 . . 
the second level accounts for the dependency of  the construction of the interpretation  of a sentence on factors 
which are not purely syntactic. it consists of drss in which the scope relations will be treated. the central property of drss is that the part of sentence or text from which they derive acts as a context which guides the interpretation of the parts following it. this property of drss is based mainly on their containing discourse referents   . it leads to a 
dynamic creation of interpretations of sentences. 
we will show how to formulate a translation meciianism which allows for arbitrary scope relations not only within the limit of a clause nucleus but also within the various clause nuclei in which an np can play a role by means of functional control. possible non-syntactic scope restrictions can thus be licensed by additional constraints derived from various other features of the surface string  the semantics  or pragmatics. 
the central feature of the translation algorithm is  loosely speaking  to replace the grammatical functions in the f-structure by the discourse referents which have been made available  for subsequent reference  by the values of the grammatical functions  i.e. the f-structures representing nps. these f-structures themselves are translated into drss which are partial in the sense that there are  in general  still 
*  this work has been supported in part by dfg under grant r1 and esprit under grant aoord. 



of course the translation of the pred has to introduce a discourse referent p specified by k. for the interpretation of 
 1  we translate the 
 1  every boy expects an american to win entry for expect by 

before we calculate the other two readings for  1  we want to note that in the case of equi verbs the requirement that only closed drss are accepted as a translation excludes the 

it has been shown how grammatical functions and discourse referents can be used in the translation process from linguistic form to discourse representations. the algorithm described accounts for the dynamics of the construction of interpretations of sentences  determined not only by syntactic configurations  but also by contextual means  semantics  or pragmatics. 
