 
     the king kong parser described by this paper attempts to apply the principles of r elational grammar to the parsing of english in order to overcome the problems encountered by syntactic and semantic parsers. specifically  this parser uses relational categories such as subject  direct object  and instrument to map syntactic constituents onto semantic roles wi thin cd-like structures. thus  the parser makes use of both syntactic and semantic informatio n to guide its parse. 
	i 	background 
a. 	syntactic parsing 
during the 1's  woods  and bresnan and 
kaplan among others developed syntax driven parsers based on various kinds of atns  whose theoretical base derived more or less from transformational grammar and its offshoots. a more recent approach to syntax driven parsing is represented by the marcus parser  which  unlike atn's  does no backtracking and builds permanent structure. one of the principal difficulties with the type of parser represented by woods's work and marcus's work  and also to a lesser extent of bresnan's and kaplan's  is illustrated by the problems associated with garden path sentences  which require extended backtracking  or  in the case of the marcus parser  more look-
ahead than his theory permits. 
     prepositional phrase attachment represents another problem for syntactic parsers  since this phenomenon is primarily semantic and as such does not lend itself to syntactic solutions. more abstractly  one can say that syntactic parsers generally have trouble dealing with sentences with multiple interpretations  where the ambiguity involves the placement of constituents. marcus uses a related problem  that of locating the source of a moved whphrase  to argue that semantic as well as syntactic information is necessary for an accurate syntactic parse and appeals to the procedure in  woods 1  of selective modifier placement  although he does not formally incorporate it. 
     one syntactic parser  the chart parser developed by kay for the mind system  dealt extensively with this type of problem. the solution chosen was to keep several possibilities open at once by building constituents and  in erfect  treating them as building blocks which could be put together in a variety of ways. the final parse would be the result not only of the identification and analysis of the constituents 
but also of the choice of how to put them together. the chart parser relied on some semantic knowledge to make this choice and was in a way a hybrid of syntactic and semantic approaches to parsing. 
*this research was sponsored by rome air 
for   development  center under contract f1-c-1  project #1. 
b semantic parsing 
     another approach to ambiguity is offered by members of the semantic school of parsing  among them the developers of cds: schank. abelson  and their students. the developers of such parsers recognized multiple senses of of a word from the start. attachment problems were resolved either by reference to larger meaning structures such as a scriots or by lexical expectations. 
     the ability to handle ambiguity is the great advantage of semantic parsers  but this abili ty comes at a high price. such a parser has great difficulty capturing generalizations betwe en transformationally related sentences  and it also has to work harder in dealing with probl ems that are better analyzed in terms of const ituent structure  such as gapping. furthermor e  there is no graceful way to retarget a word based parser to another language  since such parsers ignore cross-linguistic generalizations finally  error handling is often easier in a syntactic parser both because knowledge of const ituent structure can often aid in correction and because syntactically based error messages are far more intelligible to the user. 
ii the need for relational grammar 
     the parser being developed at mitre differs from most parsers in that it recognizes not two but three levels of representation: the level of structure  the level of meaning  and the level of grammatical relations  subject  object  indirect object ! which mediates between the first two for the purpose of identification of semantic roles. this notion is based mainly on work in  bayer 1 y although a similar approach in a different framework has been suggested in  wasow 1 . the premise of this approach is that there is no straightforward mapping between structural information  which  in typical cd approaches  seems to amount to no more than appeals to position  and semantic roles. this is clear even in english  a language whose structure is quite rigid and yields more clues than most languages about the mapping between structure and semantic roles. 
     an approach in terms of grammatical relations may be justified by i  simplification of syntactic generalizations  ii  simplification of identification of semantic roles  and i i i   generality with respect to complex sentences a. simplification of syntactic generalization 
     in english  as in other languages  various syntactic facts are best expressed in terms of grammatical relations. the facts of verb agree-
ment  for example  are most elegantly captured through appeals to the categories subject  object  and indirect object  in english as well as languages with richer case marking . semantic subcategorization facts  such as the requirement that the verb  walk  be predicated of an animate being  are also most easily expressed in terms of grammatical relations. since final grammati-

cal relations are deduced from surface structure almost solely by positional and morphological information  one might claim that a statement of the facts of verb agreement and subcategorization in terms of this sort of information would be adequate. while it is true that this sort of description can be made  its awkwardness calls its intuitiveness and usefulness into question. the term  subject  in english is isomorphic with the phrase  the np directly preceding the verb in an uninverted clause  or the np directly following the initial verb in an inverted clause   but the fact that this disjunction must be employed in all those references where the word subject  would be naturally used suggests that an important generalization is being missed  even in a language where structure is strict ana fairly unambiguous; in a language where case-
marking and word-border combine to identify the subject  the description of the above phenomena in structural and morphological terms becomes 
much harder. 
b 	simplification of identification of 	semantic roles 
     analogously  the explicit identification of subject aids in the identification of semantic roles. generalizations or defaults  such as the mapping into the actor slot  can be greatly simplified by referring to the notion of subject rather tnan to the positions the np in question may occupy. the mapping properties of classes of exceptions can also be described easily  when the group of np's conveniently labeled  subject  
map into the object slot instead  for example. 
c. 	generality with respect 	to 	complex 	sentences 
     we referred earlier to the notion of final grammatical relations. this phrase hints at the idea that grammatical relations may changethis is why  in the passive sentence  john was struck by mary   the surface subject is mapped into the same semantic slot that receives the direct object of an active sentence such as  mary struck john . the operation of passive makes a direct object a subject  with concomitant displacement of the original subject  into the  by -phrase in english  for example . in order to identify the original relations  we apply the operation backward in order to  undo ' the application of passive. although english has relatively few rules which change grammatical relations  these few rules interact to derive complicated multi-clause sentences which positional approaches are hard-pressed to analyze elegantly or easily. 
     consider two more of these relationchanging rules: subject-to-subject raising  which makes the subject of a clause in subject position the subject of the dominating clause  relating  that john will go is likely  and  john is likely to go   and subject-to-object raising  which makes the subject of a clause in direct object position the direct object of the dominating clause  relating  i believe that john left  and  1 believe john to have left . these two rules  combined with the rule of passive above  may cooperate in their application to yield quite complex sentences. for example  
john is believed by mary to be likely to have left. 
is derived by subject-to-subiect raising in 	the 
most embedded clause  followed by subject-toobject raising in the next clause up  and finally passive in the matrix clause. while a relational approach can  having identified and extracted those np1 which bear the relevant gram-
matical relations  simply change the grammatical relations of the nps involved when they undo these operations  a positional/structural ap-
s. bayer etal. 1 
roach must physically move the nps or try to evelop a set of complicated conditions which 
alter 	the 	slot-mappings for a verb. 	these approaches are unwieldy alternatives to the 	relational 	approach; 	trie intuitive appeal of gram-
matical relations is demonstrated even in the names of the raising operations just described  names which were coined not by relational grammarians but by the classical transformational grammarians of the '1's and '1's  notably noam chomsky  for whom grammatical relations were  and still are  derivative. 
	i l l 	implementation of the king kong parser 
     the current implementation of the king kong parser contains a marcus-type syntactic parser coupled with mechanisms for manipulating gram-
matical relations and semantic roles. it also relies on a semantic representation scheme in which cd type structures are embedded in a semantic net. as the parse progresses  the grammatical relations of the terms in the sentence are identified  and the changes in grammatical relations are undone. once the initial relations have been reached. the function fill-cd takes the relational network  along with a set of slot-mappings  which are produced by modifying a set of global defaults  such as subj -  actor  dobj t  object  with whatever verbspecific mappings are appropriate  and maps in the values for the cd. 

     the dictionary entries for king kong  although based on cd-like kernels  look quite different from standard cd's. figure 1 contains an example of a typical verb entry  for the word  fly  f the  part-of-speech  slot for the verb contains subcategorization information  and the  features  slot specifies syntactic and morphological properties. the two fields  gr - slots  
and  slot-completions  contain crucial information which ties the semantic properties of  fly  to its syntactic properties. tne former maps from relational categories to semantic slots; the latter f i l l s empty semantic slots based on already filled slots. each can rely on the functional/semantic notions of  command  and  instrumentality  to guide the slot-filling. an actor must be able to command an action in the sense that he must be able to cause the action to occur; an instrument must be a tool useable by the commander to accomplish the action; an object is the entity primarily affected by the action. an example may clarify this. 
     the various senses of  fly  are illustrated in table 1; we consider the semantic roles of these sentences to be as in table 1. 

1 s. bayer etal 

iv testing and results 
     the parser  with a dictionary of 1 words  was tested on a set of 1 sentences to verify that it recognized the morphology of the words and syntactic constructions of the clauses properly  and that the mapping from structure to grammatical relations and from grammatical relations to semantic roles was correct. 
     king kong worked correctly under the full range of tenses  voices  and under many transformations on sentence structure including unbounded movement rules like wh movement  relation-changing rules like passive  dative movement and raising  deletion rules such as equi  and insertion rules such as thereinsertion and extraposition  see a sampling in table 1 . however  tnere were some limitations on the capabilities of the parser arising from its insufficient handling of coordination. we 
are currently implementing king kong as an expert systems approach to parsing in order better to handle decisions about ambiguity. even with these limitations  the range of sentence constructions it could parse was very wide. most crucially  king kong successfully recognized grammatical relations. it was always able to identify the subject  object and indirect object of each verb  even when these were shifted away from the verb by transformations of the base sentence. 
     finally  within the restrictions imposed by lack of context and only the most rudimentary suggestions of a semantic component  king kong 
was always able to map from grammatical relations of entities to actions  to the semantic roles of actor  instrument  and object. 

v conclusion 
     we have demonstrated that the use of relational grammar as a mapping between syntax and semantics overcomes many of the weaknesses associated with other parsing strategies. we realize  of course  that a parser is only one component of an interlace; we are currently eveloping a representation of context using 
scripts and semantic networks. the latter should provide a capability for understanding simple word extensions  while the former will aid in understanding ill-formed but  meaningful  input. a last hope is that by making use of universal relational categories we can attempt the retargetting of king kong to another language-
