 
most of the geometric information in a scene is captured by local coordinate frames oriented according to local geometric features. in polyhedral worlds these features are faces  vertices and edges. such features lead naturally to parallel algorithms for building such a scene description from stereo input that are insensitive to noise and occlusion. this representation can be used for object 
location  object recognition  and navigation. 
1. introduction 
     the critical problem of form perception is that of picking the right representation. in previous papers we have argued that if frame primitives are picked as the underlying geometric representation  then many problems related to form perception can be solved in an elegant way  1 1 1 1 |. frame primitives are geometric coordinate frames that can be extracted from more primitive image features. these primitives play a dual role: thev can be- regarded as features in then own right and used in the form matching process directly  or they can be used to specify transformations between themselves and other features. 
　　in this paper  frame primitives are developed with respect to a polyhedral model of the geometric environment. the advantage of a 
　　polyhedral model is that the polyhedral primitives arc intimately related to the frame primitives. howevei. any substrate related to 
coordinate frames such as symmetries |1| may be used as well. frame primitives express the fundamental nature of rigidity: two shapes are equivalent if there exists a rigid transformation that maps one into the other. this idea can also be extended to the matching of a prototype with portions of a scene. a portion of a scene is said to represent an -instance of a prototype it there exists a rigid transformation mapping the prototype into portions of the scene. 1 he-

use of rigidity distinguishes the approach from topoplogical matching l1. 
     the problem of matching a 1d prototype to an image can be hierarchically organized into:  1  the recovery of 1d lines from stereo image data  for monocular approaches  see | l.ll| ;  1  the 
construction of a 1d polyhedral scene model: and  1  the matching of portions of that model to a library of stored prototypes. this hierarchical strategy is similar to that of  1| and has several advantages over the methods that trv to match the image to the 1d prototype in one step for example.  1  try to match the 1d prototype directly with the 1d line drawing. 
     the computation is implemented in a connectionist architecture  motivated by biological information processing systems  1|. the complete processes of extracting 1d structure and matching is carried 
out by a parallel probabilistic relaxation algorithm 
1. matching different frame descriptions 
　　an instance of an object in the viewer centered frame may be related to a prototypical internal representation in an object-centered frame bv a viewers: transforminations. but this problem is generally underdetermined . furthermore  the image usuallv contains many features that belong to different objects  and these lend to confound the perception of a particular shape  
　　a key simplifying assumption is that the internal representation contains only a single object. in this case the viewing transformation can generally be computed and parts of the object in the image can be identified despite other image clutter |1|. the task of determining if a known object is in an image is posed as: is there a transformation of a subset of image features such that the transformed subset can be explained as the object  if the answer to this question is no  then the object is not present. if yes. then the transformation provides all the necessary information about the object. 

d. ballard and h. tanaka 1 


1 d. ballard and h. tanaka 

d. ballard and h. tanaka 1 
1. implementation 
the status of the current implementation is that the constraints 

lor matching an object in  wo coordinate frames ha e been shown to work by |1|. the stereo portion of the constraints are currently being implemented  figure 1 shows the result for a simulated threedimensional wrench. in these first tests  the data for the wrench is rotated and translated to obtain a scene copy and there is no sell 
occlusion. 
 this is then matched against the original using the constraints described in section 1 implemented as described in sections 1 and s. the figure shows: a  the wrench  b   alues for the direction of rotation magmtude not shown  and c  values for the direction of tratislation magnitude not shown . the multiple values are die result of false pairings between scene frame primitive and prototype. although the grey scale does not emphasize this  the correct transformation is found easily in this case. 
1. high-level control 
　　the prototype frames form a generic basis set. in order to represent a particular object  an appropriate subset of value units must be turned on. one way to do this is to represent objects as specific links between an object token space and the prototype frame space. this arrangement forms a basic architecture that can be used in several different ways. 
/. object localion. if a particular object is sought  its prototype frame description is turned on by activating its ob|cct token. this  urns on the appropriate frame primitives. then if a match between the object and a subset of the scene exists  a rotation and a translation unit will be turned on in the transformation network. 
//. object recognition. if an object has been segmented  by other methods  e.g.. range  color etc.  and its identity is sought  the prototype frame can be loaded with several candidate objects. if the matching process can build a transformation between any of these objects and the segmented object  appropriate rotation and translation units will be turned on. 
e 

figure 1. 
///. navigations. this architecture can also be used for navigation in the following way. at some initial ume to the current scene is loaded into the prototype frame by activating the identity units in the transformation space. this has the effect of turning on units in the prototype frame that are a copy of the scene units at that instant. henceforth  as the observer moves around  these units are locked on. 
the result is that at any instant the transformation units will reflect the transformation between the current scene and that at t1. the inverse of this transform corresponds to the observer motion. 

1 d. ballard and h. tanaka 

