 
　　the widespread use of analogy in human communication underscores the need for a system which can recognize and understand analogies. this paper presents a theory of analogy recognition and comprehension  using as a domain letters to the editor of a weekly news magazine. some of the issues facing a system which understands analogies in this domain are identified  initial work on this program is reviewed  and work in progress is discussed. 
i introduction 
　　people often rely on analogy as a vehicle for conveying ideas. researchers in linguistics  education  psychology and other academic disciplines have studied this use of analogy and metaphor in depth  lakoft and .johnson  1   ortony  1   sternberg  1 . recent investigations by ai researchers into computational models of analogical reasoning include  oarbonell  1   in which carbonell outlines extensions to means-ends analysis which make use of past experience in solving new problems  thus integrating skill refinement and plan acquisition processes. there are few computational theories on the use of analogy in editorials  conversations  debates  narratives or other natural language text. two examples of work in this area are winston's work on learning by analogy  winston  1  and lebowitz1 ipp  lebowitz  1 . 
　　in winston's system  a teacher supplied a precedent setting story to the system and then gave the system as an exercise a second story and a conclusion which was known to be true about the precedent. the system was able to reason why the conclusion was true for the precedent  and show how it was also true for the second story. while winston's system was able to perform some analogical reasoning on the narratives  it did not recognize the narratives as being analogous without the assistance of the teacher. 
　　ipp compared new wire service stories to similar events previously stored in memory. lebowitz used in frame-like structures  minsky  1  to index events in memory according to their similarities and differences. ipp was successful in finding events similar to the new one and was able to form generalizations allowing it to learn about its domain. however  ipp did not form specific analogical mappings and did not deal with disputes  arguments  or beliefs. 
　　julip is a computer program which is part of the oped project  alvarado  dyer  and flowers  1 . the goal of oped is to develop a theory about the process of reasoning comprehension in the domain of editorials. the focus of 
this work is supported in part by the artificial intelligence center  
hughes aircraft company  calabasas ca  and by a grant from the w.m. keck foundation. 
* also affiliated with the software engineering division  electrooptical and data systems group  hughes aircraft company  el segundo  ca 1. 
julip is on the use of analogies in editorials. in contrast to the work by winston and lebowitz  the objective of julip is to implement a theory of analogy recognition  representation  and access for question answering. a completed julip system will accept as input a letter to the editor in english containing an analogy. our challenge will be to recognize the presence of the analogy in the letter to the editor  map analogous elements together  and perform any transformations needed to complete the analogy. our system will demonstrate that it understands the analogy via an english language question answer session with the user. 
ii the issues facing julip 
consider the following hypothetical letter to an editor: 
high-tech-1 
some people are against computers because computers eliminate peoples jobs however  the automobile industry did the same thing to people in the horse carriage industry. yet consumer demand for autos was strong enough that eventually more jobs were created in the auto industry than were lost in the horse carriage industry. in the end  the economy benefitted by the introduction of the new technology. 
　　informal protocols show that readers give the following answers when questioned on their understanding of this text: 
ql: to what is the computer industry being compared  
al: the computer industry is being compared to the automobile industry. 
q1 what did the auto industry do to people in the horse carriage industry  
a1: people in the horse carriage industry lost 
jobs. 
a1: why is the computer industry being compared to the auto industry  
q1: both industries initially eliminated jobs but ultimately created more jobs than they eliminated. 
q1: what will happen as computers eliminate jobs  
a1. an even greater number of new jobs will be created. 
　　both the textual clues and an understanding of the mechanics of editorials and arguments are used in recognizing and following an analogy. since julip's domain is letters to the editor  work on julip also encompasses a theory of editorial comprehension and draws upon previous work on argument structures and rules  flowers  mcguire  and birnbaum  1 . 
　　how can all these elements - analogical reasoning  editorial comprehension  and argumentation - be combined with natural language understanding  our approach is to base the natural language comprehension component on boris  dyer1   an integrated natural language understanding system for narratives. the work by flowers et al. on representation of beliefs and the structure of arguments is a key part of our representation of an editorial letter  flowers  mcguire  and birnbaum  1 . memory organization and causal rea-

1 s august and m dyer 
soning components are based upon schank's work  schank  1   schank  1 . our implementation of jump's question answer processing draws upon lehnert's work in this area  lchnert  j 1 . 
ill how do you know the analogy is there  
　　understanding an editorial requires that the reader identify the dispute being presented  and the technique being used to support or refute the author's arguments. analogy is one of these techniques. there are two main indicators of the presence of an analogy: 1  textual clues  and 1  conceptual similarities. jump relies upon both of these indicators to identify the presence of an analogy. 
a. textual clues 
　　use of textual clues provides the most direct technique for introducing an analogy into an editorial letter  lu this case  the author uses a phrase such as  the same thing  or  similar to  or  so it is  to link the source to the target. this technique is used in the following letter: 
revolution 
the soviets are doing the same thing in lebanon that they did in 
viet nam. by supplying the syrians and the druze with weapons  the ussr is fostering internal feuds and abetting the downfall of lebanon.  christison  l1  
　　in revolution  the reader is explicitly called upon to map the soviets' role in viet nam in the past to the soviets' role in lebanon today. it is assumed that the reader has prior knowledge of what the soviets did in viet nam. 
b. conceptual similarities 
　　people can readily detect the presence of an analogy even in the absence of textual clues  as seen in the following 
example: 
destruction 
the soviets are bombing people in afganistan. but the u.s. killed people in vietnam. what does labelling the soviet's actions as despicable say about our own action  
a reader identifies both events as instances of destruction. this indicates that the concepts representing the text are categorized in memory by type. to provide this capability in a computer program  conceptual representations must be categorized as they are built  and linked together in the order in which they are encountered. the contents of these groups must be checked as new elements are added to them. when similar conceptual representations are encountered  similarity measures and other heuristics must be employed to determine whether an analogy is intended. 
iv constructing a representation of the analogy in an editorial letter 
　　high-tech-1 serves as a typical editorial letter containing an analogy. here we present the analysis that julip is being designed to perform in building the representation of high-tech-1 in memory. 
the author of high-tech-1 first brings up the issue 
 arg-1  of introduction of computers into manufacturing  where robots are being used on the assembly lines. the author makes the point that this automation is causing people who would normally work on the assembly lines to lose their jobs. this is understood as a belief that computer aided manufacturing  cam  is bad. this belief is justified by the fact that computers cause people to suffer job loss  and that losing a job is something bad. 
　　since this is a letter to an editor  julip must expect the author of the article to either defend or attack the original point. julip sees the author's argument begin to unfold in 
the second sentence  when the conjunction  however'' provides a lexical clue that a dispute regarding the argument is about to be introduced. 

v answering questions about the analogy 
　　julip is being designed to answer questions related to the mapping of source and target in the analogy  the transforms required to complete the analogy  and the basis of the analogy. techniques for answering these types of questions draws upon lehncrus theory of question answering  lehnert  1   which is being augmented to handle questions peculiar to accessing the conceptual representation of an analogy. for example  questions regarding analogical mapping such as q1 above  are basically concept completion questions that require traversing a new type of link; in this case  the comparison link. 
vi work in progress 
　　work on jump up to this point has concentrated on developing a conceptual representation of the text of high-teoh-1. we examined the text of this letter in detail in an effort to identify the lexical items  demons  and domain knowledge that must be available to the parser in order to develop a plausible conceptual representation of hightech-1 in memory. this approach enabled us to test the robustness of the representation  without being distracted by parser and coding implementing details. 
　　.1 'lip currently works with a hand coded conceptual representation of the high-tech-1 analogy built in memory using arf  edwards  1   a knowledge representation tool which supports both static and dynamic property inheritance. julip accepts queries in conceptual representation form. it searches the completed graph in memory and returns a conceptual representation of its findings to the user. the question answer session is implemented via arf queries on the representation. 
vii future work 
　　we are now developing the parsing and generation components of julip to enable it to handle verbatim input. 
　　the next step for julip is to translate our theory into the demons and lexical entries needed to support analogy recognition and comprehension in dypar  the parsing component of boris  dyer  1 . our theory will continue to develop as we collect additional examples of letters to the editor containing analogies and human protocols for understanding them. julip's current objective is to demonstrate understanding of editorial analogies given to the program in english through a natural language question answer session with the user. future objectives of the project will address the issues of incorporation of conclusions drawn from the analogies into long term memory  and generation of analogies. 
vlll conclusions 
　　julip draws upon knowledge of editorial comprehension  argumentation  and integrated natural language understanding systems to develop a theory of analogy comprehension in the domain of letters to the editor. we have shown how both lexical cues and comparison of conceptual similarities trigger recognition of analogies in editorials letters. our conceptual representation of an analogy in memory utilizes comparison links to map analogous elements to each other and to tie together parallel arguments. these links must be created and 
traversed during understanding as the representation of the completed analogy is built in memory. question answer processing utilizes these links to demonstrate the system's understanding of the completed analogy. 
s. august and m. dyer 1 
