 
   this paper reports on the development of a computational theory of discourse the theory is based on the thesis that discourse structure is a composite of three structures the structure of the sequence of utterances  the structure of intentions conveyed  and the attentional state. the distinction among these components is essential to provide adequate explanations of such discourse phenomena as clue words  referring expressions and interruptions. we illustrate the use of the theory for four types of interruptions and discuss aspects of interruptions previously overlooked 
1. introduction 
   this paper reports on the development of a computational theory of discourse structure that simplifies and extends previous work as we develop it. the theory will be seen to be intimately connected with two nonlinguistic notions  namely intention and attention. attention and intention are crucial to accounting for the processing of utterances in discourse. intentions will be seen to play a primary role not only in providing a basis for explaining discourse structure  but also in defining discourse coherence  and providing a coherent notion of the term  discourse  
itself 
   the theory is a further development and integration of two lines of research work on focusing in discourse      b   and more recent work on intention recognition in discourse           our goal has been to generalize properly to a wide-range of discourse types the notions of focusing and task structure shown by grosz to be necessary for processing task-oriented dialogue. one of the main generalizations of previous work will be to show that discourses generally are in some sense  task-oriented   but the kinds of  tasks  that can be achieved are quite varied - some are physical  others mental  others linguistic. as a result  the term  task  is unfortunate  and we will use the more general terminology of intentions - speaking for example of discourse purposes - for most of what we say 
   our mam thesis is that the structure of any discourse is a composite of three distinct but interacting constituents: the structure of the actual sequence of utterances m the discourse  a structure of intentions  and an attentional state. the distinction among these constituents is essential to providing an explanation of interruptions  see section 1   as well as the use of certain types of referring expressions and of various expressions that affect discourse segmentation and structure  discussed in   most related work on discourse structure  including reichman   linde   candace l sidner 
bbn laboratories 
cambridge  ma 
lmde and goguen  ll   and cohen   conflates at. least two of these constituents. as a result  significant generalizations are lost  and the computational mechanisms proposed are more complex than needed by carefully distinguishing the constituents  we are able to account for the significant observations in this related work while simplifying the explanations given and computational mechanisms used. related work by polanyi and scha         concentrates on a single component  the linguistic one. and examines in more detail various aspects of its internal structure 
   in addition to its use in explaining these linguistic phenomena  the theory provides an overall framework m which to answer questions about the relevance of various segments of discourse to each other  and to the overall purposes of the discourse participants various properties of the intentional component have implications generally for work in natural-language processing. in particular  the range of intentions that underlie discourse is such that approaches to discourse coherence based on selecting discourse relationships from a fixed set of alternative rhetorical patterns are unlikely to suffice in general furthermore  this study makes evident several problems that must be confronted in extending speech-act related theories  eg   l       etc.  from coverage of individual utterances to coverage of extended sequences of utterances in discourse 
   although a definition of  discourse  must await the development of the theory laid out in the remainder of this paper  some properties of the phenomena we want to explain must be specified now. in particular  we take a discourse to be a piece of language behavior that typically involves multiple utterances and multiple participants. the discourse may be produced by one or more speakers  or writers  and the audience may comprise one or more hearers  or readers  each conversational participant brings to the discourse a set of beliefs  goals  intentions  and other mental attitudes. these attitudes affect a conversational participant's participation in the discourse  they influence both how utterances are produced and how they are understood where necessary  we use initialing conversational participant  icp  and other conversational participant  ocp  to distinguish participants. 
1. the basic theory 
   discourse structure is a composite of three interacting components a linguistic structure  an intentional structure  and an attentional state. these three components of discourse structure deal with different aspects of the utterances in a discourse. utterances - the actual saying or writing of particular sequences of phrases and clauses - are the basic elements in the linguistic structure. note that this use of linguistic structure to refer to the structure of a sequence of utterances rather than to single sentence syntactic structure intentions of a particular sort  namely those whose recognition  by the ocp  is intended  by the 1cp  and which provide the basic reason for the discourse are the basic elements of the intentional structure attentional state contains information about the objects  properties  relations  and discourseintentions that are most salient at any given point in a 
   discourse  it summarizes information from previous utterances crucial for processing subsequent ones so that a complete history need not be kept 
   together the three constituents of discourse structure provide the information needed by the conversational participants to determine how an individual utterance fits with the rest of the discourse - in essence to figure out why it was said  and what it means  in the context in which it was uttered the context provided by these constituents also forms the basis for certain expectations about what is to come  these expectations too play a role in fitting in new utterances the attentional state serves an additional role  namely it provides the means for actually using the information in the other two structures in the generation and interpretation of individual utterances 
1. linguistic structure 
   the first component of discourse structure is the structure of the sequence of utterances that form a discourse just as the words in a single sentence form constituent phrases  the utterances in a discourse are naturally aggregated into discourse segments the utterances in a segment  like the words in a phrase  serve particular roles with respect to that segment in addition  the discourse segments  like the phrases  fulfill certain functions with respect to the overall discourse although two neighboring utterances may be in the same discourse segment  it is also possible for them to be in different segments likewise two utterances that are not in linear sequence may be in the same segment 
   the factoring of discourses into discourse segments has been observed across a wide range of discourse types grosz  showed this for task-oriented dialogues linde  found it held for descriptions of apartments  linde and gcguen  ll  describe such structuring in the watergate transcripts reichman  observed it in informal debates  explanations  and therapeutic discourse cohen  found similar structures in essays in rhetoric texts  
   there is a two-way interaction between the discourse segment structure and the utterances constituting the discourse linguistic expressions affect the discourse structure  they are also constrained by it  not surprisingly  linguistic expressions are among the primary indicators of discourse segment boundaries explicit use of certain words and phrases  e.g..  in the first place    and more subtle clues like changes in tense and aspect are among the repertoire of linguistic devices that function wholly or in part to indicate these boundaries        . these linguistic devices can be divided according to whether they indicate changes in the intentional structure or the attentional state of the discourse  or both  the differential use of these linguistic markers provides one piece of evidence for the separation of these two components of discourse structure  in addition  because these linguistic devices function explicitly as indicators of discourse structure  it becomes clear that they are best seen as providing information at the discourse  and not the sentence  level b  grosz and c. sidner 1 
and hence that certain kinds of questions  eg  about their truth conditions  do not make sense 
   just as linguistic devices affect structure  so does the discourse segmentation affect the interpretation of linguistic expressions in a discourse referring expressions provide the primary example of this effect the segmentation of discourse constrains the use of referring expressions by delineating certain points at which there is a significant change in what entities are being discussed. in particular  pronouns and reduced definite noun phrases act differently within a segment than they do across segment boundaries while discourse segmentation is not the only factor governing the use of referring expressions  it is important for capturing one of the constraints on their use section 1 contains some simple examples of the effects of segmentation on referring expressions  more detail can be found in  
1. intentional structure 
   a rather straightforward property of discourses  namely that they-or  more accurately  those who participate in them- have an overall purpose  turns out to play a fundamental role in the theory of discourse structure in particular  some of the purposes that underlie discourses  and the discourse segments they comprise  provide the means of individuating discourses and of distinguishing coherent discourses from incoherent ones 
   although typically the participants in a discourse may have more than one aim in participating in the discourse  eg  a story may entertain its listeners as well as describe an event  an argument may establish someone's brilliance as well as convince that some claim is true   we distinguish one of these purposes as primary to the discourse we will refer to this particular purpose as the discourse purpose  or dp intuitively  this discourse purpose is the reason for engaging in this particular discourse * for each of the discourse segments  we can also single out one intention  the discourse segment purpose  or dsp intuitively  the dsp says how this segment contributes to achieving the overall discourse purpose ** 
   typically  an icp will have a number of different kinds of intentions that lead to initiating a discourse one kind of intention might include intentions to rpeak in a particular language or to utter particular words another might include intentions to amuse  or to impress the kinds of intentions that can serve as discourse purposes or discourse segment purposes are distinguished from other intentions because they are intended to be recognized  c.f  l      whereas other intentions are private  that is. the recognition of the dp  or dsp  is essential to its achieving its  intended  effect discourse purposes and discourse segment purposes share this property with certain utterance level intentions that grice  uses in defining utterance meaning 
   that is  both why a discourse-a linguistic oct-ond not some other behavior  and why the particular content of this discourse. and not some other information  is being conveyed. 
   we will assume here a single dp for discourses and dsp for segments. the consequences for the theory of loosening this assumption are discussed in . 
   
1 b. grosz and c. sidner 
   it is important to distinguish this property from that of being the main intention behind a discourse  a property which the discourse purpose may well not have. some other intention might be the primary reason for the uttering of a sequence of utterances for example  when on-stage a comedian's main intention may be to amuse he might do this in a variety of ways some of these could require linguistic behavior - e.g.  relate an event sequence  describe a funny object in all of these cases the discourse purpose is the main intention that is intended to be recognized  e.g.  the intention that the hearers' beliefs come to include some particular beliefs about the sequence of events - those told in the relating  -and their relationship to one another  whereas the intention to amuse is private and need not be recognized by the audience in order for the discourse to succeed 
   the range of intentions that can serve as discourse  or discourse segment  purposes is open-ended  c.f   para 1   much like the range of intentions that underlie purposeful action more generally there is no finite list of discourse purposes  as there is of  say  syntactic categories thus a theory of discourse structure cannot depend on choosing the dp and dsps from a small fixed list  as in    or    nor on the particulars of individual intentions the particulars of individual intentions are  of course  crucial to understanding any particular discourse  but this is a different issue what is essential for discourse structure is that such intentions bear certain kinds of structural relationships to one another since the conversational participants can never know the whole set of intentions that might serve as dps and dsps  what they must determine are the relevant structural relationships among intentions. 
   two structural relationships play an important role. dominance and satisfaction precedence an action that satisfies one intention  say dsp1  may  be intended to  provide part of the satisfaction of another  say dsp1 when this is the case  we will say that dspl contributes to dsp1  conversely  we will say that dsp1 dominates dspl. for some discourses  including task-oriented ones  the order in which the dsps are satisfied may be intended to be recognized. dspl satisfaction precedes dsps in the dominance hierarchy whenever its intention must be satisfied before the other 
   the following are some examples of the types of intentions that could serve as dps or dsps  followed by one particular instance of each type 
1. intend that some agent intend to do some physical task  intend that ruth intend to fix the flat tire 
1 intend that some agent  come to  believe some fact  intend that ruth believe the campfire is started. 
1 intend that some agent believe one fact provides support for another  intend that ruth believe the smell of smoke supports that the campfire is started. 
1. intend that some agent intend to identify an object  existing physical object  imaginary object  plan  event  event sequence   intend that ruth intend to identify my bicycle 
1 intend that some agent know some property of an object  intend that ruth know that my bicycle has a flat tire 
   dps and dsps are basically the same sorts of intentions whether an intention is a dp or a dsp depends on whether it is the reason for initiating the discourse  in which case it is a dp  or its satisfaction contributes in some way to achieving this main discourse purpose  in which case it is a dsp . any of the intentions on the preceding list could be either a dp or a dsp. furthermore  particular instances of any one of them could contribute to another  or to a different instance of the same type. for example  the intention that someone identify some object might dominate several intentions that that person know some property of that object  likewise  the intention to get someone to believe some fact might dominate a number of contributing intentions that that person believe other facts 
1. attentional state 
   the third component of discourse structure  the attentional state  is an abstraction of the focus of attention of the discourse participants as the discourse unfolds. it is inherently dynamic  recording the changes in what objects  properties  and relations are salient at each point in the discourse. the attentional state can be modeled by a set of focus spaces  changes m the attentional state are modelled by transition rules for adding and deleting spaces the collection of focus spaces available at any one time we call the focusing structure  and the process of manipulating spaces is called focusing a focus space is associated with each discourse segment  this space collects together representations of those entities that are salient either because they have been mentioned explicitly m the segment or because they became salient in the process of producing/comprehending the utterances in the segment the focus space also includes the discourse segment purpose  the inclusion of the purpose reflects the fact that the conversational participants are focused on not only what they are talking about but also why they are talking about it 
   figure 1 illustrates how the focusing structure serves to coordinate the linguistic and intentional structures  as well as capturing the attentional state. the discourse segments  on the left of the figure  are tied to focus spaces  m the middle of the figure  the focusing structure is a stack we illustrate that stack in figure 1 with a pointer between individual focus spaces information in each space is accessible to other spaces higher in the stack unless otherwise notated with a hash line 
   the stacking of the focus spaces shown reflects the relative salience of the entities in each space during the corresponding segment's portion of the discourse the stack relationships arise from the ways in which the various dsps relate  information captured in the hierarchy of dsps  depicted on the right in the figure  the depiction of spaces shown in the figure is a static representation of what results from a sequence of operations such as pushes onto and pops from a stack a push occurs when the dsp for a new segment contributes to the dsp for the immediately preceding segment. when the dsp contributes to some intention higher in the dsp hierarchy  some number of focus spaces are  popped  from the stack before inserting the new one 
   part one of figure 1 shows the state of focusing when the paragraph p1 is being processed. paragraph 
p1 gave rise to fs1 and had as its discourse purpose dp1 the properties  objects  relations and purpose 
   

represented in fs1 are accessible but less salient than those in fs1. p1 yields a focus space that is stacked relative to fsl because dp.  in fs1 dominates p1's dsp  
dsp1 	as a result of the relationship between fsl and 
fs1  reduced noun phrases will be interpreted differently in p1 than in pi for example  if some red balls exist in the world and are represented in both fs1 and fsl   the red ball  used in p1 will be understood to mean that red ball that is represented in fs1. if  however  there is a green truck and it is represented only in fsl   the green truck  occurring in p1 will be understood as that green truck. 
   part two of figure 1- 1 shows the state of focusing when paragraph p1 is processed. because the dsp of fs1  dsp1  is dominated only by dp1  and not by dsp1 
fs1 has been popped from the stack  and fs1 has been pushed on 
   two essential properties of the focusing structure are now clear first  the focusing structure is parasitic on the intentional structure the relationship among dsps determines pushes and pops note however  that which operation is relevant may sometimes be indicated 
b. grosz and c sidner 1 
in the language itself for example  the clue word  first  indicates the start of a segment whose dsp contributes to the dsp of the previous segment. second  the focusing structure  like the intentional and linguistic structures  evolves as the discourse proceeds none of them exists a priori*** 
   the discussion here should also clarify some misinterpretations of focus-space diagrams and task structure in    the focus-space hierarchies in that work are best seen as special cases of the attentional state  and the task structure as a special case of the intentional structure we stipulate in this paper several researchers  eg  linde and goguen  ll   reichman   misinterpreted the original research in an unfortunate  and unintended  way -they took the focus-space hierarchy to include  or be identical with  the task structure the conflation of these two structures forces a single structure to contain information about attentional state and intentional relationships it prevents a theory from adequately accounting for certain aspects of discourse including interruptions  see section 1 . 
   a second confusion was that the task-structure is necessarily a prebuilt tree taking the task-structure to be a special case of intentional structure makes it clear that the tree structure is simply a more constrained structure than one might require for other discourses  the nature of the task that generates a task-oriented discourse has both dominance and ordering relations **** while other discourses may not have significant ordering constraints among the dsps furthermore there has never been reason to assume that the task structures in task-oriented dialogues are pre-built rather the task of discourse theory is to explain how the hearer builds up a task structure using information conveyed in the discourse 
   figure 1 illustrates some fundamental distinctions between the intentional and attentional aspects of discourse structure first  the dp hierarchy provides  among other things  a complete record of the discourselevel intentions and their dominance  and  where relevant  precedence  relations  whereas the focusing structure at any one time can contain only information relevant to a single branch of the hierarchy second  at the conclusion of a discourse  if the discourse completes normally  the focus stack will be empty while the dp hierarchy will be fully constructed third  when the discourse is being processed  only the attentional state can directly constrain the interpretation of referring expressions. 
it is possible to confuse the dsp with the notion of 
모모although there ore some rare cases in which one conversational participant has a complete plon for the whole discourse prior to uttering o single word  much more typically  the dsp hierarchy is constructed as the conversational participants create the discourse and need not exist prior to it. it may be more obvious this is true for speakers and hearers of spoken discourse than for readers and writers of texts  but in fact even for the writer  the dsp hierarchy is often developed as the text is wr i 1en. 
     even in the task case the orderings may be partial. in fact  the systems built for task-oriented dialogues       did not use a prebuilt tree  but constructed the tree-based on a partially-ordered model-only as o particular discourse evolved. 
   
1 b. grosz and c. sidner 
center  the dsp and center differ in two ways first  the center is an element only of the attentional state  whereas the dsp plays a role in both the attentional and intentional structures. second  the center may shift within a discourse segment  it almost always shifts across segment boundaries   the dsp does not a change in dsp is what underlies a segment boundary. although in some cases the intention that is the dsp may be the object that is the center  more typically these do not coincide 
   in short  the focusing structure is the central repository for the contextual information needed to process utterances at each point in the discourse. it contains those objects  properties  and relations most salient at that point - distinguishing the center from others - and also contains links to those parts of the linguistic structure and the intentional structure that are relevant the ability to identify relevant discourse segments  the entities they make salient  and their dsps becomes especially important as the amount of information grows over the course of a discourse. 
you kids and i put them away after he left 
   these two discourses have distinct purposes and convey different information about properties  objects  and relations. since d1 is embedded within dl  one expects the discourse structures for the two segments to be somehow embedded as well  the theory described in this paper differs from polanyi and scha's   and other more radically different proposals as well  e.g.  .     in that the embedding occurs only in the attentional structure: the focus space for d1 is pushed onto the stack  above  i.e.  as more salient than  the focus space for dl  until d1 is completed  as shown in figure 1. the intentional structures for the two segments are distinct there are two dp/dsp structures for the utterances in this sequence it is not necessary to relate these two - end indeed intuitively they are not related 
   
1. application of the theory: interruptions 
   interruptions in discourses provide an important test of any theory of discourse structure because processing an utterance requires figuring out how it fits with previous discourse  it is crucial to figure out which parts of the previous discourse are relevant to it  and which cannot be thus  the treatment of interruptions has implications for the treatment of the normal flow of discourse interruptions may take many forms - some are not at all relevant to the main flow of the discourse  others are quite relevant  and many fall somewhere inbetween these extremes a theory must differentiate these cases and explain  among other things  what connections there are between the main discourse and the interruption and how the relationship between them affects the processing of the utterances in both. 
   the importance of distinguishing between intentional structure and attentional state is evident in the first three examples we consider in this section the distinction also permits us to explain a type of behavior considered by others to be similar - so-called semantic returns--an issue we consider at the end of the section. 
   the three examples that follow do not exhaust the types of interruptions that can occur in discourse there are additional ways to vary the explicit linguistic and nonlinguistic indicators used to indicate boundaries  the relations among dsps  and the combinations of focus-space relationships present. these examples illustrate interruptions that fall at different points on the spectrum of relevancy to the main discourse. they can be explained more adequately by the theory of discourse structure given here than by previous theories  and hence provide evidence for the necessity of the distinctions we have drawn. 
1. type 1; true interruptions 
   the first kind of interruption is the true interruption  a discourse segment whose purpose is distinct from the purpose of the discourse in which it is embedded in the example below  from   there are two  separate  discourses  dl indicated in normal type  and d1 in italics. 
john came by and left the groceries 
stop that 

	figure 1: 	the structures of a true interruption. 
   the focusing structure for true interruptions is different from that for the normal embedding of segments  in that the focusing boundary between the discourse in progress and the interruption is nonpenetrable  depicted with a hashed line between focus spaces  the boundary between the focus spaces prevents entities in the one from being available to the other because the second discourse totally shifts 
   
attention to a new purpose  and may shift who the intended hearers are   the speaker cannot use referential expressions in it that depend on the accessibility of entities from the first discourse because the boundary between the focus space for dl and that for d1 is non-penetrable  if d1 were to include an utterance like   put them away   the word  them  would have to refer to something deictically present  and could not be used to refer anaphorically to the groceries. 
   as the discourse stands however  dl is resumed almost immediately. the word  them  in  and i put them away  cannot refer to the kids ***** but onlv to the groceries. the focus space for d1 has been popped from the stack note for this to be clear to the hearer  the speaker must indicate a return to dl explicitly two indicators of the  stop that  interruption are assumed to have been present at the time of the discourse -a change of intonation and a change of eye gaze the linguistic indicators are the change of mood to an indicative  and the use of the vocative  
b. grosz and c sidner 1 
now back to bill. how do 1 say that bill is an employee of abc  
   the dp for the whole larger discourse from which this sequence was taken is to provide information about various companies  including abc  and their employees the outer segment in this example - d-bill - has a 
dsp--dsp- bill- to tell about bill  while the inner segment- --d-abc- -has a dsp 뫴뫴 dsp-abc-- .o convey certain information about abc. because of the nature of the information being told  there is order to the final structure of the dp dsps information about abc must be conveyed before all of the information about bill can be the speaker in this instance does not realize this constraint until after he begins the  flashback  interruption allows him to satisfy dsp abc while suspending satisfaction of dsp bill  which he then resumes  hence  as shown in figure 1.'  there is an intentional structure rooted at dp and with dsp-abc and dsp-bill as ordered sister- nodes 
   
   unlike previous accounts  the theory is not forced to integrate these two discourses in terms of a single grammatical structure  nor must the theory provide answers to questions about the specific relationship between segments d1 and dl  as in  l1  inst end  the intuition readers have of an embedding in the discourse structure is captured in the attentional state by the stacking of focus spaces  which thus accounts for the manner in which the utterances are processed further  what is intuitively distinct about the two segments is captured in their different intentional  dp/dsp  
struct u r e s 
1. type 1. flashbacks and filling in missing pieces 
   sometimes a speaker interrupts his or her- own flow of discussion because some purposes  propositions or entities need to be brought into the discourse but have not been the speaker forgot to include those entities first  and now must go back and fill in the missing information. a flashback or- a filler segment results at that point in the discourse these segments contain additional dsps that must be satisfied before the current dsp can be this type of interruption differs from true interruptions in several ways the dsp for the flashback or filler bears some relationship to the dp for the whole discourse  even though it may not have a close relationship to the dsp of the current segment or to any of the dsps dominating the current dsp  the linguistic indicator of the flashback or filler typically includes a comment about something going wrong  and the audience always remains the same 
   in the example below  from  1    the speaker is instructing a mock-up system  played by a person  about how to define and display some knowledge representation information again  the interruption is indicated by italics 
ok now how do 1 say that bill is woops / forgot about abc 
1 need art indivdual concept for the company abc 
 rcmaiitder of discourse segment on abc  
모모모because this is so clearly the case on other grounds  the segment boundary is clear even to a reader after the fact . 

	figure 1: 	the structures of a flashback. 
   the available linguistic data permit two possible attentional states as appropriate models for flashback type interruptions the simpler model has a focusing structure identical to the one that would ensue if the flashback segment were a normally embedded segment  as depicted in figure 1 the focus space for the flashback- - fs-abc*-is pushed onto the stack above the focus space for- the outer segment fs-bill  and all of the entities in both focus spaces are normally accessible for reference the more complex model uses an auxiliary stack fs -bill  and possibly some additional spaces  are put onto the auxiliary stack for the duration of the interruption after an explicit indication that there is a return to work on dsp-bill  e.g.. the  now back to bill  used in this example   any focus spaces left on the stack from the flashback are popped off  and all spaces on the auxiliary stack  including f s - bill  are returned to the main stack 
   the major difference between these two models is that the first allows entities relevant to the interrupted material to be accessible during the interruption whereas in the second thev are not which model is correct depends on whether in the embedded segment  d-abc  the speaker can refer to bill or other entities in fs-bill using less than full definite descriptions 
   
1 b. grosz and c. sidnnr 
because the use of pronouns seems to be connected much more with centering than with focus space boundaries  the appropriateness of pronominal reference to bill   he   is not an adequate test  as a result the current example - and other data available - do not indicate a clear choice between these models however  the explicit return to d -bill in this example suggests the more complex model is needed 
   this kind of interruption is distinct from true interruptions because there is a connection  although indirect  between the dsps for the two segments. further the linguistic markers of the start of the interruption indicate that there is a precedence relation between these dsps  and hence the need for the correction . flashbacks are also distinct from normally embedded discourses by the precedence relationship between the dsps for the two segments  and the order in which the segments occur. the second attentional model further distinguishes flashbacks from normal discourse because it provides for information being saved but not accessible  in the auxiliary stack  during the 
interruption 
1. type 1: digressions 
   the third type of interruption we consider  which we call a digression  is a segment that is linked to the segment it interrupts by some entity that is salient in both  but that has a dsp unrelated to the dp to which the interrupted segment's dsp contributes for example  if while discussing bill's role in company abc  one conversational participant interrupts with   speaking of bill  that reminds me  he came to dinner last week   bill remains salient  but the dsp changes the salient object on which the digression is based might be the dsp  but more typically is some object  relation  or property in the focus space for the interrupted segment a typical means of beginning such digressions are phrases like  speaking of john  and  that reminds me ' 
   in processing digressions  the dsp for the digression forms the base of a separate intentional structure just as in the case of true interruptions a new focus space is formed and pushed onto the stack  but it contains at least one - and possibly other - entities from the interrupted segment's focus space. like the flashbacktype interruption  the digression usually must be closed with an explicit closing utterance such as  getting back to abc .   
1. noninterruptions -  semantic returns  
   one case of discourse behavior which we must distinguish are the so-called  semantic returns  discussed by polanyi and scha  in all the interruptions we have considered there is a need to pop the stack when the interruption is over  and the mam flow of the discourse is resumed. the focus space for the interrupted segment is  returned to.' in the semantic  return case  entities and dsps previously salient are taken up once again  but they are explicitly reintroduced the state of the focus stack is not a factor in constraining such  returns   for example  suppose yesterday two people had discussed how badly jack behaved at the party  and then today one says  remember our discussion about jack at the party  well  a lot of other people thought he acted just as badly as we thought he did.  the utterances today call up  or return to  yesterday's conversation through the intention that more be said about jack's poor behavior  but the return is not a return to a previous focus space 
   anything that can be talked about once  can be talked about again later. however  if there is no focus space on the stack corresponding to the segment and dsp being discussed further  then  as polanyi and 
scha  point out. there is no popping of the stack the separation of attentional state and intentional structure makes clear what is occurring in such cases  and the intuitions that lie behind the use of the term  semantic return.  in re-introducing some entities from a previous discourse  conversational participants are establishing some connection between the dsp of the new segment and the intentional structure of the original discourse it it not a return to a previous focus space because the focus space is gone from the stack and the items to be referred to must be explicitly re-established. it is a return  at least in some sense  to a previous intentional structure. 
1. conclusions and future research 
   the theory of discourse structure presented in this paper generalizes from theories of task-oriented dialogues. it differs from previous generalizations in carefully distinguishing three components of discourse structure-one linguistic  one intentional  and one attentional the distinctions are crucial for an explanation of interruptions  clue words  and referring expressions 
   the particular intentional structure used also differs from the analogous aspect of previous generalizations. although  like them it provides the backbone for the discourse segmentation and determines structural relationships for the focusing structure  part of the attentional state   unlike them it does not depend on the particular details of any single domain or discourse - type. 
   although  obviously  not complete  the theory provides a solid basis for investigating not only discourse structure  but also discourse meaning  and for constructing discourse-processing systems. several difficult research problems remain to be addressed of these  we take the following two to be of primary importance 
1 what is the relationship between discourselevel  dp/dsp  and utterance-level  speech acts  intentions1 
1. what information do discourse participants use to recognize these intentions  and how do they do it  
   finally  the theory suggests two important conjectures first  that a discourse is coherent only when its discourse purpose is shared among the conversational participants  and when each of the utterances of the discourse contributes to achieving this purpose  either directly or indirectly by contributing to the satisfaction of a discourse segment purpose. second  that the notion of  topic  is primarily an intentional notion  it is best seen as referring to the dp  and dsps. previous discussions of the  topic  of an utterance or discourse have been confused because uses of the term  topic  have variously referred to notions that are essentially syntactic  e.g.  the  wa  marking in japanese  surface subject in english   attentional  the center of an utterance   and intentional  the dsp of a segment  
acknowledgments 
the research reported in this paper has been made 
   
b. grosz and c. sidner 1 
1 of discourse and syntax  pages 
possible by a gift from the system development foundation  and by a grant from the defense advanced 
research project agency under contract n1c-1  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 1.academic press. inc.  1. 
mann  w.c. and thompson  s.a 
relational propositions in discourse 
technical report information sciences instituterr-1  information sciences institute  november  1. 
polanyi  l. and scha. r. 
a syntactic approach to discourse semantics 
in proceedings of int'l conference on computational linguistics 	stanford university  stanford  ca  1 
polanyi  l and scha  r. 
a model of natural language discourse. in discourse structure.able* publishers  1 
polanyi  l  and scha  r. j. h. 
on the recursive structure of discourse. 
in proceedings of the january 1 symposium on 
connectedness in sentence  text  and 
discourse the catholic university of tilsburg  
   tilsburg  the netherlands  1 in press 
reichman-adar  r 
extended person-machine interface 
artificial intelligence 1 : 1  march. 1 
robinson  a. 
interpreting verb phrase references in dialogs 
in proceedings of the third biennial conference of the canadian society for computational 
studies of intelligence victoria. may  1. 
schank. rc  collins  g.c.. davis  e.. johnson  p.n.  lytinen  s.  reiser  b.j what's the point  
cognitive science 1 1  july-september  1 
sidner  c.l  and israel  d.j 
recognizing intended meaning and speaker's plans. 
in proceedings of the international joint conference in artificial intelligence  pages 
1 ijca1  ijcai. vancouver  b.c . august  1 
sidner  c.l 
protocols of users manipulating visually 
presented information with natural language 
technical report 1  bolt beranek and newman inc.  september  1 
sidner  c.l 
what the speaker means the recognition of speakers' plans in discourse 
computers and mathematics with applications 1   1. 
special issue on computational linguistics - nick cercone  guest editor 
sidner  cl 
plan parsing for intended response recognition in discourse. 
computational intelligence 1  1  february  1 
walker. d 
understanding spoken language. 
elsevier north-holland  new york city  1. 
wittgenstein l 
philosophical investigations oxford press  1.  i   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 ii   
 