 
　　the framework and control structure of an image understanding system sigma arc presented. sigma consists of three experts: geometric reasoning expert  gre  for spatial reasoning. model selection expert  ms'e  for appearance model selection  and low level vision expert  live  for knowledge-based picture processing. tills paper mainly describes the control mechanism for the spatial reasoning by gre  where bottom -up and top-down analyses are integrated into a unified reasoning process. 
	1. 	introduction 
　　many experimental image understanding systems have been developed to test the feasibility of image understanding! 1   the followings are some problems in building an image understanding system which have not yet been treated successfully. 
 1 segmentation 
　　there are many methods of segmenting an image to extract  objects. each method has its advantage and disadvantage. how to select and/or combine appropriate methods is a basic problem in image understanding. 
 1 diversity 	in 	appearance 
　　1d appearances of a 1d object vary greatly depending on viewing angles. on the other hand  an object has many diverse appearances. for example  houses in a suburban area have many possible shapes  sizes  and colors. how to limit the number of possible appearances and intelligently select the ones to try  search  is another problem. 
 1 representation and utilization of domain knowledge 
　　an image understanding system needs to have domain knowledge to construct an interpretation of the image. usually  the sources of knowledge are diverse and redundunt. requirements that must be satisfied by an object are specified in many different ways  and each of them gives only a weak constraint. knowing that only some of the constraints for an object are satisfied is not enough to assign the object label to an image 
feature e.g. region . on the other hand  failure to satisfy some of the constraints does not indicate that the image feature cannot be an object. how to organize and use domain knowledge is another problem. 
　　in this paper  we describe the framework and control structure of an image understanding system sigma. the followings are the basic ideas incorporated into sigma 
to solve the above three problems. 
  1  knowledge-based segmentation 
	it 	is 	advantageous 	to 	use 	a 	knowledge-based 

　　this export is the central reasoning module in the system  and utilizes a symbolic hierarchical model for the possible spatial organization of objects in the world. the geometric reasoning performed by this expert 
 evidence accumulation  in teg rates both bottom-up and top-down analysis processes into a unified reasoning process. all of the partial evidence obtained during the interpretation are stored in a common database  iconic database in fig. 1   where consistent pieces of evidence are accumulated. gre first establishes local environments  contexts  using the accumulated evidence. then  either the bottom-up analysis to establish a relation between objects or the top-down analysis to find a new object are activated depending on the nature of a focused local environment. in the top-down analysis  gre first reasons about its goal  the target object to be delected  and where to analyze the image. then it asks model selection export to perform the analysis. 
 1 model 	selection expert  mse  
　　this expert reasons about the most promising appearance models to use in searching for the object in the image. this model selection is performed based on the contextual information provided by gre. knowledge about objects is represented at several levels of specificity. for example  an object class  house  is a generalization of many specifically shaped types of houses. gre determines the general class of objects to search for  e.g.  house   while mse determines which specialization  e.g. rectangular house  should be looked for. in addition to this reasoning  mse performs geometric transformation from the scene domain to the image domain. 
 1 low 	level 	vision expert 	 llve  
　　tho appearance model determined by mse is given to this expert. llve performs picture processing to extract the image feature corresponding to the specified appearance model. it selects appropriate picture processing operators and determines efficient and effective process sequences based on the knowledge about picture processing methodsias for details of llve  see 1j . 
1. 	evidence 	accumulation for 	spatial 	reasoning 
　　it is widely accepted that image understanding systems should incorporate both bottom-up and top-down analyses. the use of geometric relations  however  is very different in the two analysis processes: consistency verification in bottom-up analysis end hypothesis generation in top-down analysis. an important characteristic of our evidence accumulation method is that it enables the system to integrate both bottom-up and top-down processes into a single flexible spatial reasoning process. 
1 principle 	of 	evidence 	accumulation 
　　the spatial reasoning using the evidence accumulation method is perfomed by the geometric reasoning expert. its principle is as follows. 
　　let rel. 1  denote a binary geometric relation between two classes of objects  1 and 1. this relation can be represented using two functional expressions: 1 - f 1  and 1 = g 1l . given an instance of 1  soy s  function f maps it into a description of an instance of 1  f{s   which satisfies the geometric relation  rel  with s. the analogous 
t. matsuyama and v. hwang 1 
interpretation holds for the other function g. 
　　in sigma  knowledge about a class of object is represented by a frame   and a slot in that frame is used to represent a function such as f or g. a slot contains a group of production rules  each of which consists of a precondition and an action. a precondition represents a set of conditions specifying when the function can be activated. an action represents a computational procedure corresponding to the function  which produces the description of the related object. 
　　whenever an instance of an object is created and the conditions are satisfied  the function is applied to the instance to create a  hypothesis   expectation  for another object which would  if found  satisfy the geometric relation with the original instance  fig. 1 a  . a hypothesis is associated with  fig. 1 b    i  a prediction area  locational constraint  where the target object instance may be located  and  ii  a set of constraints on the target object instance. 
　　all pieces of evidence  hypotheses and object instances  are stored the iconic database fig. 1   where accumulation of evidence  i.e. recognition of consistent hypotheses and instances  is performed. this database contains an iconic data structure  i.e. two dimensional array for 1d scene analysis  to represent locational constraints associated with the stored pieces of evidence. they are represented as regions on this array. gre uses overlaps among the regions to index mutually consistent pieces of evidence. note that this array represents the world under analysis and its coordinate system is defined independently of that of the image. resides this locational information  symbolic information such as relations among and properties of object instances is also stored in this database. 
　　suppose object instance s creates hypothesis f s   based on relation kel  for object 1  which overlaps with an instance of 1  t  fig. 1 a  . if the set of constraints associated with f s  is satisfied by t  these two pieces of evidence are combined to form what we call a  situation . that is  a situation is defined by a set of mutually consistent pieces of evidence. gre unifies f s  and t  and establishes the relation rel from s to t as the result of resolving the situation. this is the bottom-up process to establish a geometric relation between a pair of object instances. 


1 t. matsuyama and v. hwang 


a .slot in a frame  where a set of production rules are stored. conditions for both the bottom-up instantiation and top-down hypothesis generation through a pw hierarchy are represented by preconditions of the production rules*. computational procedures to generate parent instances and hypotheses for part objects are represented as actions of the rules.  the interpretation process to construct instantiated pw hierarchies  i.e. recognition of complex objects  will be described in section 1.  
1. aerial image understanding by a prototype system 
　　this section describes the knowledge organization and analysis process of a prototype system for aerial image understanding. the system is implemented on vax 1 and is written in flavor. lisp  and c. the model selection and low level vision experts in this system are realized by simple functions written in lisp and c. 
1 	knowledge 	representation 
　　fig. 1 illustrates the knowledge organization used in the prototype system. as described above  an object class is represented by a frame  which consists of slots. information stored in the slots includes attributes of the object and its relations to other objects. besides these slots  a set of constraints among object attributes are stored in a frame to represent their allowable value ranges. these constraints are basic- requirements to 
t. matsuyama and v. hwang 1 
linked with an in-conflict-with  icw  relation. 
 1 apo :represent appearance of object 
1 	initial 	segmentation 
the first analysis of an image is initiated by mse. 
at the very beginning of the analysis  there is no object instance in the system. mse examines the knowledge stored in the system and selects objects with simple appearances. then  it asks llve to extract image features which match the selected appearances. the basic constraints on object attributes are associated with the goal specification to live. all image features found by llve are returned to mse. which then instantiates corresponding object instances and inserts them into the iconic database. these instances are seeds for reasoning by gre. 
　　fig. 1 a  shows an aerial photograph  black and white  used in the experiment  1 x 1 and six bits for each pixel . figs. 1 b  c  illustrate the instances of house and road-piece extracted by the initial segmentation. note that the segmentation in our system is dynamically performed on request and that no fixed set of image features  e.g. regions  to be interpreted are formed by the initial segmentation. 
1 	interpretation 	cycle 	of 	gre 
　　gre iterates the following steps until no change is done in the iconic database. 

be satisfied in object recognition. 
	the relations used to associate frames are: 	  
 1  pw represent geometric structures of objects with complex internal structures 
 zisp :geometric relations between objects 
 1 ako specialization/generalization 	relations 	among objects 
{1 represent instances of a class of object 
 1 icw :some pairs of objects cannot occupy the same location in an image. for instance  a region cannot be interpreted as both house and road at the same time. pairs of frames representing object classes which cannot occupy the same location are 


1 t matsuyama and v. hwang 
 1  each instance of an object generates hypotheses about related objects using functions stored in the object model. object instances in pw hierarchies instantiate! their parent objects  which then generate hypotheses for missing parts. 
 1  all pieces of evidence  both hypotheses and instances  are stored in the iconic database. 
 1  consistent pieces of evidence are combined to establish  situations   
 1  focus of attention : since there are many situations  the most reliable situation is selected. each piece of evidence has a reliability value  and the reliability of a situation is computed from those of its constituent pieces of evidence. 
 c   the selected situation is resolved  which results either in verification of predictions on the basis of previously detected/constructed object instances or in top-down image processing to detect missing objects. 
　　the system has one additional post-processing: during the analysis by gre  conflicting pieces of evidence may be generated. comparing figs. 1  b  and  c   for example  two road-piece instances overlap with house instances. these interpretations are considered as conflicting. gre maintains all possible interpretations throughout the analysis. the final interpretation process then selects the maximal consistent interpretation. at this stage  all partially instantiated objects and their parts are removed  because enough evidence to support their existence has not been obtained from the analysis. 
1 	consistency 	examination 	among 	evidence 
　　the consistency among pieces of evidence is examined based on: 
 1  prediction areas of hypotheses and locations of instances 
 1  object categories of evidence 
 1  constraints imposed on properties of hypotheses and instances 
 1  relations among sources of evidence. 
 1.1 	intersection 	of 	prediction 	areas 
　　fig. 1 a  shows all intersections formed from four pieces of evidence el  e1  e1  and e1 in the iconic database. a partial ordering on intersections can be constructed on the basis of region containment. intersection 1 is less than 1 if region 1 is contained in region 1. fig. 1 b  shows the lattice representing the partial ordering among the intersections in fig. 1 a . each intersection consists of some set of hypotheses and instances. situations are only formed among intersecting pieces of evidence  i.e. satisfying locational constraints . in other words  this lattice is an index to search for consistent pieces of evidence. to examine the consistency among pieces of evidence  if is sufficient to examine all intersections containing only a pair of pieces of evidence and then to propagate the results through the lattice. 
1.1 	conflicting 	evidence  
let op be the intersection arising from evidence {e1  
e1} and let obj 1 and 1bj1 denote the object categories of el and e1. respectively. if 1bj1 and 1bj1 are linked by an icw relation  then el and e1 are said to be conflicting  and op is removed from the lattice. the removal of op is propagated through the lattice  and any intersections contained in op are also removed. 

then  if instances s and t are really parts of the same object  regions of g q  and t will overlap with each other and will be consistent.  note that instance u cannot intersect with g q  directly since no iconic description is associated with u in the database.  in this case  although the object classes of g q  and t are different  they can be consistent since their object categories are linked by a sequence of pw relations. 
　　in such a case  since the names of the attributes used in the constraints associated with el  g q  in fig. ft  and e1  t in fig. 1  are different  they cannot  in general  be directly compared. in this ease  the constraints associated with the lower level object  i.e. t  ore translated into those for the higher level object  i e g q    by using pw relations. currently  this translation is done simply by rewriting the attributes  slot names  of the lower level object into appropriate attributes of the higher level object using a  attribute translation tablc  for the pw relations  fig. 1  . the similar attribute translation is used between object categories linked by ako relations. 
　　the properties of and/or constraints associated with both pieces of evidence must be consistent. both constraints associated with a hypothesis and properties associated with an instance represented by a set of linear inequalities in one variable. a simple constraint manipulation system 1| is used to check the consistency between the sets of inequalities. 
1.1 	relations 	bet ween 	sources 	of 	evidence 
　　sources of accumulated evidence involved in a situation must not be conflicting. let si and s1 denote the source evidence of el and e1 respectively. if a piece of evidence is a hypothesis  its source evidence is the instance which generated the hypothesis. an instance is the source evidence for itself. it is possible that si and s1 are mutually conflicting  belonging to conflicting interpretations   but that el and e1 themselves are consistent. in such a ease  we do not combine el and e1 into a situation; analysis based on such conflicting interpretations should be performed independently. 
t. matsuyama and v. hwang 1 
expectations. 
1.1 	resolution 	process 
　　in what follows  the process of resolving a situation is described by using the example shown in fig. 1. suppose gre selected the overlapping region between two hypotheses generated from two road instances rd1 and rd1  fig. 1 a  . in the symbolic data structure  rd1 and rd1 are linked to their part road-piece  instances rp1 and rp1 by pw relations  respectively. 
　　since this situation consists only of hypotheses  the system activates top-down analysis to find a road-piece in the overlapping region. this request is issued to mse together with the supporting evidence  i.e. rd1 and 

1 t. matsuyama and v. hwang 
rd1 . so that the expert can use any available; contextual information of such supporting evidence. 
　　assume' that a new road-piece instance  rp1  is created  fig. 1kb  . then  gre provides this result to the instances involved in the situation. rd1 and rdl1 
　　suppose rd1 is the first to be informed of the proposed solution. rdl examines -whether or not rp1 satisfies all constraints required to establish the pw relation with itself. in this case  however  rp1 fails  because rp1 is not adjacent to rp1.  the constraints associated with the hypothesis do not include this type of relational count taints.  this failure activate an exception handler  which is also a production rule stored in the corresponding slot in the road frame. then it issues a top-down request to find a road-piece between rp1 and rp1  see fig. 1 c  . 
　　assume that another new road-piece instance  rpl  is detected  pig. 1 d  . since rp1 is adjacent to rpl. rdl establishes a pw relation to rp1  and then to rp1. fig. 1 e  shows the interpretation after the same analysis is performed by rd1. in this case  however  when rd1 establishes a pw relation to rp1  an exception handler in rp1 is triggered  because rp1 has two different parents. more specifically  after rd1 establishes a pw relation to rp1  rd1 asks rp1 to ckeck its reverse relation from rp1. an exception handler is activated as a result of this checking process. this handler issues a request to gre to examine the consistency between two parents. if they are consistent  gre merges the two pw hierarchies below them into one  pig. 1 f  . 
　　the hypotheses generated by rdl and rdl' are removed from the iconic- database. the resultant new road instance in fig. 1 f  generates new hypotheses for its adjacent road-pieces at the beginning of the next interpretation  cycle. 

　　in general  mse has the ability to deal with such failures. for example  mse analyzes the request to find rp1  fig. 1 a   by first assuming the road-piece to be detected is a visible road fig. 1   and issues a request to five. if this request fails  mse switches to the other appearance of a road-piece  i.e. an occluded-road  fig. 1 . the selection between overpays and shadowed road is done based on the cause of the failure returned from 
live. 
if all efforts by mse fail  this is reported to gre. 
then. gre reports this to rdl and rdl'  which trigger their relevant exception handlers  if any . since different new hypotheses may be generated by such exception handlers  no immediate further analysis is activated. 
　　fig. 1 illustrates an example of this  where a road instance is reported that its hypothesis for an adjacent road-piece cannot be verified. then it removes that hypothesis and newly generates a hypothesis for a road terminator  fig. ft . assuming that it comes. to an termination. 
　　if a top-clown request issued by an instance fails  the instance reports this to gre. then gre activates another instance involved in the focused situation. in the prototype system  failures of this type are not taken into accout in any way. 
1.1 merging a pair of partial pw hierarchies 
　　if a part instance is shared by two parent instances  the part issues a request  to check the similarity between the parents. if they are similar  the system merges them into one. 

t. matsuyama and v hwang 1 
fig. 1 illustrates an example of the third case. 
suppose that definition of a house group is a group of regularly arranged bouses which face the same side of the same road. as shown in fig. l1  if two house group instances share a house instance  the similarity examination is performed. if both house group instances face the same side of the same road instance  then they are similar and merged into one. on the other hand  if one {or both  of them has not established such a  faring  relation  then it is not possible to verify the similarity between them. moreover  even if the two house group instances have established  facing  relations to different road instances  it is still possible for them to he similar  because those road instances may be merged later. 
	if 	the result 	of 	the similarity 	examination 	is 
 inconclusive   the system records its causes and suspends the action of establishing a new pw relation from a parent instance to the shared part instance. in the case shown in fig. 1  the relation between hgi and h1 is suspended. the system records all suspended actions together with their causes. the suspended action can be reactivated if its cause is resolved by analysing other situations. 
　　at the final stage of the analysis  the system makes copies of shared part instances involved in the suspended actions  and separates overlapping interpretations. 	the system 	does 	not 	regard 	these 	interpretations 	as conflicting. 	but 	considers 	them 	as 	possible interpretations. 
	1. 	concluding 	remarks 
　　fig. 1 shows the final results of analyzing the aerial photograph shown in fig. 1. although there are several mis-interpretations  they can easily be removed since such interpretations are isolated and/or conflicting with the correct  maximally consistent  interpretation. 
　　sigma is not a completed system and has several problems to be solved first  no negative sources of evidence are considered in assessing the reliability of a situation. introduction of negative evidence requires a more general method of combining evidence. the most  difficult problem would be how to coordinate interpretations excecuted in parallel in local areas in our system  the interpretation of an object with many parts can be initiated from any part in parallel  and 
