 
     this paper describes a method of interpreting three dimensional motion of an object by making use of rigidity assumption and orientation of its edge. we employ a vanishing point to determine the orientation. we propose a new idea of using cross ratio  i.e. one of the most fundamental concepts in projective geometry to find a vanishing point of a line. this allows to calculate the location of a vanishing point with a 
     known sequence of points on it without another parallel line required by the conventional method. 
	1. 	introduction 
     these years a number of researchers workinq on the computer vision come to be interested in the analysis of three dimentional motions of an object for the application to improving industrial robots and some intelligent systems. three major approaches have been taken for this problem  optical flow analysis  algebraic geometry and projective geometry. these methods have their own advantages. 
     some robots  for example mobile robots  require visual systems providing a standard  not long focus  lens for getting a rather wide scope. perspective distortions appear in the image  since projection through such a lens yields an image of central projection. perspective geometry is useful to deal with the image. the most advantageous point of it is that it enables to calculate relative distance between the camera and arbitary points on a line could be calculated by a simple ratio of the one  or two  ' dimensional distances between the images of the points and the vanishing point of the line. the difficulty in the procedure is to find 
the vanishing point by means of image processing. hence it has been given a priori in most of the scene analysis using vanishing points. in case of utilizing image processing it has been determined an intersection of several edges in an image assumed to be parallel in the orginal space. however we often encounter the cases to analyze images which involve no parallel edges or lines. 
     in this paper we propose a method which does not require the existence of parallel lines for finding the vanishing point of a line. it is expected to extend application areas of projective geometry in the field of computer vision and scene analysis. we describe an application to interpreting the 1-d motion of an object moving freely in space. 
t. kltahashi and h. endo 1 


1 t. kitahashi and h. endo 

	1. 	experiment 
　　the concept of the cross ratio enables us to calculate a location of a vanishing point with a simple formula by imposing rather easy restrictions satisfied in most of the applications as described in the previous section. thus together with the discussion in chapter 1 now we have a new method for the analysis of free 1-d motion of an object. 
     we have experimentally applied this method to an analysis of a motion of a simple shaped object  i.e. a carton. we move it 1 feet from 1 feet in front of a fixed camera tilting gradually to realize taken  although pictures in fig.1 are dis-
played 1 in size and 1 levels in intensity for convenience. 
     the requirement of the proposed method is satisfied by three points on a diagonal of the top-surface of the box  that is both end-points of the diagonal and the intersection of diagonals. since a pair of facing edges of the top-surface could be assumed parallel  the intersection is the 

middle point of each diagonal. in this case and the cross ratio becomes as simple as equal to - 1 . 
     the computed results of the experiment  are shown in fig.1 and the measured data are added for comparison. the relative errors in the position are lower than 1% . this is well acceptable to most of the actual applications. 
	1. 	conclusion 
　　　　in this paper  we have proposed a new method to analyze non-restricted 1-d motions by introducing a simple but fundamental concept useful to deal with actual problems. results of the experiments proved its validity for a variety of  applications. our method is also rolevent to the recovery of three dimensional structures of static scenes although it may fail to analyze structures of small objects. the accuracy for the estimation should be well considered in such applications. 
acknowlegemen t 
     we thank dr. k. murase for his suggesting improvements in presentation. 
