determining object a t t i t u d e 
from extended gaussian images 
james j. little* 
department of computer science 
the university of british columbia 
vancouver  b.c.  canada v1t 1 
a b s t r a c t 	1 	o b j e c t m o d e l s 
the extended gaussian image  egi  of an object records the variation of surface area with surface orientation  uniquely representing convex objects. the inversion problem for polyhedra  from an egi to a description in terms of vertices and faces  has been solved  by an iterative algorithm  little  1 . the algorithm depends upon the mixed volume  a geometric construction linking the areas and positions of the faces of an object. a robust method for determining object attitude from the egi is developed here  using this construction. experiments show the method's insensitivity to small attitude differences. 
1 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
orientation maps can be generated by binocular stereo  baker and binford  1   grimson  1   photometric stereo  woodham  1   shape from shading  horn  1   or by differentiation of laser range images brou  1 . by translating the surface normals of an object to a common point  a representation of the distribution of surface orientation is formed  called the extended gaussian image  egi   horn  1 . figure 1 shows the extended gaussian image of a polyhedron and the corresponding object. 
   horn and ikeuchi demonstrated the feasibility of using egis for attitude determination  comparing the egi of a prototype with a sensed egi. the reconstruction method using the mixed volume suggests a new method for attitude determination. this method is practical and more robust than direct comparison of egis. a detailed 
discussion of this method is presented in  little  1 . 
* this research was supported in part by a ubc university graduate fellowship and by the natural science and engineering research council of canada grant a1. 

   the extended gaussian image of a polytope p can be represented as a set of vectors n: {n |n  = w i .a  a  = a wi.   minkowski showed that when n sums to 1  n uniquely represents a polytope  up to translation. 
1 	r e c o v e r i n g s h a p e 	f r o m 	a n e g i 
the reconstruction method derives from minkowski's theorem! 1   arising from the study of mixtures  convex sums  of convex bodies. the mixed volume of polytopes p and q  v p  q   is the product of the support function of p and the area function of q: 

as a consequence of the theory of mixtures of polytopes: 
		 i  
where v  p  is the volume of p. equality holds only when p and q are homothetic. 
   minkowski's theorem states that  among all polytopes p of fixed volume  the p which minimizes v p  q  is homothetic to q. the reconstruction method little 1  minimizes the mixed volume to recover object shape. 
1 	d e t e r m i n i n g 	a t t i t u d e 
determining the attitude of a known object is equivalent to finding a rotation r   such that r egi prototype  = egisecond attitude in r1 can be identified with a rotation 
r 1 n   where 1 is the angle by which an object is rotated about an axis n in j 1. 
   to access the area function it is necessary to quantize orientation  tesselating u. the projection of the icosahedron onto u generates a tesselation. the number of facets in a tesselation u can be increased by subdividing the triangular faces of the icosahedron into smaller triangles. at frequency i  each face is mapped into i1 triangles. 
   attitude is quantized by the rotation group t1o which brings the vertices of the icosahedron into correspondence. the difference between two attitudes is the angle of the rotation taking one into the other. the minimum difference among the 1 attitudes in t1 is 1бу. for a detailed discussion of methods for representing and quantizing attitude in r* and quantizing orientation on u  see brou . 
j. little 1 
1 	c o m p a r i n g area functions 
to determine object attitude from the egi  horn and ikeuchi  horn and ikeuchi 1  match the prototype egi and the sensed egi at a discrete set of attitudes. at each sample attitude the matching measure between two area distributions is: 
 1  
where a  is the sensed egi area function at direction wi  and ar i  is the prototype area function evaluated at the direction to which wi is transformed by r. this amounts to maximizing the correlation of a and a. the attitude which minimizes the measure in equation 1 is selected. 
   area matching can fail when the object attitude is offset from a sample attitude brou  1 . a polytope with m faces fills at most m cells on u. as the resolution of orientation increases  the number of empty cells increases. if the attitude offset is near the cell resolution  the faces of the prototype and the object may not lie in the same cells  even at the correct attitude  the attitude in t1 nearest the actual attitude . the minimum matching error increases and the minimum may not indicate the correct attitude. 
1 	m i x e d volumes 
reconstruction builds a polytope whose area function fits the egi; attitude determination seeks an attitude which rotates the sensed egi into correspondence with the prototype egi. both determine a fit between an egi and a model. rotating a polytope preserves volume  so among all p' which are rotated versions of p  that p' which has the same attitude as p minimizes the mixed volume. to determine object attitude  minimize the mixed volume: 

hi is the prototype support function and a  the sensed area function. 
1 	support and a r e a functions 
for polytopes  the area function a w  is discontinuous; in contrast  the support function m w  is continuous on u. the comparative smoothness of the support function can be seen by examining its relation to the area function  most easily for polygons. the area function of a polygon  for example  consists of a finite set of non-zero points in the 1 j. little 
interval  its autocorrelation is 1 almost-everywhere. not surprisingly  when the attitude of the sensed object is slightly different from the prototype  or any attitude in the sample set   the value of the area matching is maximum. discretizing a by sampling u is helpful  as brou remarks  introducing a smoothing effect  widening each of the pulses to the resolution. with discretization  small changes in attitude do not affect the area function  until the size of the attitude difference exceeds the resolution on u  when the errors recur. 
   the support function for a polygon can be written in terms of the area function a: 

             jo when the point on the polygon where w = 1 coincides with the origin. the support function is an integral transform of a and is much smoother. because a varies rapidly  shifting a by a small rotation changes its correlation with the prototype a significantly. the support function varies less and the error rate is correspondingly lower. for a polygon  the support function is piecewise sinusoidal  as is the mixed volume. 
1 	e x p e r i m e n t s 
initials tests employ the complete egi  the total spherical distribution  to demonstrate feasibility. to examine the effects of attitudes different from the test set  at a specified resolution  the attitude difference between the object and the prototype was varied. the results can be evaluated under two criteria: the magnitude of the rotation between the selected attitude and the correct attitude  and  where the method ranks the correct attitude  it should have rank 1 - lower is better . 
   the egi of the polytope shown in figure 1 was rotated about the coordinate axes by angles of 1  1  1 and 1 degrees and its attitude determined by both methods. at frequency 1  the area matching method fails at angles as small as 1бу; both fail sometimes when the angle is 1. when the mixed volume method fails  its failure is less severe in two respects: the attitude selected is closer to the correct attitude and the rank of the correct attitude is lower. area matching fails in 1 out of 1 cases and mv in only 1 out of 1. 
   the results for the 1бу rotation are shown in another form in figure 1. the graph shows  on the vertical axis  

figure 1: mixed volume  solid  vs. area  dotted  
the values of area matching  in a dotted line  and mixed volume  in a solid line; the horizontal axis shows the attitudes  from t1o  at which the matchings were evaluated. the horizontal axis is separated by tick marks into regions which are 1  1  1  1 and 1бу from the prototype attitude. point a is the minimum found by mv  correctly identifying the object attitude. point b  the value of the area matching method for the correct attitude  is rather high; there are 1 attitudes with lower values. the area function achieves a minimum  point c  at an attitude in the 1бу set. 
   at frequency 1  the mv method errs in 1 out of 1 cases  both at 1бу offset   while the area matching method fails for 1 out of 1 cases  some as little as 1бу offset . in general  the area matching method performs worse at a finer resolution. finally  at frequency 1  the number of errors increases  for area matching  from 1 out of 1 to 1  while the mixed volume method fails twice. three other objects  of varying eccentricity  were tested. the mv method succeeded for all offsets  while area matching failed 1 times at frequency 1 and 1 times at frequency 1. 
   in all cases  mv ranks the correct attitude in the top 1  suggesting that more sophisticated procedures can be applied to these to determine correct attitude. area matching performs much more poorly at ranking the correct attitude. the better behaviour of mv at lower resolutions also suggests that mv would be useful in a coarse-to-fine search strategy. 
1 	visible subsets of e g i s 
in practice  the sensed portion of a surface corresponds to a single visible hemisphere of the egi. with only partial information  experiments with several prototypes contrasted the mv technique with the area method. in no case does the mv method fail where the area method succeeds; in all cases  the ranking of the mv method is lower than the 

figure 1: non-convex polygon and its reconstruction 
area method. there were 1 times as many errors by the area matching method. 
   using mv for attitude determination depends on the fact that volume v p  remains constant  see equation 1 . ignoring this effect incurred no penalty in these experiments  because the contribution of invisible faces to the mixed volume is negligible. a reconstruction method makes possible construction of suitable invisible faces. 
1 n o n - c o n v e x i t y 	a n d 	a t t i t u d e 
to extend the use of egis for non-convex objects  consider using the support function of the convex object reconstructed from the area function of a non-convex object. dashed lines in figure 1 delimit the convex polygon corresponding to the area function of this non-convex polygon. if  hypothetically  the entire area function of the sensed object were available  then recovering the attitude of the nonconvex polygon would be indistinguishable from recovering attitude of the convex polygon. using complete egis and ignoring the effects of self-occlusion  this method proved effective for a set of sample polygons  including the polygon in the figure 1. this holds the promise that mixed volume method can be applied to attitude determination for nonconvex objects  especially where the effects of self-occlusion are small. 
1 c o n c l u s i o n s 
an egi supplies the sensed area function for an object. the object model permits calculation of the support function. the mixed volume combines these two functions; it is minimized when the attitude of the model matches that of the sensed object. because of the smoothness of the support function  the mixed volume technique is robust for determining the attitude of convex objects. the experiments described here demonstrate its effectiveness and its 
j. little 1 
insensitivity to small changes in attitude which affect other methods. this method can also be applied to non-convex objects when the effects of self-occlusion are small. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 h.h. baker and t.o. binford   depth from edge and intensity based stereo   proceedings of the seventh ijcai  pp. 1  vancouver  1 
 p. brou   using the gaussian image to find the orientation of objects   the international journal of robotics research  vol. 1  no. 1  pp. 1  winter  1 
 w.e.l. grimson   from images to surfaces: a computational study of the human early visual system   mit press  cambridge  mars  1 
 b.k.p. horn   obtaining shape from shading information   the psychology of computer vision  ed. p.h. winston  pp. 1  mcgraw-hill  new york  
1 
 1  b.k.p. horn   extended gaussian images   proceedings of the ieee  pp. 1  december  1 
 b.k.p. horn and k.i. ikeuchi   the mechanical manipulation of randomly oriented parts   scientific american  august 1 
 1j j.j. little   an iterative method for reconstructing convex polyhedra from extended gaussian image   proceedings of aaai-1  pp. 1  1 
 j.j. little   recovering shape and determining attitude from extended gaussian images   ph.d. thesis  university of british columbia vancouver  april 1 
 herman minkowski   allgemeine lehrsatze uber die konvexe polyeder    nachr. ges. wiss. gottingen  pp. 1  1 
 r.j. woodham   photometric method for determining surface orientation from multiple images   optical engineering  vol. 1  pp. 1  1 
