 
this article proposes a slider stereo matching method  which employs a coarse-to-fine control strategy to overcome the false targets problem. at first  a stereo pair is taken at a short baseline  and a match is assigned to it. the resulting disparity map is then used to restrict search range and to predict occlusion for efficiently and reliably matching the succeeding stereo pair taken at a longer baseline. the system iterates the sliding 
and matching to obtain an enough disparity range. 
1. introduction 
it has been pointed out by the early researches 1  on stereopsis that at the heart of the matching problem lies the problem of false targets  whose severity is enhanced by both a wide disparity range and a fine resolution. to obtain both  which are necessary for accuracy  marr and poggio  proposed a zero-crossing algorithm  implemented by crimson   based on the coarseto-fine strategy. the stereo images were filtered at different scales  yielding a set of primitive image pairs of different resolutions. a match of a wide disparity range but of a coarse resolution was assigned f i r s t   and this result was then used to reduce search space  for matching the finer detailed primitive pairs. while the algorithm was successfully applied to a variety of images  it resulted in incorrect matches along occluding zerocrossings  because the continuity constraint was used along those depth-discontinuous contours. 
tn this paper  we present a new stereo matching method  which is based upon a different coarse-tofine strategy. a camera is slid along a straight line to take stereo pairs at different baselines  resulting in a set of stereo pairs of different disparity ranges  images are convolved with a small-sized laplacian-caussian operator  which assures us of a fine resolution  and the zerocrossings in the filtered images are extracted along horizontal scan lines. then the matching process proceeds in a coarse-to-fine iterative manner. the pair taken at the shortest baseline is matched first; the matching is easy  at the expense of reduced disparity range. this result  a narrow range disparity map  can then be used to reduce search space for matching the longer baseline pair  again making the process easier. we iterate the sliding  imaging and matching several times to obtain a wide disparity range. one important advantage of our method over the conventional ones is that we can predict occlusion  helping avoid mismatches. 
motion stereo methods have been studied for a long time by moravec and nevatia. the idea  however  was used to make reliable depth measurement 1   and to save computing time  while the disparity information available from the already matched pairs was not utilized in matching the other pairs. 1. coarse-to-fine rule 
both our algorithm and marr and poggio's are based on the coarse-to-fine control strategy  aiming at obtaining both a wide disparity range and a fine resolution at last. the two algorithms  however  take different routes to reach the goal. fig.l helps to understand the difference. while the depth accuracy in marr and poggic/s algorithm is improved by making the resolution finer over a wide disparity range  that in ours is improved by widening the disparity range in a fine resolution. 
it is important to note that  the only physical constraint we use here is that features should not disappear  nor features newly appear  through the sliding  because the scene and the illumination condition are supposed not to change during this period. in general  it is satisfied except the cases where some feature points are occluded  as 

fig.l there are two routes leading to the final goal  the accurate depth measurement. the diamonds indicate the possible errors in estimates of location of a point in scene   a  the vertical diagonal of the diamond becomes shorter with the finer resolutions  r- r   while a wide disparity range d  remaining unchanged   b  the vertical diagonal becomes shorter with the disparity range getting wider d- d    while a fine resolution r  remaining unchanged. 
the camera is slid. these feature points  however  are assigned with disparities before occluded and the probability of occlusion is predicted from the disparity information obtained already. as a consequence  not only can we avoid the incorrectmatches due to occlusion  but it is also possible to obtain more disparity information about the feature points occluded f i n a l l y than the other stereo matchers. 
1. sliding and matching 
a camera is s l i d from l e f t to right  along a 
straight line  taking a sequence of images at predetermined intervals. the sliding is kept parallel to the horizontal axis of the camera coordinate system  so that the epipolar lines  on which correspondences can be found  are completely horizontal. let the f i r s t image be the only l e f t image and the remainders right ones. note that such an arrangement is purely for simplifying our description  and the following matching algorithm can be easily modified for other arrangements. 
images are convolved with the laplacian-gaussian filter  and zero-crossings in the filtered images are found. for a fine resolution  we have chosen 1 as the filter's central region width w. besides the location  an attribute of the zero-crossings  the contrast sign  is also recorded  and used as a criterion for matching. 
the first stereo pair  due to its reduced disparity range  can be easily matched by simply searching a small region without encountering false targets. below  we discuss how to use the obtained disparity information for matching the second stereo pair. suppose that the baseline of the second stereo pair is k times that of the f i r s t one. then for a zerocrossing in the left image at position  x y   whose disparity obtained by matcing the first stereo pair is d x y   i t s correspondence's position in the 
right image is estimated by  x-kd x y  y . 
taking into account the error ad in the disparity obtained already  the position is revised as  x-kd x y +kad y . 
therefore  we can constrain the search for the corresponding zero-crossing in the right image of the second stereo pair to the region 
{ x' y | x-kd x y -k dmax  x  x-kd x y +kadmax  d  dmaxl. 
the size of search region should be selected so that the probability for double targets in one search region is not high. a conservative value  1 pixels  is selected for the width of the search region. then the worst case probability of double targets is 1  estimated from the result by crimson   1       and true matches can found by utilizing   oulling effect  . 
now let us consider how long we can slide the camera in each step of the successive imaging. given dmax  we can determine k  the ratio of the baselines  as 1/admax. ad results from many factors  such as errors in locating zero- crossings in quantized images and the physical inaccuracy in sliding the camera. we have not estimated all these 
	g.xuetal. 	1 
factors yet. the experimental results  however  indicate that ad x does not exceed 1 pixels in most cases; 1 is currently selected for k. clearly  we need less sliding times for obtaining an enough disparity range than conventional motion stereo methods  1   which take pictures at equal intervals. 
1. occlusion prediction 
in this section  we consider how the occlusions in the successive stereo pair is predicted from the disparity map obtained already. suppose that there are two zero-crossings p1 and p1 at  x1 y  and  x1 y  on a scan line in the l e f t image. if they are predicted as changing to the opposite order in the right image  i.e.  x   x
	l	1  
x -kd xj y  x1-kd x1 y   
then the probability for p1 being occluded is high. 
the prediction is not always true  because of the error in estimating the zero-crossing positions. therefore  the following method is used to avoid mismatches. if the estimated distance between the occluding and occluded zero-crossings is above a threshold  then the occlusion is certain and we search for only p1. if below  we search for both. in the latter case  if there is only one matchable z e r o - c r o s s i n g   then it is considered as corresponding to p1  the one closer to the camera. 
1. experiments and discussion 
we have tested the described method for a blocksworld and an indoor scene. fig.1  a    b  and  c  illustrate the first  second and f i f t h images of an image sequence of the blocksworld  respectively. fig.1  d  shows the zero-crossing contours of fig.1 
 c . the contours are displayed as bright if the contrast sign is positive  and as dark if negative. fig.1  e  shows the differences between the estimated zero-crossing positions and the real ones. it can be seen that they agree with each other quite well. the dark points indicate the estimated locations of zero-crossings and those predicted as occluded are displayed with larger spots. the bright points are the actual positions in the image. fig.1  f  shows the top view obtained by matching fig.1  a  to fig.1 e . fig.1 a  shows an input image of the indoor scene  and fig.1 b  shows the disparity map  in which the disparity is displayed as proportional to the brightness. 
the experiments indicate that most zero-crossings appear in the search pools  provided that the camera sliding is accurate enough. the disparities obtained along occluding zero-crossing contours also demonstrate that there are few mismatches resulting from occlusion. 
one difficulty in matching the stereo pair is that the contrast sign along occluding zero-crossing contours sometimes changes as the camera is slid. therefore  the contrast sign  which played a significant role in the implementation of marr and poggio's algorithm by crimson  r e s u l t s in mismatches in this method. we consider that our method can be improved to accomodate such cases by 1 	g.xuetal. 
predicting 	the changes in the background's intensity. 
at present  the camera motion is along a straight line. we can  however  modify the method so as to move the camera more freely in space  and give the system intelligence to plan motion by observing the coarse disparity map obtained already. 
