 
　problems requiring the synthesis of a collection of plans accomplishing distinct  but possibly related  goals has received increasing attention within al. such problems are typically formulated as multi-agent planning problems  emphasizing a problem decomposition wherein individual agents assume responsibility for the generation of individual plans while taking into account the goals and beliefs of other agents in the system. one consequence of such a problem decomposition is a simplified view of resource allocation that assumes avoidance of conflicts to be the sole concern. the validity of this assumption comes into question in time constrained problem domains requiring the allocation of multiple  shared resources. in job shop scheduling  for example  where sequences of manufacturing operations must be determined and scheduled for multiple orders  it is necessary to consider much more than availability to efficiently allocate resources over time. we argue that in such domains  an ability to reason from both resource-based and agent-based perspectives is essential to appropriate consideration of all domain constraints. 
1 multli-agent planning and resource allocation 
　problems requiring the synthesis of a collection of plans accomplishing distinct  but possibly related  goals has received increasing attention within ai. systems that address this problem have been called multi-agent planning systems   so termed because of the emphasis on a system of loosely-coupled  cooperative planning agents  each responsible for the generation of a single plan but cognizant of  and taking into account. the goals and beliefs of other agents in the system. work in this area has focused primarily on the issue of goal protection  i.e. the planning of activities to achieve desired goals despite the dynamic nature of the surrounding environment. the issue of allocating resources to such activities has typically been given secondary importance  the assumption being that the avoidance of resource conflicts is the sole concern. the validity of this assumption comes info question in time constrained domains requiring the allocation of multiple  shared resources. in job shop scheduling  for example  where sequences of operations must be determined and scheduled for multiple orders  resource  e.g. machine  assignments to support these operations are influenced by much more than the mere availability of the resource during the time period in question. other constraints  such as capacity limitations  sequencing preferences  and order splitting preferences  must also be considered. efficient allocation of resources under such constraints is difficult within the problem decomposition ascribed to multi-agent planning systems above  given the local and incomplete view of resources held by each individual agent. our experience with the isis job shop scheduling system   which adopts 
　this research was supported in part by the air force office of scientific research under contract f1-k-1  westinghouse electric corporation  and the robotics institute. 
peng si ow 
grad. school of ind. admin. 
carnegie-mellon university pittsburgh  pa 1 usa 
such a problem decomposition  confirms this claim. what is needed to directly exploit these types of constraints is an ability to reason from a resource based perspective  suggesting the use of multiple problem decompositions. this paper describes an initial approach to providing such a reasoning capability. 
 the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1 we briefly review the approach taken by isis in reasoning with the large and conflicting set of constraints encountered in the job shop scheduling domain. this is followed in section 1 by a closer examination of the limitations of decomposing the problem solely from a order  or agent  based perspective  and issues surrounding the integration of a resource based reasoning capability are explored. an initial system architecture possessing an ability to reason from both perspectives is presented. finally  in section iv  some research directions are identified. 
ii constraint-directed reasoning in isis 
 the scheduling domain of isis is realistically complex  requiring the consideration of such diverse and conflicting factors as due date requirements  cost restrictions  production levels  machine capabilities  alternative production processes  order characteristics  resource characteristics and resource availability. to address this complexity  the isis design advocates two key ideas: 
lulijiruiim ui'liivu iivullilu . jvui vii  
　the first point above presumes a fairly broad view of constraints  and it is important to note that the isis constraint representation encompasses scheduling objectives  goals  and preferences as well as the range of necessary conditions that delineate the space of admissible schedules. constraints of the former variety provide a basis for optimization during the evaluation of alternative solutions  by assigning utilities indicative of the degree to which they have been satisfied. the representation also captures other knowledge necessary to effectively reason with the constraints  including constraint importance  constraint relevance  and constraint interdependencies. 
　the generation of a shop schedule is accomplished in an incremental fashion. for each order to be scheduled  the system proceeds through multiple levels of analysis  principal of which is the heuristic search procedure employed to make detailed selections of operations  resources  and time intervals for production of the order. working from a set of allowable routings for the order  i.e. a directed graph of operations capturing operation precedence constraints  alternative manufacturing pr' ccsses and resource substitutability   the search 1 s.smith and p. ow 
proceeds either forward from the order requested start date or backward from the requested ship date. 'the search space is composed of suites that represent alternative partial schedules  and the application of the search operators serves to generate new states that further specify the partial schedules under development  e.g. add another operation to a partial schedule for the order  bind a particular machine to an operation  allocate a particular time interval for the order on a particular machine . using a beam search  only the best n search states arc extended at each iteration of the search  and  as indicated above  the quality of a given state is estimated on the basis of how well it satisfies the objectives  goals  and preferences that are relevant to the scheduling decisions it embodies. the outcome of this search is a particular routing tor the order along with an assignment of time bounds to the resources required to produce it. once refined into the order's final schedule  these commitments serve to additionally constrain any subsequent scheduling that must be performed. 
ill reasoning from multiple perspectives. 
　the isis heuristic search paradigm outlined above attempts to provide a framework for incorporating the full range of constraints that typically influence human scheduler's decisions in the automatic construction of job shop schedules. unfortunately  its commitment to a particular decomposition of the scheduling problem places undue emphasis on the exploitation of a certain class of constraints to the effective exclusion of others. the  focus on one order at a time  approach employed  while useful in reducing the overall complexity of the problem  does not provide an adequate basis for attending to 
inter-onler constraints i.e. constraints that influence the allocation of resources over a number of orders. one example of how this weakness manitests itself is in the consideration of order sequencing preferences  which arise due to machine setup costs . these preferences relate to the total set of orders requiring a given resource in the shop. yet. within the isis framework  they can be considered only in the context of the partially constructed shop schedule that exists at the time each order is selected for scheduling. as such  the extent of their influence is somewhat coincidental. 
　we next address the problem of how to cope with these inter-order constraints while preserving the ability to adequately exploit intra-order constraints. specifically  we explore the use of a resource-based decomposition in conjunction with an order-based decomposition to provide this added ability. 
a. partitioning the problem solving effort 
　the primary source of difficulty in constructing good job shop schedules stems from the conflicting nature of the domain's constraints. constraints arc said to be in conflict when a scheduling decision made with respect to satisfying any one affects the extent to which the others may be satisfied. the optimal resolution of a given conflict necessarily requires a problem decomposition in which all constraints involved in the conflict are grouped within the same subproblem. the order-based decomposition utilized by isis groups together the constraints surrounding a particular order and  consequently  provides an 
   the above description is necessarily brief and omits several important issues that are not directly relevant to the discussion below the reader is referred to  1  1  1  1  for more detailed accounts of this work. 
　　it is sometimes necessary to prepare or  set up  a machine before an operation can be performed on it this is typically caused by a change in the type of operation to be performed on the machine and the amount of machine time consumed for setups is dependent on the type of change a proper sequencing of orders on a machine can greatly increase its throughput. 
opportunity for effectively resolving order-centered conflicts  e.g. conflicts involving precedence constraints . a resource-based problem decomposition  in contrast  produces a grouping of constraints that promotes the resolution of a different set of conflicts. here the strategy becomes one of scheduling on a resource by resource basis  and the 
grouping of constraints contained within a given subproblcm includes a cross-section of the constraints associated with a number of orders. conflicts brought to the foreground under this decomposition center around the resource allocation decisions that must be made at a 
particular resource  e.g. conflicts involving various setup p