 	al and the personal computer  today 

　　it has been almost thirty years since the dartmouth conference on artificial intelligence. since then  ai has emerged from a laboratory curiosity to a blossoming technology with world wide strategic implications. as this technology proliferates  the pc will become a major delivery vehicle for expert systems. the pc is already being used to deploy small expert systems and it's power is bound to increase over the coming years. this panel will examine the history of the pc in ai  the current state of development and attempt to en vision future developments in the marriage of these technologies. 
personal computer power 
　　1 was a watershed year for computers according to market research from input inc.. it was the first year that installed end user computing power  pc's and individual workstations  equaled that of mainframe computers. it is estimated that in 1 pc computing power alone will equal that of all other computers. this pattern will continue as pc's become increasingly more powerful and the boundary between pc's and workstations becomes forever blurred. 
visions of the personal computer 
　　one of the first people to champion the concept of the personal computer was dr. alan kay. dr. kay's work on the alto and the dynabook along with others at the xerox palo alto research center 
in the 1's was the basis of many of the developments we see today. these developments include: bit-mapped graphics  flat screens  personal workstations and networking. dr. kay's dynabook actually predicted the portable  flat personal computer. the dynabook currently has many commercial realizations including machines by apple  hp  data general  osborne  morrow  radio shack  grid  convergent technology and nec. these machines  while not achieving the full performance envisioned by dr. kay  will surely be improved and f u l f i l l his design goals. 
　　today many run time expert systems are being delivered on pc's and dedicated workstation's. one of the most ambitious is the ge cats-1 expert system for assisting in diesel locomotive repair. this expert system is deployed on a dedicated workstation and contains over 1 production rules. cats-1 is an expert tutor. when used in conjunction with a video disk player it can show diagrams and training film sequences in conjunction with the consultation process. puff an expert system  written in emycin is used to diagnose obstructive airway diseases. puff which originally consisted of 1 production rules  ha1 been rewritten in basic and is now being commercially provided on a system which incorporates diagnostic hardware and uses an apple ii as a delivery vehicle. applied expert systems has already deployed an expert system on the ibm pc-xt  for use in the financial services industry. the use of pc delivery vehicles is easily predicted because of it's large installed base and declining price. workstations will continue to be popular because their power reduces expert system development time. 
　　development of expert systems on dedicated workstations has proceeded from the introduction of the lm 1 by lisp machines inc. and continues unabated on workstations from a wide range of vendors. the evolution of expert systems on pc's is now gaining momentum. there are now at least a dozen implementations of lisp and prolog for the 
ibm pc. expertelllgence has recently introduced a 
lisp and a smalltalk for the macintosh with an 1ps1 soon to be released. there are already two versions of 1ps1 available for the ibm pc as well as a version of smalltalk. the wide availability of the classic ai languages on the pc will lead to numerous expert systems being developed and deployed on the pc. 

1 	t.schwartz 
　　many expert system shells  production rule languages and induction extraction tools havealready been developed for the pc  table 1 . these include pc implementations of emycin and other english like production rule systems. systems which learn by example  typically called inductive extraction systems are made available by three manufactures. rulemaster by radian is one of these systems and is unique because it combines inductive extraction and a production rule system in one product. a few of these tools also have hooks to other programs to further increase their power. the commercial success of these systems is demonstrated by sri's series pc which has been used to develop and field an expert system for copier diagnosis and repair. 
ai and the personal computer  tomorrow 
　　many of these pc-based systems are suitable for the development of small expert systems  under 1 rules . these small systems are now being called  technician systems  and will find wide use in business and technical training. induction extraction tools will enable users of spread sheets to build such technician systems and deploy them with little or no help from knowledge engineers. these systems will be used as learning curve accelerators and to disseminate routine expertise to less experienced members of an organization. they can also be used to enhance homogeneity in the decision making process thereby making delegation more effective. 
　　the deployment of dedicated expert systems on hand-held calculator-like devices using application-specific integrated circuits will make expert systems as pervasive as the microprocessor in the world of tomorrow. low cost expert systems 
will aid us in many of our daily activities such as: commuter route selection  business and investment decisions making  human interaction  personal health care and even wagering. automated knowledge acquisition will allow every expert to become his own knowledge engineer. even the breaking of the common sense barrier can be foreseen. 
acknowledgements 
the author would like to thank the panelists 
dr. alan kay  stan curtis and robert laddaga. thanks to amos oshrin for the many fruitful discussions on ai and to all the software producers in table 1 for their cooperation. 
on the following four pages 

	t.schwartz 	1 


1 t.schwartz 


	t.schwartz 	1 


1 t.schwartz 

