 
   an inductive inference problem of context-free languages is investigated. there have been many attempts to this problem  and most of them are based on a problem setting in which a representation space for hypotheses is a class of context-free grammars. an inference algorithm given in this paper   on the contrary  employs a kind of extensions of regular expressions called context-free expressions as a representation space for context-free languages. the algorithm  based on the notion of an identification in the limit  is significantly concise when compared with existing algorithms. 
1. introduction 
   we consider the following model of inductive inference problem: given an object l of inference  an inductive inference device  iid  tries to infer a representation h for the object from examples. it is assumed that iid has an enumeration mechanism by which any possible hypothesis from the representation space can be eventually enumerated at least once. it is also assumed that we can utilize an oracle for presenting examples concerning the object. iid asks the oracle for an example  and computes hypothesis and outputs it  and again asks another example for the next step  and this process is cycled. in a sequence of 
hypotheses h1  h1 ... iid is said to identify l in the limit if there exists a positive 	integer n 	such that hn represents l and hn + i equals to hn for all i  1. 
   a simple algorithm for identification in the limit is the one based on the notion of identification by enumeration. let h1  h1 ... be an effective enumeration of the possible hypotheses  and suppose a set of examples e1 e1 ... ek are presented. then  ed provides as its next output the first hypothesis which is compatible with all these examples. under the assumption of a perfect oracle  the sequence of hypotheses converges in the limit.  gold 1   
   in this paper  we deal with the inductive inference problem for context-free languages  and employ a representation space for hypotheses different from the ones in the existing methods. this enables us to make an elegant discussion on the problem and to obtain a simple algorithm for solving the problem. 
	yokomori 	1 
   

1 	knowledge acquisition 

	yokomori 	1 
   

 oand e in 1 i k  such that e is correct for not only all examples in examples but also every example given in the future.  that is the definition of  convergence .  hence  e is correct for do. 
    proof for convergence  suppose that the algorithm diverges. then  we show  by the induction on j   that every hypothesis in the chain above appears on the top of q and is generalized. when j = 1  it is trivial. suppose that ej appears on the top of q as a hypothesis in 	and 	is generalized. 	since for some q. the divergence of 
the algorithm implies that the finite number of expressions preceding ej + i will all appear on the top and be generalized or simply discarded. hence  ei +1 eventually appears on the top of q and is generalized duetowi + i. t h u s   e v e n t u a l l y appears on the top. however  because of the assumption of the divergence  en is not correct for some w  which contradicts the fact that  hence  the algorithm converges. 
   thus  we conclude that the algorithm converges to a correct expression. 
1 inferring semilinear languages 
   if we restrict our attention to a subclass of contextfree languages called semilinear languages  gruska 1    then we can easily get an operator for enumerating all expressions over t1  where t1  and obtain more efficient and simpler inference algorithm for the class. this is due to the fact that any semilinear language over t is contained in nt1   that   for any semilinear language l over t there exists a context-free expression e over t1 such thatl= e  holds. note that the rules  l - 1  in 1 form a context-free grammar  provided that t is finite.  
as a natural conclusion  we have: 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
theorem 1 
   there exists a simple algorithm for inferring semilinear languages in which the enumerator 1 is achieved by a context-free grammar. 
proo/ksimilar to that of theorem 1 and omitted. d 
1. meta inference 
   as we have mentioned  an expression enumerator 1 for semilinear case is realized as a context-free grammar  which implies that an enumerator in the iid is identified with a context-free expression. therefore  one can think of a meta inference problem in which for a given target  the meta-iid infers a representation  context-free expression  or enumerator  denoting the target from examples of expressions  where the target is a class of expressions  or  a class of semilinear languages denoted by the expressions . note that since the input of meta-iid  which is an expression  can be regarded as a 
   string over some alphabet  the inference schema of the meta-inference problem is structurally equivalent to that of the inference problem in the usual sense  which is illustrated by figure 1 . 

acknowledgements 
     the author is grateful to dr. t. kitagawa  the president of iias-sis  for ceaseless encouragements. he is also indebted to dr. h.enomoto  the director of iias-sis  for providing useful reference papers as well as invaluable advice. last but not least  discussion with the colleagues y.takada  y.sakakibara  and h. ishizaka was very fruitful. 
     this work is a part of the major research and development of fgcs project conducted under the program setup by miti. 
