 
모we present an approach to learning causal knowledge which lies in between two extremely different approaches to learning: 
  empirical methods  e.g.   1   which detect similarities and differences between between examples to reveal regularities. 
  explanation-based methods  e.g.   1   which derive a causal explanation for a single event from existing causal knowledge. the event and the causal explanation are generalized to create a new  chunk  of causal knowledge by retaining only those features of the event which were needed to produce the explanation. 
모in the approach to learning presented in this paper and implemented in a program called occam  prior knowledge indicating what sort of distinctions have proven useful in the past influences the search for causal hypotheses. our approach to learning snares a goal with explanation-based learning: to allow existing knowledge to facilitate future learning so that fewer examples are required. however  it does not share one shortcoming of explanation-based learning since it can create causal theories which are not implications of existing causal theories. 
introduction 
모we address the problem of learning causal knowledge by observing examples of actions and state changes. we wish to consider the acquisition of simple causal theories such as those which describe the outcome of common events in the life of a small child  e.g.  when a cup made of glass is dropped  it usually breaks and when a cup made of plastic is dropped  it doesn't break . 
모we take an empirical approach to learning causal theories. a current best hypothesis  is formed by noticing similarities and differences among the attributes of an observed event and recalled previous events. we choose to select a current best hypothesis rather than maintain a set of consistent hypotheses  e.g.    for a number of reasons: 
  the set of consistent hypotheses can be very large. for example  consider the following situation: karen  a young girl with blond hair and blue eyes wearing a green sweater  pulls on the refrigerator door but it doesn't open. mike  an adult male with brown hair and brown eyes wearing a blue sweat shirt  pulls on the refrigerator door and it opens. there are six attributes with different values for karen and mike which can generate consistent hypotheses.  e.g.  when a person with brown eyes pulls on the refrigerator door  it opens.  in addition  these attributes may be combined conjunctively or disjunctively to form a large set of consistent hypotheses. psychological evidence  e.g.   1   indicates that only one or a small number of hypotheses are considered at one time. thus generating a causal hypothesis is treated as searching the space of possible hypotheses. 
  before a sufficient number of examples have been encountered to rule out alternative consistent hypotheses  it may be necessary to predict the outcome of a new event. the current best hypothesis can serve as the source of this prediction. 
모when a new example falsifies the current best hypothesis  a new hypothesis is selected from the set of consistent hypotheses. in winston s arch program  and in rulbmod  domain-specific heuristics select the new hypothesis. however  since we are assuming no initial domain knowledge  our approach differs from the arch program and rulbmod in the following ways: 
  initially  the current best hypothesis is selected randomly from the set of consistent hypotheses subject to the constraint that simpler hypotheses are selected first: one attribute discriminations are selected before conjunctive combinations and disjunctive combinations. 
  distinctions which have proven useful in the past influence the order in which causal hypotheses are generated. for example  after a number of examples  assume that the current hypothesis indicates that when adults pull on the refrigerator door  it opens. later  when presented with examples of an adult with brown hair successfully inflating balloons  and a small child with blond hair unsuccessful at the same task  the age attribute would be preferred to the hair-color attribute. the hypothesis that when an adult blows into a balloon  it will inflate is considered before the hypothesis that when persons with brown hair blow into a balloon  it will inflate. as occam learns about causality  domain-specific heuristics  e.g.  adults are strong  are also learned which guide the search for the current best hypothesis on new problems. 
모in rulbmod  all previous examples are remembered so that the set of consistent hypotheses is always consistent with previous examples. in the arch program  no previous examples are saved so that the set of hypotheses may contain hypotheses which are not consistent with previous examples. we take a compromise between these two extreme positions. in occam  the exact number of previous events recalled from memory is dependent on the retrievability of each event as determined by the unique features of the events  see  1 1 .  typically  at feast one positive example and at feast one negative example are recalled when selecting a new hypothesis. in addition  the current example and the current incorrect hypothesis constrain the set of consistent hypotheses  1 . 
background: occam 
모occam  1  is  is a program which maintains a memory of events in several domains. as new events are added to memory  generalizations are created which describe and explain similarities and differences between events. occam integrates explanation-based and similarity-based learning techniques. for example  from a number of examples occam induces a rule which indicates that parents have a goal of preserving the health of their children. this rule explains why a parent pays a ransom in a single example of kidnapping. this explanation is generalized by explanation-based learning techniques to create a kidnapping schema. 
모in this paper  we focus on using prior learning to facilitate the learning of new causal theories. two aspects of occam relevant to learning causal knowledge are explained in this section: generalization rules and confirming causal hypotheses. 
generalization rules 
모in occam  generalization rides postulate causal relationships. a generalization rule suggests a causal explanation for a temporal relationship. for example  the simplest generalization rule is  if an action on an object always precedes a state change for the object  postulate the action results in the state change . generalization rules serve a number of purposes: 
  explanation-based learning in occam is initiated when a generalization rule suggests an explanation which can be confirmed and elaborated by existing causal theories. in this case  generalization rules focus the search for an explanation. 
* in the absence of existing causal theories  generalization rules suggest a causal explanation which can be confirmed or denied by additional examples. in this case  generalization rules serve to generate a set of plausible hypotheses which obey certain constraints on causality 
   i.e.  covariation  effects are always present when causes are present  temporal order  causes precede effects  and mechanism  a physical mediator which  connects  a cause to its effect. generalization rules may be viewed as weak heuristics which filter the set of possible hypotheses to create a set of plausible hypotheses. 
	pazzani  dyer  and flowers 	1 

  distributional attributes can viewed as parent predicates . it is in this manner  that distributional attributes facilitate learning new causal theories. when learning that a refrigerator will open after an adult 

confirming causal theories 
모in   we discuss our approach to confirming hypotheses. we quickly review two strategies for confirming hypotheses which will be used in a later example. first  confidence in a hypothesis is increased when it makes a correct prediction |1 . second  confidence in a hypothesis is increased when each alternative hypothesis is ruled out later  we also indicate how prior learning can help confirm causal theories. 
facilitating the learning of new causal theories 
모how can prior learning facilitate the selection of the current best hypothesis of a set of consistent hypotheses  one simple approach might be to keep track of the attributes which have entered into previous successful hypotheses. for example  consider a child eating pieces of a 
모pineapple. the pieces can be different shapes  square or triangular  or different colors  yellow or white . eventually  the hypothesis that the yellow pieces of pineapple taste better may be considered and supported by a number of examples. should color be preferred in future hypotheses  unfortunately  preferring color indiscriminately would hinder rather than facilitate learning in many situations. consider the earlier example of the refrigerator opening after mike pulls on the door  but not opening after karen pulls on the door. if color were preferred  the best hypothesis might be that when a person with a blue shirt pulls on the door  the refrigerator will open. the problem with this simple approach is that the context in which a preference is made is ignored. 
모the approach that we take in occam differs from the above simple approach in two ways: 
1. attributes which have entered into previous successful hypotheses are preferred in more restricted situations. these situations are determined by the type of the cause in a the generalization rule and the class of the generalization rule. for example  after inducing that the refrigerator door will open after an adult pulls on it  the preference for age applies only to the actor of this type of the action  propel  an application of a force  and to the same class of generalization rules  i.e  those which attribute a difference in a result to a difference in the actor . 
1. the attributes which have entered into previous successful hypotheses are used to create dispositional attributes. these dispositional attributes represent capacities or potentials. for example  after occam induces that the refrigerator door will open when an adult pulls on it  a dispositional attribute which might be 
1 	knowledge acquisition 
pulls on the door  two hypotheses are created: 
1. adults are strong enough to open a refrigerator door. 
1. adults are strong. 
it is this second more general hypothesis which facilitates learning in new domains. for example  this hypothesis can be specialized to indicate that adults are strong enough to inflate balloons. note that occam does not start with dispositional attributes such as  strength . 
instead  dispositional attributes are created to account for differences in capabilities  for actors  or tendencies  for objects . these dispositional attributes serve as domain-specific knowledge which guide the search for causal hypotheses. 
  more support is given to hypotheses which are formed by making use of existing dispositional attributes. it is in this manner that prior learning also facilitates confirming hypotheses. 
모there are a number of issues which arise when using dispositional attributes to facilitate the search for causal hypotheses: 
  when are dispositional attributes created  dispositional attributes are created to account for a difference in the result of two  or more  actions. 
  how do we avoid creating a new dispositional attribute for each new example  the reuse of existing dispositional attributes is preferred to the creation of new ones. 
an example 
모in this section  we demonstrate how learning dispositional attributes facilitates learning new causal theories. the example we consider is the refrigerator opening after mike pulls on the door  but not opening after karen pulls on the door. in this case there are two events in memory. events arc input to occam in conceptual dependency f 1 . a simplified representation of mike opening the refrigerator is illustrated in figure 1. 
모the generalization rule in figure 1 suggest that a difference in the actor accounts for the different results when mike or karen pulls on the door. since there arc not yet any applicable dispositional attributes  occam randomly selects one attribute of the actor which is different in karen and mike: eye-color  occam creates a new dispositional attribute1  disp-1  

 act type propel 	which it has applied successfully and unsuccessfully. this would be more actor  human name  mika  	in the spirit of goodman's parent predicates and over-hypotheses. finally  gender  mala  	that learning is also facilitated by avoiding the same mistake in future cases. the cases of a dispositional attribute being abandoned can be recorded so hair-color  brown  
	aya-color  brown  	we have presented an approach to learning causal theories which creates 
	aga  adult   	dispositional attributes such as  strength  to facilitate future learning. this 
	objact  part typa  door  	theories and an example of a social theory: occam required many technique has been applied successfully to a number of examples of causal 
	of  frige color  tan    	examples to induce that parents  as opposed to any adult  have a goal of 
aftar  state typa  opan  satisfying the hunger of their children. a dispositional attribute  which 뺆alue  yes  might be called  affection   was formed which facilitated learning that objact  friga color  tan     parents have a goal of preserving the health of their children. this social knowledge provided an explanation for a parent paying the ransom in 
figure 1: simplified conceptual dependency representation of kidnapping  which enabled occam to create a kidnapping schema by mike opening the refrigerator explanation-based learning techniques. 
which represents the tendency for an application of a force by a person with 
brown eyes to result in a state change. the current best hypothesis is that 	