 
     the area of default reasoning may be considered as consisting of two separate but closely related subareas. the first deals with representing default information  and addresses issues such as reasoning about default statements or determining the consistency of a set of defaults. the second addresses reasoning about the default properties of an individual  given a set of default statements. most extant work in default reasoning has concentrated on the second area. this paper addresses the first area only  as an initial investigation into the area of default reasoning. the approach is based on adding a  variable conditional  operator to first-order logic. this operator is used to express prototypical  rather than strict  relations between entities and properties. a possible worlds semantics is provided for the logic along with a proof theory; soundness and completeness results are also provided. it is argued that the variable conditional in the logic captures common intuitions concerning defaults and prototypical properties. 
1. introduction 
     many general statements concerning the real world are not by themselves true  but rather appear to rely on a collection of tacit background assumptions. thus for example   birds fly  seems to be a reasonable assertion  even though it isn't the case that all birds fly. birds with broken wings don't fly; tethered birds don't fly; and even whole species of birds  such as penguins and ostriches  don't fly rather  birds fly  seems to have the force of  normally birds fly  or perhaps  ignoring exceptional conditions  birds fly . 
     there are two main approaches in artificial intelligence  ai  for dealing with statments such as  birds fly : default reasoning and prototype theory. in the first case   birds fly  is interpreted  roughly  as saying that if an object is known to be a bird. and it is consistent to believe that it flies  then conclude that it flies. in the second case  the statement is generally interpreted as being descriptive or predictive  and may be taken as meaning. again roughly   most birds fly . 
     in this paper  a third alternative is introduced the general idea is that a variable conditional operator =  is introduced into standard first-order logic  fol . where the statement a= b is interpreted as  in the normal course of events  if a then b . so. for example.  vx  bird x =  fly x   would have the intended interpretation  for every object x. in the normal course of events if that object is a bird  then it flies  intuitively  the connection between the antecedent and consequent of these conditionals may be thought of as a relationship in a scientific theory. birds fly. but only if some set of presumed  additional assumptions  is satisfied: the bird isn't tethered  isn't a penguin  etc. this approach is intended then to be applicable to terms standing for naturally occurring kinds or natural kinds  such as  raven    lemon   etc. more generally  the approach is intended to also be applicable to general statements of typicality  and so we can use this connective to represent statements such as  typically quakers are pacifists  or  typically adults are employed . 
     since the intended interpretation of a= b is  in the normal course of events  if a then b . the semantics of =  will rest on the notion of other courses of events and. in particular  other more normal or less exceptional courses of events. in extending the semantics of fol to account for =  then i adopt a possible worlds approach  where the truth of a= b at a world w relies not on the world w. but on other  less exceptional  worlds: a= b is true if b is true in the  least exceptional  worlds where a is true. roughly then this says that birds fly. if we  factor out  exceptional circumstances such as being featherless  being tethered  being a penguin  etc. a major issue then is the choice of a suitable metric for  less exceptional than  between possible worlds. clearly the bounds placed on this metric will constrain the semantics of the =  operator. the formal system we obtain is a conditional logic  of a class of logics that have been developed for representing counterfactual conditionals  conditional obligation  and other related notions. 
     the next section reviews related work in ai. while the third section introduces conditional logics. section 1 informally introduces the underlying semantic theory of the logic for representing default information. section 1 develops a formal semantics for the logic  while section 1 presents a proof theory. section 1 discusses what we have gained from this approach  while the last section provides a conclusion. proofs of theorems may be found in  delgrande 1b ; an earlier version of this work was presented in  delgrande 1a . 
1. related work 
     there has been extensive work in ai in extending or augmenting classical first-order logic to deal with default and prototypical properties. most of these approaches can be termed  consistency-based   in that a default conclusion is typically 
	delgrande 	1 

warranted in part by being consistent with some given set of beliefs. for example  in reiter's augmentation of first-order logic  reiter 1 .  birds fly  would be represented by the default rule: 

this can be read  roughly  as  if. for some object  you can prove that that object is a bird  and it is consistent that it flies  then infer that it flies'  mccarthy 1 .  mcdermott and doyle 1 . 
and  moore 1  describe other consistency-based approaches. 
　　a general limitation with such approaches is that one cannot reason about defaults. thus if we had default rules corresponding to  ravens are normally black  and  albino ravens are normally not black   there is no means within the system of drawing the conclusion  non-albino ravens are normally black . similarly  in most systems the assertions  ravens are birds  and 
 typically ravens aren't birds  can co-exist peacefully - in reiter's system the default rule is simply never applied  and in 
mcdermott and doyle's no problems arise because there is no semantic connection between a statement a and the statement ma  i.e.  consistent a  . yet it seems that such a pair of sentences should be inconsistent: if every raven must necessarily be a bird  then it seems unreasonable to assert that typically ravens aren't birds. 
     a second difficulty with these approaches arises from the fact that their semantics rests on a notion of consistency with a set of beliefs. thus  paraphrasing the first example  a bird may be believed to fly. if this does not conflict with prior beliefs. however  the relationship between birds and flight  whatever it may be. is clearly a relation just between birds and the property of flight; it does not. in particular  rely on any set of beliefs or any particular believer. thus  such consistency-based approaches seem useful for telling us how to appropriately extend a belief set. the goal here  on the other hand  is to attempt to represent the relation between  say. birds and flight 
     a second approach in ai for dealing with default and prototypical properties is prototype theory  rosch 1 . in this case membership in the extension of a term is a graded affair and is a matter of similarity to a representative member or prototype. thus one might say that birds fly but only with some given certainty. a difficulty with these approaches is that there is no clear agreement as to what is meant by  certainty   nor how one may combine and work effectively with such certainties  thompson 1 . however the problems appear to run deeper than this. prototype theory seems concerned generally with descriptions of individuals  or predicting properties of individuals. thus generally there is no way of distinguishing the force of a statement such as  birds fly  from  students like pizza . this though is too weak for our purposes. we would want to be able to attribute the property of flight  in some absolute sense  to the class of birds  and leave the connection between students and pizzas as holding contingently in the state of affairs in which we're interested. in sum. notions of typicality and resemblance 
to a prototype appear too weak to be useful for our purposes. 
1 	knowledge representation 
　　insofar as representing defaults is concerned  a related problem in the area of linguistic semantics is the treatment of generic statements. examples of generic statements include  birds fly    the dodo is extinct   and  john walks to work . in these examples   birds    dodo  and  walks  are used generically perhaps the best-known work with respect to these statements is that of gregory carlson  carlson 1    carlson 1   who uses the framework of montague semantics for their treatment. carlson argues against any quantificational treatment of generics and instead proposes that kinds be treated as individuals. for example  the term  dogs  in  dogs bark  is treated as a proper name and the statement is true  roughly  if the kind  dogs  has the property of occasionally or normally barking. this approach appears to address a wide class of recalcitrant problems associated with the generic in linguistics. however it appears to not directly address our concerns. there is no indication as to what it means to be a  normal  property of a kind  nor how such properties interrelate  nor how one could reason about such properties. in addition the approach requires an increased ontology of kinds and stages  roughly space/time instantiations of kinds or individuals . 
1. conditional logics 
consider the following passage  taken from  lewis 1 : 
 if otto had come  it would have been a lively party; but if both otto and anna had come  it would have been a dreary party: but if waldo had come as well  it would have been lively; but  . 
these statements represent counterfactual conditionals: the antecedent of each statement is false  but each statement could be either true or false. these statements also exhibit a curious pattern: as the antecedent is strengthened  the consequent changes to its negation. it is apparent then that the standard material conditional is inadequate for representing counterfactual statements: since the antecedents of the above statements are false  the statements formed using a material conditional would have to come out true. however  clearly we would want to retain the option of having a counterfactual statement come out false - after all. it is conceivable that if otto had come to the party  it would have been a boring affair. 
     david lewis  in  lewis 1  and building on  stalnaker 1   proposes using a variably strict conditional  or simply variable conditional  to represent counterfactual statements. the formal systems that employ such a connective are called conditional logics. if we use  to represent this conditional  then the general idea is that the truth value of  relative to a world  depends on a subset of those worlds in which a is true. thus for example in lewis's approach. is true if the closest set of worlds  or sphere  most like our own that have a true also. for those worlds  have b true  and for no world in the sphere is a b false. 
　　the counterfactual conditional also differs from the material conditional  in that it does not necessarily support tran-

sitivity. consider the following example  taken from  stalnaker 1 : 
 if carter had been born in russia  he would be a communist. if carter were a communist  he would be sending american defense secrets to the kremlin. therefore  if carter had been born in russia  he would be sending american defense secrets to the kremlin.  
the conclusion is clearly dubious  and so a logic for a counterfactual conditional must also allow for failure of the transitivity of the conditional. 
　　related approaches for reasoning with counterfactuals and subjunctives  and reasoning about conditional obligation are described in  nute 1  and  van fraassen 1   while  chellas 1  and  nute 1  provide general discussions. the underlying semantic theory for such approaches is typically expressed using a possible worlds formulation  generally along the lines of lewis'. 
　　consider now the case of default and prototypical properties. it is fairly easy to come up with patterns of reasoning that are quite similar to those cited for counterfactual reasoning. so. for example  it seems reasonable to say that ravens are black  but albino ravens are not black. in a similar fashion  perhaps there is some disease x that turns albino ravens black again  and so we would also want to be able to assert that albino ravens with disease x are black. hence we should allow that a strengthening of an antecedent may reverse the truth value of a 
　　consequent. failure of transitivity is also easy to show. thus  every penguin is necessarily a bird: birds normally fly: yet penguins normally don't fly. in addition perhaps. quakers are normally pacifists; pacifists are normally vegetarians; yet quakers are not normally vegetarians. 
　　there are major differences though between representing counterfactual knowledge and representing default knowledge. most significantly  counterfactual reasoning treats conditionals where the antecedent is false but the conditional as a whole may be either true or false. for default knowledge  we are interested in the case where the antecedent of the conditional is true. thus  for example  when we assert that ravens are black and albino ravens are not black  we expect that there are in fact ravens and albinos. so it appears that what we require is a conditional logic  but one where the properties of the logic are  tailored  to the problem at hand. such a logic then would have the same relation to conditional logics in general as particular epistemic logics of belief have to modal logics in general: each would constitute a particular system formulated in response to a particular need. 
1. initial considerations 
　　a statement such as  ravens are black  is to be interpreted as  normally ravens are black . the approach taken is to say. roughly  that a raven is black  or would be black  if we  factor out  exceptional circumstances such as being an albino  being painted  being in a strong red light  or whatever. similarly we would want to say that an albino raven is not black if we again  factor out  exceptional circumstances such as having some disease that turns individuals black  being painted  etc. thus  roughly  if everything else was equal  a raven would be black  and an albino raven would be non-black. a key point is that in general there will be an arbitrarily large set of exceptional circumstances and so we will not be able to specify all possible exceptional conditions. 
　　since the truth of  ravens are black  involves ignoring exceptional circumstances  this means that we are considering  in some sense  less exceptional states of affairs in order to determine the truth of this statement. so we can say that  ravens are black  is true if in the least exceptional states of affairs in which there are ravens  ravens are black. similarly  in the least exceptional states of affairs in which there are albino ravens  albino ravens are black.  from this it follows that the least exceptional states of affairs in which there are albino ravens are more exceptional that the least states in which there are ravens.  this then is the way statements such as  ravens are black    albino ravens are non-black   and so on are informally interpreted: we consider not the state of affairs being modelled  but other  less exceptional  states of affairs. 
　　the semantics for the formal system to be presented then is based on a possible worlds formulation  where a  possible world  corresponds to a  possible state of affairs  . the accessibility relation e between worlds is interpreted so that ew1 holds between worlds w1 and w1 just when w1 is at least as uniform  or at least as unexceptional  as w1. from this. a=  b is true at a world just when the least exceptional worlds in which a is true also have b true. the notion of  at least as exceptional as  between possible worlds is. to be sure  a rather imprecise one. yet. arguably  one uses just such a metric when asserting that  birds fly  or  ravens are black   or any other commonsense statement. moreover  there are some conditions that can be placed on such a metric  and. arguably  these conditions yield a system that conforms to common intuitions concerning default assertions. 
　　in  delgrande 1b   the following conditions were argued to be required for the accessibility relation e: 
reflexive: eww for all worlds w. 
transitive: if ew1 and ew1 then ew1. 
forward connected. if ew1 and ew1 then either ew1 or ew1. 
clearly the notion of  at least as unexceptional as  between worlds should be reflexive and transitive; the third condition states that any worlds accessible from some world are themselves comparable. a given world w then  sees  a succession of disjoint sets of worlds arranged in a strict ordering  wherein all the worlds in a set are equivalent with respect to  unexceptionalness the modal logic corresponding to this accessibility relation is the standard temporal logic s1  hughes and cresswell 1 ; it subsumes s1 but does not subsume s1. 
	delgrande 	1 

     most conditional logics  including all that have been cited here  however do not base their semantics on an accessibility relation e. but rather employ a  world selection  function /. this function  given a proposition and a world  has as value the sei of least exceptional worlds in which the proposition is true. this means that a b is true at world w just when the set of worlds picked out by /. applied to w and the proposition expressed by a. is contained in the set of worlds in which b is true. clearly then  given an accessibility relation e. it is possible to obtain a world selection function /: in  delgrande 1b   the converse is also shown to hold for the system at hand. 
　　in the interests of bringing the present work into line with this previous work in conditional logic  the formal semantics is in fact formulated in terms of such a function. in addition  this reformulation has the advantage of being  in the end. simpler. for the remainder of this paper then i consider a semantic treatment in terms of a function /; conditions for this function are given in the next section. 
     as a final point in our informal interpretation of  normally*  note that there is no statistical connotation in  ravens are normally black . in fact  it is quite possible that no raven is black in some state of affairs  yet  ravens are normally black  is still true. one can imagine  for example  some new disease that turns ravens white: in this case it is quite reasonable to say something like  ravens are normally black  but will probably remain white until an antidote can be found  . this seems to be a slightly more general reading that that usually adopted in other systems of default reasoning  where  ravens are black  is generally interpreted as  ravens are typically black . this last reading seems a little unusual in the above example  which involves no raven  contingently  being black. 
1. a formal semantics 
     the language l for the variable conditional consists of the language of fol. augmented with a connective for the variable conditional. the language has the following primitive symbols: a denumerably infinite set of individual variables x.y.z.     ; a denumerably infinite set of individual constants a.b.c.       ; for each a denumerably infinite set of n-place predicate symbols. p.q.r. ; together with the symbols  and v. and parentheses and commas for punctuation. the symbols a.b.c. will stand for arbitrary well-formed formulae of l. the set of individual variables and constants will make up the set of terms. where no confusion arises  lower-case words may be used to stand for constants and capitalised words may be used to stand for predicate symbols. 
definition: the well-formed formulae  wffs  of l constitute the least set such that: 
 i  if p is a n-place predicate symbol and t1 ...  tn are terms  then p t1  ... tn  is a wff. 
 ii  if a. b are wffs and x is an individual variable  then 
as usual  conjunction  a   disjunction  v   biconditionality 
1 	knowledge representation 
and the existential quantifier are introduced by definition. parenthesis may be omitted where no confusion arises. also the standard notions of scope and of free and bound variables are assumed. a x  will be used to indicate that a may have x as a free variable: a t  is the result of uniformly substituting term t for all free occurrences of x 
sentences of l are interpreted in terms of a model 
m =  w.f.d.v  where w is a set. / is a function from wx  w  to  ho. d is a domain of individuals  and v is a function on terms and predicate symbols so that 
1. 
these conditions are shown in  delgrande 1b  to yield a semantics equivalent to a reflexive  transitive  forward connected accessibility relation e with respect to some given world. 
　　finally  the conditional operator can be tied to the more familiar modal notions of necessity  or truth in all alternative 

　　however  the key result here is that the proof theory is sound and complete with respect to the semantics given in the previous section. we obtain: theorem: 
　　soundness is proven by a straightforward inductive argument. completeness is proven by showing that there is a nmodel. called the canonical model  in which every non-theorem of n is invalid. this proof is an adaptation of the method of canonical models in first-order modal logics  hughes and cresswell 1 . but modified to accommodate the variable conditional operator. 
　　finally  by a standard result concerning a type of derived model called a filtration  chellas 1  we obtain: theorem: the quantifier-free fragment of n is decidable. 
1. discussion 
　　the previous sections gave a formal specification of the logic n. it remains to be shown that the logic  and in particular the variable conditional  captures common intuitions regarding prototypical and default properties. to begin with  the various difficulties encountered with the material conditional for representing default information do not arise with the variable conditional. so. for example  the following set of sentences is satisfiable: 
moreover the sentences are satisfiable while having raven x  and 
albino x  true at a world. hence  as required  we can strengthen the antecedent of a variable conditional  and reverse the truth of the consequent  without falling into inconsistency. this pattern of strengthening the antecedent to reverse the truth value of the consequent may be extended arbitrarily. 
in addition  
is satisfiable. and satisfiable with true antecedents  in each of the conditionals. also the following set of statements is similarly satisfiable: 
so  as required  we lose transitivity of the variable conditional. 
　　thirdly  we can consistently assert universal conditional statements  together with statements about  exceptional  individuals. thus for example the following set of sentences is satisfiable: 
   1  in the interests of readability i have omitted universal quantifiers. clearly universally quantified versions follow easily and trivially by universal generali sation. 
	delgrande 	1 

　　however  we do obtain weakened forms of strengthening the antecedent and transitivity for the variable conditional. axiom cv provides such a weakened form for strengthening the antecedent: 

thus if ravens are normally black  but it isn't the case that ravens are normally albino  then we can conclude that ravens that aren't albino are normally black. 
　　a consequence of axiom  provides another restricted form of strengthening the antecedent: 

hence if we have some conditional relation then  for any property  the consequent follows conditionally from the antecedent conjoined either with the property or its negation. so. if ravens are normally black  then it is either the case that albino ravens are normally black  or that non-albino ravens are normally black. 
　　a rule of inference that follows from rcm provides a restricted form of transitivity: 

that is. if ravens are normally black and black things are not white then ravens are normally not white. we also have restricted transitivity from axiom rt: 

thus if ravens are normally black and ravens that are black normally have dark eye pigment  then ravens normally have dark eye pigment. if the second occurrence of raven x  were dropped from the above  then we would of course have full transitivity. 
　　in addition  we do not have a law of the excluded middle consequents of the variable conditional. hence if a kind does not normally have a particular attribute  we are not bound to attribute to it the negation  unlike the material conditional. this is a consequence of the fact that the following sentence is satisfiable: 

thus perhaps residing in north america is irrelevant with respect to ravenhood. and we would not want to say either that ravens normally live in north america or that they normally do not live there. 
　　also  we cannot have conflicting variable conditionals. a theorem of n is: 
so if  be true  unless a is necessarily false . 
　　the logic n differs from conditional logics for counterfactual reasoning primarily in that logics for representing counter-
1 	knowledge representation 
factual assertions generally allow some sort of connection between contingent truths and variable conditionals. for example  many systems contain the following theorem: 
mp 	
thus  given a  counterfactual  where the antecedent is true  the consequent is also taken as true. an example perhaps is 
 if otto had come  a would have been a lively party.  
 but ouo did come.  
 hence  it must have been a lively party.  
however  in n we obtain an unsurprising relation between implication and the variable conditional: 
rce 	
and so. if we were to add mp to n. we would obtain: 

and the variable conditional would collapse into entailment. 
another formula that appears occasionally is the following: 
cs 	
cs requires that if the antecedent and consequent happen to be true at a world. then that world is a member of the least exceptional worlds with respect to the antecedent. this would have the undesirable consequence of tying our notion of  normally   which heretofore had rested on the notion of alternative stales of affairs  to contingent truths. neither mp nor cs then is appropriate for our concerns  wherein contingent truths at a world should play no part in the truth of a variable conditional. 
　　conditional logics of obligation  van fraassen 1  similarly differ in detail from n. most notably in rejecting the axiom id. 
ft. conclusion 
　　this paper has presented a logical system n for representing statements of default and prototypical properties. the language of the system consists of that of first-order logic  augmented with a variable conditional  the intended interpretation of is  all other things being equal  if a then c  or  if a then normally c . the semantics of the system is based on a possible worlds formulation  wherein is true if in the least exceptional worlds in which a is true. c is also true. this allows the statements  to be jointly satisfiable. and with contingently true antecedents  simply by having the least exceptional worlds in which is true differ from the least exceptional worlds in which a is true. in a similar fashion  transitivity of the variable conditional is blocked  
and so the statements are jointly satisfiable with true antecedents. similarly  it is possible to assert a variable conditional along with statements that would conflict with the corresponding material conditional. hence 
a. and  are jointly satisfiable. we can then  via universal generalisation  assert general statements concerning  normal  properties without inconsistency. hence  for example  we can assert that every bird normally flies  every penguin is 
1  see {lewis 1  and  nute 1  for taxonomies of such systems. necessarily a bird  yet every penguin normally does not fly. in addition we can assert that tweety is a bird that does not fly. 
　　on the other hand  the variable conditional is strong enough to permit reasonable and intuitive relations between sentences. in particular we obtain restricted versions of strengthening the antecedent and of transitivity of the variable conditional. thus  as an example of restricted transitivity  we have a derived rule that lets us state that if it is true that every bird normally flies  and that if everything that flies has the ability to become airborne  then it follows that every bird normally has the ability to become airborne. in addition we have restrictions such that a= c and a= -c are jointly satisfiable only if a is necessarily false. 
　　the key point here then is that the logic allows one to represent statements of default and prototypical properties  and to reason about such statements. thus it makes sense in the system to talk of one default statement being derivable in the logic from a set of others. in addition  the logic seems more appropriate for representing information about prototypical properties than extant default or non-monotonic logics  in that its semantics does not rest on the notion of consistency with a given set of assertions. thus the relation between birds and flight is phrased independently of any particular believer or believers. finally  the quantifier-free fragment of the logic is decidable. and so there exist complete mechanical procedures for reasoning about the default properties of  for example  a single individual. one such procedure  based on the method of semantic tableaux  is described in  groeneboer 1 . 
　　however  the work presented here contains one rather obvious omission  the logic contains no mechanism for reasoning  in the absence of other information . thus for example if we know that a and that a= c. we have no mechanism for concluding something like  in the normal course of events. c . this  from the semantic end of things is quite reasonable  in that the truth conditions for a and c are independent of the conditions for a= c. yet. on the other hand  it also seems reasonable that if we knew that birds normally fly and that tweety is a bird  then we should be able to conclude  by default  that tweety flies. the difficulty of course is that if we allowed modus ponens as a rule of inference  we would run into problems with strengthening the antecedent. 
　　one solution is to use the model theory of the logic to suggest conclusions about individuals. consider  for example  where we know only that ravens are normally black  and that albino ravens are normally not black  and that individual opus is a raven. this gives us some information concerning the world at hand  but not enough to conclude that opus is  or is not  black. however  if we pragmatically and a priori decide that the world at hand is one of the least exceptional worlds consistent with what's known then  we would have also that opus is black. that is. since in the simplest worlds in which there are ravens  ravens are black  if the world at hand is among these worlds then ravens clearly are black at that world. if we were to subsequently add the information that opus was an albino  then we could no longer obtain such a result. the reason for this is that in the simplest worlds in which there are albino ravens  such ravens are not black  and so we would draw the alternative conclusion that opus was not black. this approach is developed and put on a formal footing in  delgrande 1 . 
acknowledgements 
　　this research was supported in part by the natural science and engineering research council of canada grant a1   
