 
     the research reported here is part of a project aimed at the construction of an environment for building intelligent help systems. a help system supports the user in handling and mastering an information processing system. core of this environment is a shell that contains all domain independent procedures and knowledge. a comprehensive help system not only answers questions of users  but also 
'looks over their shoulders* and interrupts when appropriate. this means that a help system is equipped with a 
performance interpreter  consisting of a plan 
recogniser  a diagnoser  and a question 
interpreter. part of this shell and focus of this paper is a generic coach. in a help system a coach has two functions: to assist the user with a current problem and to teach the user about the ips. the proposed coach consists of three layers: 1  a didactic goal generator which generates an overlay of domain concepts that may be taught  1  strategy planner which constructs coaching strategies  and 1  tactics which are the terminal elements of strategies. they are the speech acts finally  uttered  by the coach. in this paper these three layers are discussed in greater detail and are related to empirical research. 
i introduction 
     the research reported here is part of the eurohelp project. *  this project is aimed at the construction of an environment for building intelligent help systems. a comprehensive help system supports the user both in an active and in passive way in handling and mastering a particular 'information processing system'  ips  i.e. an interactive computer program . core of this environment is a shell that contains all domain independent procedures and knowledge. the major task of a developer of a help system for some specific ips will be to load the shell with a representation of the domain concepts  commands  syntax  methods of object reference  etc . this shell is under construction now; specifications have been written and a 
     prototype help system  eurohelp.p1  for unix-mail has been developed and tested  breuker  in press . implementation is in loops on a xerox 1. in this paper we will focus on the construction of a generic coach that is part of this shell  after a short description of what a full help system consists of. 
   the research is partially funded by the esprit program of the european community under contract p1. the project encompasses an effort of about 1 man-years over a 1 year period  of which 1 years have been spent now. partners in the project are: cri  ddc  denmark   icl  university of leeds  u.k.   university of amsterdam  courseware europe  the netherlands . 
ii functions and structure of help systems 
     the function of a help system is to provide information about the use of some ips when needed by any type of user. the need can be expressed by the user or be inferred by the help system. this means that a help system should have the role of a human coach  who looks over the shoulder of the user to interpret her performance  interrupts when things go wrong or when there is an opportunity to extend the repertoire of the user  and who is able to answer questions in the context of current use of the ips. the latter is crucial  because many users -in particular novice users- are not aware of a problem  and if they are  they do not know how to describe it  fischer et al.  1 . this is one important reason why question-answering help systems  which do not interpret user performance  have a very limited functionality  e.g. uc  wilensky et al.  1; aqua  quillici et al.  1  . on line monitoring the performance of the user entails many conceptual and computational problems  but these are not qualitatively different from those in intelligent coaching in general  e.g. sleeman & brown  1; anderson et al. 1; self  in press . 
a. architecture of the eurohelp shell 
     because user needs may either be identified by the system or by the user  eurohelp consists of a question interpreter and a performance interpreter. 
to circumvent the problem of interpreting questions in natural language  lehnert  1; wilensky  et al.  1  question frames are used. for each type of question  lehnert  1; hartley & smith  in press  a text frame is presented for which the user supplies the objects. 
     the question interpretation problem may be reduced by relying on the linguistic competence of the user  the performance interpretation problem presents itself in its full glory. in normal coaching  training  the system presents a problem to the student. however  in ips performance the user poses the problems  tasks  to herself. finding out whether something goes wrong is highly dependent on identifying the intentions of the user. therefore  the 
performance 	interpreter 	contains 	a 	plan 
recogniser and a planner  which cooperate in such a way that the former works bottom-up and provides constraints to the latter in generating currently feasible plans. plans may not only be wrong or impossible  they may be highly inefficient. in almost any editor  for example  a line can be deleted by a simple command rather than character by character. 
	breuker  winkels  and sandberg 	1 

     the tracing of errors is simplified to some extent by the fact that many erroneous actions of the user are not executable by the ips. however  the variety of executable errors is as complicated as in any 'natural' domain  because users may acquire all kinds of misconceptions  ranging from wrong models of the underlying virtual machine' to not knowing about a side effect of some command. although generative diagnosis of misconceptions by systematic perturbations of correct domain knowledge is certainly beyond the current state of the art for domains of any complexity  cf clancey  in press   the identification of errors and underlying misconceptions by the diagnoser is reasonably constrained on one hand by the current goal of the user and a detailed user model. *  because ips task performance consists of many fine grained steps very detailed  interpreted  information on the current state of knowledge of the user can easily be obtained. figure 1 presents a global overview of the architecture of eurohelp. in the next section we will discuss the coach into more detail. 

fig 1: architecture of eurohelp. 
iii a generic cqachino system 
     in a help system a coach has two functions: to assist the user with a current problem and to teach the user about the ips. these two functions support one another: correct performance facilitates learning; knowledge about the ips enables  better  performance. however  the scope of these functions is different. learning goals are long term goals  while the 'help' function is a very local one. therefore we distinguish 'global needs'  i.e. the knowledge to be acquired about a particular ips  see 1.   and local needs  which state the current problem of the user  for more details see 1 . whenever a local need can be related to a global need  i.e. the user is supposed to be able to learn from the information presented  the coach should teach; otherwise it simply presents the required information  help . 
presenting information consists of a sequence of 
 'speech acts' or tactics. this sequence is the result of a planning process that takes into account what to say when and how  given the identified problem of the user  i.e. the local need . this is what a 'teaching strategy' is about current intelligent teaching systems  its  contain more or less fixed  prewired teaching strategies  e.g. sleeman & brown  1; self  in press . in the eurohelp.po -a help system for unix-mail- coaching strategies were also prewired in the form of fixed frames in which topics  what to say  could be inserted. however  the large variety of potential local needs requires a more generative approach. as literature  e.g. ohlsson  in press  and empirical data  see section 1  show: there are no fixed coaching strategies. they are flexibly generated as a function of the current problem and state of knowledge of the user. 
     the structure of the coach consists of the following three layers  which are similar to those proposed by woolf & mcdonald  1   but with much more functional differentiation. 
didactic goal generator. didactic goals are overlays of domain concepts that provide a didactic view of the domain; they form the hidden curriculum of a help system and are similar to 'genetic graphs*  goldstein 
1   see section 1  
strategy planner. the second layer contains a planner that constructs the coaching strategies  and will be discussed in section 1. 
tactics. the third layer contains the tactics  and is a data structure. tactics are the terminal elements of strategies. they are 'speech acts'  consisting of a 
communication act  which embeds a proposition about the 'topic of discourse'. in other words: the 'how' embeds the 'what'  e.g.  to give you an example  1dd deletes 1 lines from the current cursor position  . in actual discourse  the communication act is often deleted. a major distinction can be made for tactics which have propositions that contain domain knowledge  and those that refer to the process of communication itself  e.g. questions like: did you understand what i just explained . because the 'what' and the 'how1 are strongly related tactics can be typed both by their communication act  and by their goal  i.e. the kind of change of state of knowledge they try to induce in the user's mind. this goal is dependent on the state of knowledge of the user  e.g. known  unknown   the type of knowledge 
 operational or support domain knowledge  see clancey  1   communication context   and the type of object within this knowledge  concept  relation  history  state  etc. . currently  we have distinguished 1 goals for tactics  winkels et a!.  1; see also section 1 . 

*  if the plan recogniser is not able to eatablith the currant goal  multiple hypothetet about mitconceptiont can often be ruled out by atking the uter about what the intendt to accomplith 

a. didactic goal generation 
a didactic goal refers to a domain concept  or to parts 

of a concept  if it is a complex one -e.g. a model of how the buffers of an editor function-. like a genetic graph  didactic goals are related. however  they are not  as in a genetic graph  goldstein  1  some substitute for the domain representation  but only indicate the didactic principle that underlies learning a new concept  given the fact that another concept is already mastered. these relations are based on principles of  machine  learning  and specify 'least effort* knowledge and skill acquisition trajectories through the domain representation. the didactic goals do not have to be specified by the developer of a help system for a particular domain  but are derived from the domain representation  and the user model  see below   by the 
didactic goal generator. 	in principle  	the 
didactic goal generator matches pairs of concepts and derives from their differences whether it fits one of the didactic relations. this is an exhaustive costly process  but for all relations except one  abstraction-concretion  the various networks can be generated completely once the domain representation is specified. the following relations are identified: 
generalisation-specification the more general a concept the larger its applicability and the less attributes it has. therefore  ordering concepts  e.g. commands  according to whether one is a further specification of the other provides an optimisation of learning and of scope of applicability  these relations are generated on the basis of variabilisation  is a and part of hierarchies  disjunction/conjunction of attributes  etc. 
inversion many actions in an ips have an inverse  which can be derived from the highest layer of the domain representation  which contains all generic actions for a specific domain. most inversion relations are very local  i.e. only between pairs of concepts. 
divergence-convergence because objects in an ips may have different sizes of 'grain'  e.g. character vs file in an editor  from the point of view of efficient performance  and not of learning  it is more profitable to acquire first skills that handle 'large size' and 'small size' objects  than starting at some medium size. this relation can conflict with the generalisation-specification relation  but initially this relation has priority  ceteris paribus; see below . 
analogy because eurohelp has means to map an 
'information system metaphor'  ism  onto the domain representation  the mapping relations  analogies  can be used for didactic purposes. the discussion of the ism is beyond the scope of this paper. 
abstraction-concretion when certain commands are reasonably well practiced by the user explaining underlying objects and models helps to induce a coherent model of the ips. on the other hand  new abstract concepts are well explained by pointing to their concrete manifestations  the inverse of this relation represents an important didactic principle as well. it is beyond the scope of this paper to describe in detail how this relation is dependent on distinguishing operational from support knowledge  clancey  1 . because commands may share objects  and because the transition from concrete to abstract is also dependent on the *shared* skill with respect to an object  this relation can only be generated dynamically for each user per session. 
     because the didactic goals are interrelated in multiple ways  conflicts may arise regarding which expansions  i.e. instructing a new concept  should be presented. therefore  a 'strategic* layer is specified which contains rules for establishing priorities. currently  an experimental prototype of the dgg is under construction: functional specifications have been written. 
b. the planning of coaching strategy's. 
     once the current problem of the user  the local need has been identified it will be sent to the coach. three types of local needs  corresponding to the three functions of coaching are distinguished: 
error: when a user issues a non-executable command or performs in a way diagnosed as not intended or non optimal  
occasion for expansion: when the performance of the user provides an occasion to introduce a new concept  a didactic goal  see previous section   
lack of feedback: when the feedback of the ips is assumed to be insufficient for a user. 
type of local need 	coaching function 
error 	remediate occasion for expansion expand lack of feedback 	provide feedback 
     besides the performance  a question can  in combination with performance  lead to one of the three local nseds. 
     the local need also contains the immediate cause  i.e. the thing that triggered it  see above  and a diagnosis of the specific lack of knowledge or misconception that explains the local need. this diagnosis thereby provides the topic s  of the local need and gives already some information about the state of knowledge the user has concerning this topic  from the user model . 
     an example of a local need for the vi domain  representing the fact that a user does not know she used a certain command  is: 
local need error executable  sehousness moderate   -  type 
tperformance history tp    f -  immediate cause tdiagno1ls lack ofjcnowledge     diagnosis 
topic concept p   
support unknown   operational unknown    attribute main effect p    j  certainty certain  . 
     in case the local need is for example of type error  the immediate cause will refer to what the error is  and the diagnosis will denote the knowledge that is needed to avoid the error in the future. in the example above  the user accidently executes an unknown command  p   which results in putting back in the text the last piece of text that has been deleted. the topic provided by the diagnosis 
	breuker  winkels  and sandberg 	1 

is the concept of p. the user should be made aware of the main effect of p. 
     the first decision the coach has to make  is whether to provide pure help or to coach. if the topic of the local need is expandable from the  assumed  current knowledge of the user  in fact  if it is part of the current didactic goals  real coaching is in order. if not  one can assume that the user will not be able to retain the new information and the coach will decide to provide help  which in this view is a stripped version of coaching. 
     next the strategy planner will choose a top-level strategy to tackle this local need. top-level strategies are: remedial  expansion and state feedback. there is no fundamental difference between top-level strategies and substrategies: the strategy first picked is the top-level one. in fact  the same strategy can be a substrategy later on. for instance  many remedials imply an expansion of the knowledge of a user. 
     at this point a potentially recursive cycle of strategy selection and strategy refinement starts. the top-level strategies point to sets of prestored skeletal strategies  cf. friedland and iwasaki's notion of  skeletal plans  - friedlnnd e.a.  1  these skeletal strategies consist of sequences of substrategies and depending on whether the help version is wanted or not  they are shallow or not. 
     such a set of strategies consists of very general and very specific ones. the general ones are not immediately applicable. they need further refinement to accommodate the current situation. specific strategies are applicable as they are but require a matching current situation. if the current situation does not match one of the available  specific strategies  a general one will be chosen. 
     after a plan has been selected  the refinement process starts. every substrategy will be refined until it maps directly to a tactic  the terminal element that 'can be executed right away*. it may sometimes turn out to be necessary to consult other modules of the ihs  like e.g. the performance planner to construct a plan to achieve some goal  e.g. a repair to undo a current state  or the user model to find out if a topic is known or not. 
     refinement of substrategies is in principle guided by heuristics. sometimes  however  refinement may be done by another cycle of plan selection  after which of course further refinement has to be done. this can be the case when strategies are inserted  of which also sets of plans exist. for example  a repair substrategy may be inserted in a general remedial plan  and a refinement of that repair may consist of selecting some special repair plan. 
an example of a heuristic refinement rule is: 
if error executeble  & error seriou1nes1 high   
then insert next to strategy repair   strategy context   
     which means that after the context-strategy  which for instance explains the immediate cause of an error  a repair strategy is inserted. a repair strategy consists of a plan to undo the effects of an executable error. in case the error is a serious one  the user may worry about this undoing  so this information is provided rather early; in case the error is not a very serious one  such a repair strategy is better delayed until the user has a full understanding of the  immediate  cause of the error. 
     ultimately we will thus have a complex structure with tactics as terminal elements. there may be a lot of redundancy or inefficient use of tactics  or their propositions   so some pruning will have to take place. the resulting tactic structure will then be fed through the utterance generator. the tactic structure represents the major pragmatic issues; the utterance generator supplies additional pragmatic  text-semantic  syntactic and lexical processing. 
     for now the process of output generation consists of filling slots in textframes which are associated with the tactics. figure 1 gives a general overview of the strategy planner as discussed. a summary of the processing of the coach is presented in figure 1. 
	input 	process output layer 1: domain representation--  dgg   didactic goals 　　　user model | layer 1:  planner  etc  	| 
	v 	v 
local need--  strategy planner   user model update 
/ 
/ 
layer 1: tactics 	|-  structure of tactics 
v 
utterance generator 
figure 1: input  output and processing of the coach 
 components of the coach are in capitals  
1. an example 
     for a simple example we will take the local need as presented above. given the fact that the topic of the local need is unknown  help is in order and because the local need type is 'error'  the remedial strategy is chosen. we will assume there is no specific plan for this situation  so the most general one will be selected. 
the top-level strategy then  looks like this: 
 rtmedial  announc m nt cont xt n w inform tion coniolidation evaluation   
     of these substrategies  the  context  and the  new information  are the most important ones. the first is for establishing a context for the second  the new information. this context can be found in the immediate cause of the local need  the new information can be found in the diagnosis and besides that in the domain representation and the didactic goals. figure 1 shows the refinement of this remedial strategy. the protocol describing the refinement presents information on the local need  and how this information is used in the refinement process. the protocol ends by specifying the tactic structure. the text generated is what the coach would say in the present situation. 

fig. 1 protocol of planning a remedial protocol eurohelp strategy planner - version 1 
where does the local need come from: 
1  diagnoser 
1  file 
enter your choice:1. 
please enter the filename: ln1. 
ok. the local need is: local need error executable  seriousness moderate    
 performance history  p     
 diafnosis lack of knowledge  topic concept p   support  unknown   operational unknown   
  main effect p       certainty  certain  . 
   picking the top-level strategy... 
   checking the didactic goals 
   assuming concept p  is not part of didactic goals  operational/support  
   consulting the performance planner for a plan to undo  p  
   plan  crsr up  dd   
   consulting the user model for crsr up  operational/support .     known weak /known weak  
   consulting the user model for dd  operational/support .    known weak /unknown 
rented i al  local  need1  
clarify 
announcement 
drawing  attention 
　　 interruption proposition1   context 
clarification perf hist1  
　　 instantiation proposition1s j new information 
describe topicll  
describe support topicl 1  
informationl topicll  
　　 description proposition1   describe  operation al  topic 1  
concretion  topic 1  
　　 operationalisation proposition1   state  feedback describe state  change topic 1  
check  assumption 
      elicitation proposition1   repair 
describe topicl1  
information1 topicl1  
 direction topicl1   
may i have your attention please. 
you just did  p    that is what went wrong. 
 p  is put buffer in text. 
practically  p  means what you deleted last will be inserted in the text is this you intention  
|: no. 
to undo do  crsr up  dd . 
1. the current state of affairs 
     at the moment a prototype of the coach as described above exists in prolog  in the near future an interlisp version will be constructed with some extra features. one obvious necessity is the possibility to postpone part of a strategy  because eurohelp will have to be concise. experience with the eurohelp.p1 and our experiments has taught us users of ipss do not want to be told too much at one time  otherwise they ignore the information and get on with their work. 
iv the tutor experiment 
     in order to evaluate the structure of the coach as specified before  an on-line help-experiment has been conducted  winkels  et al.  1 . the structure of the coach reflects a theory of how tutors will respond to user's needs in handling and learning about an ips. the experiment is meant to find out whether the tactics proposed are indeed present and sufficient. besides the identification of tactics per se the clustering of tactics into standard patterns is of importance  for such patterns reflect underlying strategies. empirical information regarding the existence of such clusters would provide support for the planning of coaching strategies as proposed before. 
     the domain chosen for this investigation is the domain of text-editing  i.e. unix vi because of the concepts involved are fairly complex and efficient performance calls for more or less elaborate planning. therefore  such a domain provides a rich context for collecting information on how a help-system could function as an aid in handling and learning about an ips. 
a. experimental procedure 
in the experiment we tried to mimic the prospective 
help-system as closely as possible. this implies that tutors should not be able to interpret the text the user is working on  because a help-system would neither be able to interpret the meaning of a text. text interpretation is prevented by presenting the tutors with a scrambled version of the text the user is processing. 
     the vi-user  and the tutor are in separate rooms. such separation first forces them to communicate via a terminal and secondly provides an opportunity to think aloud during task performance. both tutor and user are provided with two terminals  one for communication and one for 
vi-processing. a record is kept of both the ongoing dialogue 
 communication protocol  and the processing of vi  vi-protocol   and stored for later usage. the users  seven in all  were novices in varying degree. the different tutors participating in the experiment were all very experienced users of vi. 
     the users who participated in the experiment were presented with a set of tasks representative of editing tasks: insert a piece of text  interchange two words  move a piece of text  delete a piece of text  replace a word  etc. before the first session started  all users were provided with a short instruction  explaining basic-commands. these commands were selected in such a way that all tasks presented could be performed  but not in a very efficient manner. this provided the participating tutors with ample opportunity to take the initiative and provide help or instruction  expansions . the tutors were instructed to interrupt whenever they thought appropriate. both user and tutor were asked to think aloud during experimental sessions. in this way  three different types of data have been collected: 
1  communication-protocol 
1  record of the vi-performance 
1  thinking-aloud-protocols 
	breuker  winkels  and sandberg 	1 

b. results 
     the first part of the data analysis to be described here was solely concerned with the identification of  tactics . the main source of data for this analysis is provided by the communication-protocol containing all tutorial actions. to code the communication-protocols in terms of tactics  all protocols were partitioned into episodes  and within each episode into speech acts. following this partitioning  each and every speech act has been coded as a particular tactic. the next figure presents an example of a part of a coded communication protocol. 
tutor/user dialogue 	type 
 tutor   1   1  object type goal as a consequence of the i instantiat. p rf. 	clarification command you gave  history you are back in insert mode  instantiat. actual state context ref. that means all you type operationalisation concept concretion in will actually be inserted in the text. 
 tutor   1   1  
you cannot wipe out a new limitation line  return   by delete or x. concept 	distinction but you can join two 	direction 
lines again into one line by moving the cursor to the upper line and then giving the j command. implication information thus try an arrow up 	direction and j. implication information it should be capital j. 	direction 
 tutor   1r  1  implication remind. excellent. 	evaluation perf. hist. 	motivation fig a: an example of a coded protocol 
     apart from coding the communication-protocols in terms of different tactics  clusters of tactics  reflecting a particular strategy have been identified. indeed  there appear to exist frequent clusters  reflecting underlying strategies  such as typical remedials and expansions. as has been suggested earlier tactics belonging to a cluster are frequently left out by the tutors for reasons of conciseness and efficiency. the output generated by the human tutors has been compared with the output generated by the implemented coach  fed with local needs derived from the log-files. it turned out that in general  the tactic-structure generated by the coach matched the structure generated by the human tutors quite well. although  the human tutors are much more fluent in their expression  the coach is more explicit in announcing interruptions and in referring to the performance history  stating for instance:  you iust did x. that is what went wrong . sometimes this kind of reference is called for  but in other cases the user is quite aware of what she did  and there is no need to remind her. 
     the thinking-aloud-protocols of the tutors contain additional information on the importance and the nature of planning in tutoring. the protocols provide evidence for a two-stage model; first interpretation of the user's local need  and secondly planning how to transfer the needed information  exactly as has been proposed in a top-down fashion for the planning of the coaching strategies. especially the last stage poses a problem to the tutors. they do know what they would like to transfer  but need to consider how the information has to be transferred. they construct a sequence of tactics by explicitly planning:  i want to explain this  but first i need to get this across . even when tutors eventually generate a sequence of tactics that occurs more often  the thinking-aloud protocols indicate that such a sequence is not prestored in memory but has to be constructed anew. 
     the data obtained within the experiment  both the communication-protocols and the thinking-aloud-protocols support the model for the planning of coaching strategies; basic frames do exist as identified clusters  tactics may and will be deleted. tutoring does not just mean executing a prewired plan  but means adjusting skeletal plans to current circumstances on the basis of planning. such planning is evidenced by the difficulties tutors expressed:  i should not have told this now  i just forgot to tell him    i just tell her what to do  but she will not understand it    well i hope this is clear  i am afraid i am telling too much . the tactical clusters identified are themes with variations  the latter reflecting the flexibility induced by the planning process  phrased by tutors on how to convey particular information  and by the recurring clusters of tactics. in other words tactical clusters are themes with variations  the latter reflecting the flexibility in the planning. 
v concluding remarks 
     the research described in this paper reflects a methodology which combines and integrates a top-down and a bottom-up approach for the construction of intelligent help systems. existing ideas on the functionality of the 
coach provided a framework for a top-down analysis of coaching strategies which resulted in the construction of a prototypical strategy planner. the complementing bottom-up approach consisted of gathering empirical data  identifying tactics and clusters of tactics. 
     both approaches combined  present a detailed picture of the nature of coaching strategies. the methodology represents a powerful research tool. first  it provides means to gather and analyse data from different sources. secondly  it allows for interaction between different levels of analysis. for example  tactics identified in the bottom-up analysis were used by the prototypical strategy planner in the top-down construction of strategies. 
     apart from the above methodological considerations  the major research result concerns the nature of coaching strategies. one might easily assume there exist a number of prewired strategies that only need to be retrieved from long term memory when appropriate. but this does not seem to be the case. human tutors tend to build strategies when confronted with a particular situation. they may be guided by a general strategy  like:  i need to correct this misconception . but how this misconception is corrected is planned on the spot. 

     if we want our coaching system to be as flexible in the use of strategies as human tutors turn out to be  we need a strategy planner instead of prewired  fixed strategies. the strategy planner as presented here  seems to satisfy the goal of flexibility in that it is capable of generating the same sort of tactic structures as our human tutors. 
