ions over the state of the system or student knowledge  expressing generalized conditions such as student takes initiative or student is confused. 
　　the definition of arcs as aggregations of predicates in a boolean formula provides a powerful tool for knowledge engineers. modifying predicates  and therefore arcs  allows fine-grain changes on individual predicates to impact greatly on the system's reasoning ability and to result in consequential changes to the tutor's discourse activity. 
　　within this structure  several arcs might define nearly equivalent situations as in the case when two arcs share one or more predicates. at such time  a conflict between arcs will be resolved through global or local  associated with specific nodes  conflict resolution stategies.1 one solution is to order the arcs in the set according to their specificity and to execute the first triggered arc. in this way  the most 
   1 conflict resolution in this sense is analogous to what happens in a production system when the left-hand sides of more than one rule are satisfied. 
	woolf and murray 	1 

specific subsuming situation will be preferred over other situations with which the arc shares predicates. however  we prefer to evaluate all the arcs  since incomparable situations  i.e. situations whose sets of predicates are disjoint  are likely. 
　　for example  suppose that students ask many questions after giving a wrong answer  and suppose that they also ask several seemingly random questions. one tutoring convention says that answering students' questions should take priority; another says that random questions should be discouraged. in such a case a non-conventional resolution mechanism must be used to resolve the conflict. 
b. 	actions defined by nodes 
nodes correspond to actions available to the system; they define alternative conversations and tutoring strategies. nodes differ in the actions they perform and in the manner they present tasks to students. shifting actions to the nodes  as we did for tactns  instead of leaving them on the arcs  as was done for atns  facilitates the notation of expanding abstract actions into more concrete substeps. abstract actions are nodes that are to be expanded and refined one or more times before taking on a form that can be executed. for example  the node evaluation schema is an abstract node whose expansion led to a second abstract node called remediation schema. on the other hand  the node present task represents an immediately executable action. action expansion is an activity of the discourse manager. this notion of abstract planning borrows principally from sacerdoti  and stefik . 
	v . 	f u t u r e w o r k 
the techniques we are working on allow a machine tutor to remain flexible while cooperatively engaged in conversation. the goal is to continually adjust the discourse to real-time changes in either the knowledge base or the user by admitting to the possibility of multiple discourse paths arising asynchronously depending on current context. these techniques are being applied toward improving a tutor's abilty to reason about discourse and to select appropriate remediation activities. as part of this work  we are building a visual editor that will allow a knowledge engineer to use screen figures  similar to those in figure 1 to reconfigure  the machine's response. 
　　the goal is to reduce the excessive time needed for building intelligent tutors by providing structures that can be easily refined and rebuilt as new systems are tested. tactns are designed to allow a wider circle of authors  e.g.  psychologists  teachers  curriculum developers  etc. to participate in the implementation of new intelligent tutors. 
	v i . 	a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t 
we thank klaus schultz of the university of massachusetts for his identification of key misconceptions about the crane boom problem. 
1 cognitive modeling 
	v i i . 	r e f e r e n c e s 
brown  d.  clement  j.  and murray  t.  tutoring specifications for a computer program which uses analogies to teach mechanics  cognitive processes research group working paper  department of physics  university of massachusetts  april 1. 
cerri  s.a.  and breuker  j.  a rather intelligent language teacher  in hart  ed. .studies in language learning  university of illinois  urbana  1.  vol. 1  # 1  pp. 1  1. 
clancey  w.  tutoring rules for guiding a case method 
dialogue  in d. sleeman and j. s. brown  eds.   intelligent tutoring systems  academic press  cambridge  ma  1. 
clement  j.  student's preconceptions in introductory mechanics  american journal of physics  1  1   january 1. 
grosz  b.  and sidner  c  the structures of discourse structure  proceedings of the national association of artificial intelligence  1. 
littman  d.  pinto  j.  and soloway  e.  an analysis of tutorial reasoning about programming bugs  in proceedings of the national association of artificial intelligence  august 1. 
mcdonald  d.  brooks  j.a.  woolf  b.  and werner  p.  
transition networks for discourse management   coins technical report # 1  1. 
sacerdoti  e.  planning in a hierarchy of abstraction 
spaces  in artificial intelligence  vol. 1  pp 1  1. 
stefik  m.  planning with constraints   in artificial intelligence  vol. 1  pp. 1  1. 
stevens  a.  collins  a.  and goldin  s.  diagnosing student's misconceptions in causal models  in d. sleeman and j.s. brown  eds.   intelligent tutoring systems  academic press  cambridge  ma  1. 
van lehn  k.  felicity conditions for human skill acquisition: validating an ai theory  report number csl-1  palo alto  ca  xerox palo alto research center  1. 
woods  w.  transition network grammars for natural 
language analysis  communications of the acm  vol 1  pp. 1  1. 
woolf  b.  and mcdonald  d.  context-dependent transitions in tutoring discourse  proceedings of the national association of artificial intelligence  austin  tx  1. 
