 
most ai systems model and represent natural concepts and categories using uniform taxonomies  in which no level in the taxonomy is distinguished. we present a representation of natural taxonomies based on the theory that human category systems are non-uniform. there is a basic level which forms the core of a taxonomy; both higher and lower levels of abstraction are less important and less useful. empirical evidence for this theory is discussed  as are the linguistic and processing implications of this theory for an artificial intelligence/natural language processing system. among these implications are:  l  when there is no context effect  basic level names should be used;  1  systems should identify objects as members of their basic level categories more rapidly than as members of their superordinate or subordinate categories. we present our implementation of this theory in sneps  a semantic network processing system which includes an atn parser-generator  demonstrating how this design allows our system to model human performance in the natural language generation of the most appropriate category name for an object. the ability of our system to acquire classificational information from natural language sentences is also demonstrated. 
1. introduction. 
　　knowledge-base systems typically model and represent natural concepts and categories using uniform inheritance networks  quillian 1  1  1; collins & quillian 1; fahlman 1  or frame systems  brachman 1; brachman & 
1 	cognitive modeling schmolze 1 . we will present a representation of natural taxonomies based on the theory that human category systems are non-uniform  i.e.f not all levels of abstraction are equally important or useful. this theory is supported by a substantial body of empirical evidence from the fields of psychology  anthropology  and linguistics  rosen et al. 1  1; mervis & rosen 1; berlin 1; c h. brown et al. 1; 
tversky 1; hunn 1; cantor et al. 1; smith & medin 1 we will discuss some of the evidence for this theory  as well as some of the linguistic and processing implications of this theory for an ai system modeling human cognitive behavior. 
　　this work is part of a larger  ongoing research effort concerned with problems in the understanding of natural language sentences containing generic terms. we will demonstrate some of the current abilities of our system to acquire generic concepts from natural language sentences  and to use these generic concepts in answering questions and making categorization judgements. this implementation uses the sneps semantic network processing system which includes an atn parser-generator  shapiro  1  1  1  1 
1. theory - the vertical dimension of category systems - a basic level. 
　　our representation is based on the following principles of human categorization set forth by eleanor rosen. categories within taxonomies are structured such that there is one level of abstraction at which the most basic category cuts can be made. this level of abstraction forms the  core   berlin 
1  p. 1  of a taxonomy  and is called the basic level. basic categories are:  l  those which carry the most information;  1  those whose members have the most attributes in common; and  1  the categories most differentiated from one another. basic level categories are  in fact  disjoint. chair  cat  and dog are examples of basic level objects. 
　　levels of a taxonomy above the basic level are called superordinate categories  e.g.  furniture  vehicle  mammal . fewer attributes are shared among members of superordinate categories  i.e.  there is less category resemblance. categories below the basic level are called subordinate categories  e.g.  kitchen chair  station wagon  collie . subordinate categories contain many attributes which overlap with those of other subordinate categories  i.e.  there is less contrast between categories across a subordinate level. 
1. empirical evidence. 
　　the following summarizes some of rosen's empirical evidence supporting the existence of a basic level which forms the core of a taxonomy.  rosen et al. 1  1; mervis & rosen 1u 
1.1. attributes of objects. 
　　when subjects were asked to list attributes of basic  superordinate  and subordinate level objects  very few attributes were listed for superordinate categories  a great number of attributes were listed for basic categories  and an insignificant number of additional attributes were listed for subordinate level categories. this result supports the theory that the basic level is the most inclusive or general level at which the objects of a category possess a large number of attributes in common. attributes appear to be clustered at the basic level. 
1.1. object recognition. 
　　experiments using averaged shapes  obtained by superimposing outlines of objects to form normalized shapes  showed that the basic level is the most inclusive level at which the averaged shape of an object can be recognized. that is  basic objects  e.g.  chairs  dogs  were the most general objects that could be identified from these shapes; superordinate objects  e.g.  furniture  animals  could not be identified from averaged shapes. this suggests that basic level objects  are the most inclusive categories for which a concrete mental image of the category as a whole can be formed. we can form an image of a cat or dog which reflects the average members of the class  however  we cannot form an image of a mammal that reflects the appearance of the class as a whole. 
1.1. object names - categorization. 
　　studies of picture verification have demonstrated that objects are first recognized as members of theit basic level category. when subjects were shown pictures of objects  the basic level name was the name chosen for an object. with additional processing time  subjects were able to categorize objects at their subordinate and superordinate levels. thus  subjects knew the subordinate and superordinate names of objects  but categorized objects first at the basic level. rosen further states that basic level objects are the first categorizations made during perception of the environment  as well as the categories most named  and most necessary in language. 
1.1. development of categories. 
　　basic level objects are not only the first categories learned by children  they also appear to be formed differently from categories at other levels. that is  basic categories are not learned explicitly by acquiring a definition or deductive rule  but rather are learned implicitly by exposure to multiple instances of the category  i.e.  they are formed inductively. this is often called the acquisition of types through ostensive definitions  jackendoff 1 . categories subordinate and superordinate to this level are often formed by the acquisition of a deductive rule  berlin 1 . for example  the concept mammal might be learned in terms of a rule which lists attributes such as: warmblooded; body usually covered with hair; female gives milk to young. 
1.1. summary of empirical evidence. 
　　thus  recent categorization research provides a great deal of empirical evidence supporting the importance of basic level categories in a taxonomy  and the non-uniformity of human category systems. basic level categories are the first categories developed  they are formed differently than non-basic categories  they are the most used and useful categories  and therefore  they must be distinguished from non-basic categories in some way. 
1. representation 	and 	use 	of 
categories in an ai/nlp system. 
　　if an artificial intelligence/natural language processing  al/nlp  system modeling human category systems must be able to distinguish basic level categories from n on-basic categories  an important issue to be considered is how and where to make the distinction. basic level objects are used in two kinds of categorization:  ordinary  categorization  i.e.  the 
classification of an individual in a class  and generic categorization  i.e.  categorization involving two classes or types. it seems clear that since basic level categories are formed early in life  they are formed via ordinary categorization. the teaching of these names is limited to the presentation of examples and counter-examples. thus  a child may learn the basic level name 'dog*  as someone points to rover and says 'dog  therefore  our system makes the distinction between basic and non-basic levels in the representations for ordinary categorization  i.e.  in the individual/class relations. the case frame used for this form of categorization of a basic level object is: 

	peters and shapiro 	1 

here ml represents the proposition that the individual represented by i is a member of the basic level category represented by j.  rover is a dog  is represented as follows: 
 see shapiro & rapaport 1 for the syntax and semantics of other constructs.  
　　since non-basic categories are formed later than basic categories  and are formed in the course of the investigation of underlying principles rather than ostensive features  we use a slightly more complex case frame to represent membership in a non-basic level category. 
　　these case frames in sneps are the built-in syntactic structures of our modeled minds. the use of the member/class case frame reflects the basic or primitive nature of categorization in basic categories  whereas the use of the argl/rel/arg1 case frame treats membership in non-basic categories as an ordinary binary relation. thus  our system distinguishes two cases of ordinary categorization: one representation is used when the class membership involves a basic level category  another representation when the class membership involves a non-basic category. 
　　in addition to this ordinary categorization  a system must  of course  be able to represent generic categorization  i.e.  class/class relations  such as  dogs are mammals . these relations are represented using a subclass/superclass case frame. 
figure 1 
are a subclass of the class of j's.  dogs are mammals  is represented as follows: 
1 	cognitive modeling here ml represents the proposition that the class of i's 

　　thus  we build a traditional uniform type hierarchy of class/class relations. we see no reason to distinguish any relations in the hierarchy  since we find no evidence that generic categorization sentences such as  collies are dogs    dogs ate mammals    mammals are vertebrates   require different underlying representations.  it is noteworthy that there are no class/class relations between two basic level 
categories.  
　　since an ability to form abstract concepts is required for generic categorization  this categorization occurs at a later stage of development than does ordinary categorization of basic level objects. therefore  the type hierarchy  which is formed after basic level concepts are formed  is not the appropriate place to make the distinction between basic and non-basic categories. in summary  a single representation is used for class/class relations  but two distinct representations are used for individual/class relations. 
　　krl-1  bobrow & winograd 1a  1b  1  is  to our knowledge  the only other al system to distinguish basic and non-basic levels in the representation of taxonomies. krl-1 used units to represent both classes and individuals. three distinct levels of abstraction were used in the representation of classes or types in units: a basic level  an abstract level  and a specialization level. bobrow and winograd stated that they did not  however  find an appropriate way to use these unit categorization levels for classes  and removed unit categorization from krl-1  bobrow & winograd 1  p. 1 . although not precisely specified in their papers  bobrow and winograd appear to have made distinctions among the levels of abstraction in the type hierarchy of frames only  not in the individual/class relationships. we could not find any evidence that distinctions were made in the units representing individuals  bobrow & winograd 1a 
p. 1 . 
1. inheritance and linguistic implications. 
1. inheritance. 
　　one of the organizational principles to which most semantic networks and frame systems adhere is that of storing properties in the hierarchy at the place covering the maximal subset of nodes sharing them. this is an efficient organizational scheme in which properties do not have to be replicated at different places in the network  for they are inherited by nodes below the ones in which they are stored. this principle fits in well with the theory of cognitive economy  for one can gain a great deal of information from a category system organized in this way  while conserving resources. 
　　categorization research studies  however  do not support this principle of organization. as stated above  properties appear to be clustered at the basic level  not at the level covering the maximal subset of nodes. this means that there is not a great deal of inheritance of properties taking place in the type hierarchy. instead most inheritance occurs at the individual level  i.e.  from the basic level category to the individual. thus  rover inherits attributes from the basic level category dog. 
1. linguistic implications. 
　　perhaps the most dramatic enhancement to our system resulting from our distinguishing basic and non-basic level categories is our ability to model human performance by choosing the most appropriate category name for an object. systems using uniform taxonomies have to make arbitrary word choice decisions. for example  the nigel generator  sondheimer et al. 1  generates as specific a term as possible. however  we know from human categorization research that in the absence of a specific context that would lead one to use a non-basic level name for an object  the basic level name should be used. 
　　figure 1 shows a dialog with our system illustrating our ability to model human performance in this respect: 
atn parser initialization 
: lucy petted a yellow animal 
i understand that lucy petted a yellow animal 
: the animal was a dog 
i understand that the yellow animal is a dog 
: the dog was a collie 
i understand that the yellow dog is a collie 
: what did lucy pet 
lucy petted a yellow dog 
:  end 
 end atn parser  
figure 1 
	peters and shapiro 	1 

　　since the basic level name is the most useful and most used name  the most appropriate answer to the question  what did lucy pet   is not the specialization  collie  or the superordinate level name  mammal   but the basic level name  dog . 
　　the dialog in figure 1 demonstrates that the basic level name is chosen regardless of the order in which categories are mentioned. 
atn parser initialization 
: mary petted a dog 
i understand that mary petted a dog 
: the dog is a mammal 
i understand that the dog is a mammal 
: the dog was a labrador 
i understand that the dog is a labrador 
: what did mary pet mary petted a dog 
: jane petted a manx 
i understand that jane petted a manx 
: the manx is a cat 
i understand that the manx is a cat 
: a cat is a mammal 
i understand that cats are mammals 
: mammals are animals 
i understand that mammals are animals 
: who petted an animal mary petted a dog and jane petted a cat 
: ~end 
 end atn parser  
figure 1 
　　thus  figures 1 and 1 show that word choice decisions are not made arbitrarily. our system does not simply choose the most or least specific name of an object  of the category name mentioned either first or most recently in the dialog. rather  the most appropriate name for an object  its basic level name  is used. 
　　figure 1 also shows the use of both ordinary categorization information and generic categorization information. the first three sentences show ordinary categorization  i.e.  the multiple classifications of an individual as dog  mammal  and collie. figure 1 shows part of the network built following the input of these sentences. node m1 represents the individual 
1 	cognitive modeling 
classified as a dog  mammal  and collie. the basic level name  dog  is chosen to answer the question  what did mary pet . 
　　figure 1 shows part of the network constructed from the input of the last five sentences in the dialog. node m1 is the individual classified both as a car and manx. the last group of sentences in figure 1 also includes two generic categorizations:  a cat is a mammal  and  mammals are animals . a type hierarchy is constructed from this input. answering the question  who petted an animal  requires inferencing using the type hierarchy. our system has inheritance rules which make this inferencing possible.  see shapiro 1  and shapiro & rapaport 1 for examples of these rules.  
1. processing implications. 
　　the non-uniformity of human category systems also has implications for a processing model for categorization. we would like to use our system to model classification problem solving. this form of problem solving is the basis for many expert systems  e.g.  prospector  gauschnig 1   emycin  van melle 1 and cocci  shapiro 1  are knowlege-base systems that specialize in forms of classification problems. 


　　category research has established that objects can be identified as members of their basic level category more rapidly than as members of their superordinate or subordinate categories. a possible processing model for our implementation  compatible with rosch's empirical evidence and the current general processing assumptions about categorization involving featural models  smith & medin 1  such as ours is the following. an object is first identified or recognized as a member of its basic class  since properties or attributes are clustered at the basic level. because of this bundling of attributes at the basic level  this processing involving feature matching can be performed quickly. categorization of an object as a member of its subordinate classes requires additional processing time  because additional features must be matched  some of which are much less salient than the features for 
categorizing an object at the basic level. categorization of an object as a member of its superordinate classes requires inferencing using the type hierarchy. we use path-based inference to accomplish this 
 shapiro & rapaport 1  shapiro 1 . performing this inferencing  of course  requires additional processing time. 
　　we are also interested in modeling the effect of expertise on the classification system  since rosch  found that expertise affects which level of abstraction is considered to be the basic level  as well as the amount of information stored at the basic and subordinate levels. for example  an airplane mechanic participating in her studies did not treat airplane as a basic level category  but further differentiated airplanes to form basic level categories. his list of attributes for types of airplanes was much more lengthy than those of other subjects  and he used attributes ignored by others. his visual view of airplanes also 
differed from those of other subjects  since his canonical view of airplanes was of the undersides and the engines  rather than of the top and side images. although it seems clear that the effects of expertise will be confined to small  specific parts of the taxonomy  the effects of expertise on the classification system need to be studied further. we believe that our system is flexible enough to accomodate the effects of expertise on the organization of the system. 
1. conclusions. 
　　we have incorporated principles of categorization derived from several years of research in our ai/nlp system. we distinguish one level  the basic level  as the core of our taxonomies  using a representation for membership in basic categories distinct from that used for membership in non-basic categories. this allows our system to model human performance in the generation of appropriate names for objects: when there is no context effect  the basic level name is used. the use of distinct representations and storing of attri-
butes at the basic level also will allow us to model the additional processing time necessary to categorize an object at a non-basic level. 
