 
a general problem in qualitative physics is determining the consequences of assumptions about the behavior of a system. if the space of behaviors is represented by an envisionment  many such consequences can be represented by pruning states from the envisionment. this paper provides a formal logic of occurrence which justifies the algorithms involved and provides a language for relating specific histories to envision ments the concepts and axioms are general enough to be applicable to any system of qualitative physics. we further propose the concept of transverse quantities as a general solution to qualitative versions 
of zeno's paradox. the utility of these ideas is illustrated by a rational reconstruction of the pruning algorithms used in frob  a working ai program. 
	i. 	introduction 
a goal of qualitative physics is to predict the behavior of physical systems. one technique  envisioning  generates all possible behaviors of a system  relative to a particular set of background assumptions. informally  any specific behavior of a system  a history  corresponds to a path through the system's envisionment  and vice versa. this correspondence is essential to using envisionments. 
for example  interpreting measurements can be viewed as constructing a correspondence between a  usually partial  history and an envisionment. however  the correspondence between histories and envisionments has never been adequately formalized. 
     formalizing this relationship has two benefits. first  it provides additional grounding for theories of measurement interpretation and diagnosis  such as  1  1   second  we use the formalization to generalize existing domainspecific algorithms for inferring the consequences of assumptions about behavior. the problem is this: any assumptions we make about a system's behavior  or any additional information we obtain concerning it  restricts its possible behavior in the future. for example  in engineering design we might assume that a boiler's rupture pressure is never reached or that the water level inside it never goes above a particular height. alternately  if we are observing a moving object then we might be able to calculate its initial energy  and thus place bounds on its location. in each of these cases a particular subset of behavior is directly ruled out  but other behaviors are indirectly ruled out as well. understanding these indirect consequences is useful for determining if we have imposed the correct constraints on our design or if our assumptions about an observed system are correct. figure 1 shows an example of these conclusions drawn by an existing ai program  frob  1l  that reasons about moving point-masses in a 1d world. the formalization presented here explicitly identifies the intuitions embodied in these algorithms  making them available for general application. 
frob   that reasons about moving point-masses in a 1d world. the formalization presented here explicitly identifies the intuitions embodied in these algorithms  making them available for general application. 
　　the following section describes the logic of occurrence  introducing registrations to represent the relationship between envisionments and histories. the axioms for inferring additional consequences of behavioral assumptions are also presented. these concepts are sufficiently general to apply to any system of qualitative physics. next  we describe a form of zeno's paradox which plagues qualitative physics  and propose transverse quantities as a general  domain-independent solution. section iv. illustrates the utility of this logic by a rational reconstruction of frob's algorithms. section v. discusses further implications and plans for extensions. 
	i i . 	theory 
we begin by introducing formal definitions for certain aspects of envisionments  qualitative states  and histories. next  we describe the concept of a registration  a mapping between an envisionment and a history. we then describe the relationships between occurrences of states  including axioms which can be used to derive the consequences of assuming that some states must  or must not  occur. 
a. 	preliminaries 
definition 1  envisionment  an envisionment ♀ represents all possible qualitative states a particular system may take on and all legal transitions between them. the function states : ♀ -  {states} maps from envisionments to the set of states it contains. 
     for generality we assume as little as possible about the nature of qualitative states. we assume that each qualitative state can be described by a finite amount of information. ergo  qualitative states may be tested for identity 
	forbus 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

   collections of occursat statements are the building blocks of registrations. 
definition 1  registration  a registration z of a history u wtth envisionment ♀ consists of a set of occursat statements  denoted occurrences r  . 
　　the next axioms ensure that registrations correspond to paths through the envisionment. allowing partially specified episodes means that a path of qualitative states may occur within a given episode  since the properties which distinguish the individual states may not be apparent from the history. another complication arises if we allow the history to have temporal gaps. in the simplest case where two episodes meet  the accuracy condition is: 
c. 	constraining the future 
to an agent observing a system  a registration represents what has gone on so far. knowing what has happened constrains the future. other constraints on the future include quantitative information and assumptions  as mentioned above. since the envisionment already contains all states and transitions possible without these assumptions  their only effect will be to exclude other states from occurring. essentially  the envisionment is  pruned  to reflect the fewer models possible with the additional information. 
　　first we need a bridge from what we know about the history to the future. the function initial states maps 
	forbus 	1 

　1  it is easy to extend this logic to include required and excluded for transitions as well. 
1 	knowledge representation 

using the atmi theory to construct a registration will provide an explanation of the history. furthermore  any states which have been excluded from the envisionment  or fragment thereof  by the axioms above cannot ever appear in any extension of the current history. this gives the agent a set of expectations: if any excluded behavior shows up in future observations  then either the constraints imposed on the behavior  the observations  the domain model  or some combination of these  are wrong. 
   consider the projection to be the subset of states and transitions of which are not excluded under #   i.e.  a transition is included only when the states before and after are not excluded . clearly since as  grows there are more constraints on the possibility 
of equality arises because some of the constraints may be redundant. 
	i i i . 	t h e q u a l i t a t i v e z e n o ' s 
p a r a d o x 
a problem lurks in the concept of continuation introduced above. the nofuturt law  like axiom 1  is local. it turns out that local laws laws are insufficient to capture our intuitions about good continuation of action. essentially  programs using the logic described so far fall prey to a form of zeno's paradox. consider the situation in figure 1a. a ball is bouncing up and down  heading left. we assume the ball never reaches the wall  and that the ball is perfectly elastic so that it doesn't stop. any reasoning engine based on the logic of occurrence presented so far will think this kind of behavior is perfectly reasonable  even though it violates common sense. the problem is not peculiar to motion: consider now figure 1b. suppose there is friction between the block and the table. then the amount of energy each cycle will be less  and eventually it will stop1. but if we exclude the possiblity of the block stopping from the envisionment  the nofuturt law will not detect a problem because each state in the cycle has another element of the cycle in its afters! some oscillations can last forever  at least ideally   so we cannot simply define the problem away. a non-local technique must be used to avoid the qualitative zeno's paradox  hereafter qzp . 
　　to express the pruning conditions we must introduce an abstraction that will cover both the leftward motion of the ball and the energy of the mass-spring combination: 
definition 1  transverse quantities  a transverse quantity  with respect to a cycle c in  is a property of the envisioned physical system such that: 
1.exists for every state in c. 
1. has a constant upper  alternately: lower  bound. 
   1 see '1| for how this can be proven in qp theory. advocates of classical continuity in qualitative physics  e. g.  1  1  will claim that the block indeed never stops. we prefer here to model the common intuition  since classical continuity leads directly to zeno's paradox figure 1: the qualitative zeno's paradox reasoning about occurrences is subject to a form of zeno's paradox. consider these scenarios: 
 a  a perfectly elastic ball is bouncing up and down on a horizontal surface  heading towards the wall on the left. assume it cannot reach the wall. 
 b  friction is acting between the sliding block and the table. assume that the combination never stops. 
in both cases the assumption at the end makes the behavior intuitively implausible. yet the logic presented so far will not see these as problematic. 
 a  

	forbus 	1 

exclusions: the user can assume that certain states must not occur  or that a ball cannot ever be in particular places. excluding a place causes all states including that location to be excluded. 
 elasticity: if a ball is assumed perfectly elastic then states corresponding to the ball stopping are excluded. if the ball is assumed perfectly inelastic then states corresponding to the ball flying away from a surface after a bounce are excluded. 
energy: given a quantitative position and velocity  frob calculates the maximum height it could reach. if a place is completely above this height  then all states including that location are excluded. 
　　figure 1 outlines the algorithm. in frob's domain envisioning is cheap  so a new envisionment is computed which just contains those states attainable from the end of the current  initially all states are assumed possible  step 1 . the direct consequences of the behavioral constraints are added  and then pruning algorithms are applied repeatedly until no more states are excluded. 
　　the algorithms used in pruning are much like those used for  'garbage collection  in computer language  which 
1 	knowledge representation 
allow dynamic allocation of memory. step 1. i provides local pruning via the nofuture and nopast laws to quickly get rid of states which are obviously ruled out  see figure 1 . this step is essentially a  reference count  garbage collector  using the number of possible befores and afters to determine whether a state is to be excluded. just as reference count algorithms fail to work with circular storage structures  this step will fail to detect cycles which are excluded. step 1. 1 applies reachability  axiom 1  to remove these cycles  see figure 1 . this algorithm also keeps track of what required states are accessible through each state  so that states which do not allow all required states to occur can be ruled out. step 1. enforces axiom 
1. 
　　to apply the zeno axiom  frob identifies places where such oscillations might occur along with the corresponding transverse quantity. if the oscillation is up/down the transverse quantity is motion in the left or right direc-


tion  and if the oscillation is left/right the transverse quantity is motion in the up or down direction. the cycle in each place involving a transverse quantity1 is examined in step 1 to see if either  a  the ball may stop   b  it can leave the place  or  c  if the transverse quantity can reverse direction  i. e. bouncing around inside a sealed box. if any of these are possible the cycle is okay  and otherwise it is pruned to avoid qzp. 
	v . 	d i s c u s s i o n 
this paper has presented a formal logic of occurrence  to capture the relationship between histories and envisionments and to provide the ability to reason about the consequences of behavioral assumptions. it should be applicable to any system of qualitative physics  since it makes very few assumptions about the details of the underlying physics. 
　　while the specific algorithms described above require the ability to explicitly construct envisionments  these ideas can be used without explicit envisionments. one possibility is to generate a subset of the possible behaviors  using these laws to guide backward chaining. another is to prove general statements about classes of physical be-
   1 not every cycle is subject to qzp - a perfectly elastic ball bouncing straight up and down on a horizontal surface will bounce forever. havior  in the style of argument used in classical thermodynamics. we are exploring both styles of reasoning. 
　　we are also applying these algorithms to envisionments involving qualitative process theory. the implementation is taking the form of a post-processor to qpe  our new qp implementation which generates total envisionments. the major unsolved problem is automatically detecting transverse quantities. one avenue is to simply declare them - energy  after all  is the typical choice. another possibility is to extend weld's aggregation technique  to extract transverse quantities as a side-effect of the cycle summarization procedure. 
	v i . 	a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
this work benefitted from conversations with dedre gentner  dennis decoste  and brian falkenhainer. this research is sponsored by the office of naval research  contract no. n1-k-1. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 l  de kleer  j.  an assumption-based truth maintenance system   artificial intelligence  1  1 
 1  de kleer  j. and bobrow  d.  qualitative reasoning with higher-order derivatives  aaai-1  august  
1 
 de kleer  j. and brown  j.  a qualitative physics based on confluences   artificial intelligence  1  1 
 1| de kleer  j.  williams  b.  reasoning about multiple faults   aaai-1  august  1 
 forbus. k.  spatial and qualitative aspects of reasoning about motion  aaai-1  palo alto  california  august 1 
 1j forbus  k.  qualitative process theory  artificial intelligence. 1  1 
 forbus  k.  interpreting measurements of physical systems   aaai-1  august  1 
 hayes  p.  naive physics 1: ontology for liquids  in hobbs  r.  moore  r.  eds.   formal theories of the commonsense world  ablex  1 
 kuipers  b.  common sense causality: deriving be-havior from structure  artificial intelligence  1  
1 
 1  weld  d.  the use of aggregation in causal simula-tion   artificial intelligence  1  no. 1  1 
 1  williams  b.  qualitative analysis of mos circuits   
artificial intelligence  1  1 
	forbus 	1 
