learning idioms - with and without explanation 
url zernlk 
computer science department university of california 
los angeles  california 1 
current address: 
ge corporate research and development 
schenectady  new york 1 

modeling learning in any domain can be pursued in two alternative directions: either by finding domain-specific heuristics  or by applying general machine-learning methods. in the linguistic domain  programs such as foulup  and child  have used specific heuristics  regardless of the general learning methodology; other programs  1  have focussed on the general learning methodology. in our particular task-learning idioms from examples  the evaluation of general learning models is very appealing  since such methods have been studied extensively  and may offer ready solutions. 
language is a special domain in regard to learning. consider for example behavior of idioms. by definition  idiosyncratic properties are not systematic and are not predictable. thus  how do people learn such properties from examples  what is the general learning model  therefore  which accounts for idiom acquisition  we examine here the processes involved in acquisition of idioms  and relate them to existing machine-learning paradigms. 
1. introduction 
although idioms are pervasive in human communication  especially in spoken language  their irregular behavior has not been investigated systematically. idioms are interesting since they provide singular points by which linguistic theories and machine learning theories should be evaluated. here is a puzzling phenomenon  1   which has not been explained so far: 
 1  in 1  israel and egypt resolved their long conflict the hatchet had been buried. 
 1  finally the patient succumbed. 
the bucket had been kicked. 
these two phrases  kick the bucket and bury the hatchet  behave differently with respect to the passive voice. while the first paragraph is generally acceptable to native english speakers  the second one sounds awkward. this linguistic behavior is surprising  and unpredictable in computerprogram terms  since this pair of phrases are structurally similar. we investigate this idiosyncratic property in terms of its acquisition. this behavior is significant because it sheds light on the otherwise hidden language-acquisition processes and illuminate the role of metaphors. 
metaphors provide learners with the information necessary for explaining the nature of idioms. when encountering an idiomatic phrase  people seek the clues which would make it less arbitrary. however  a metaphor might be obscure  at least from the view of a learner  and thus an explanation cannot always be constructed. regarding this problem  the questions we consider are:  a  can people learn an idiom even when its metaphor is not accessible   what is the metaphor underlying kick the bucket    b  what is the impact of the metaphor on the use of idioms  
1. the linguistic issue: the passive-voice anomaly 
consider the two phrases introduced in sentences  1  and 
 1 . why can the phrase kick the bucket not take the passive voice  are there other such phrases  in fact  there are: put one's foot down  for example  cannot appear in the passive  his foot was put down does not convey the meaning of the idiom . how do language learners predict for each new phrase  its behavior  i.e.  whether it takes the passive voice or not  there must be a rule for supporting this prediction. 
traditionally  linguistic systems accounted for this phenomenon by including arbitrary syntactic restrictions in the lexicon. accordingly  lexical entries included explicit clauses to inhibit the passive voice. 
pattern: kick the bucket pattern: bury the hatchet passive: not possible passive: possible 
we argue against the inclusion of such arbitrary structural restrictions and seek a more substantial solution in which underlying metaphors account for idiom behavior. 
compare the metaphors underlying our pair of idioms. on the one hand  in bury the hatchet  learners assume that hatchet stands for a generic war implement  whose disposal ends a war  similarly  the poet buried her pen could mean that she stopped writing poetry . some learners can imagine a remote culture in which burying a hatchet is a ceremonial act in signing a peace treaty. on the other hand  no such metaphor could be found for kick the bucket learners cannot come up with an explanation as to why the words kick and bucket really mean  to die . 
discourse analysis concerns why people phrase utterances the way they do. sandy thompson  gives a detailed account of people's use of the passive voice. she concludes 
	zemick 	1 

that the passive voice is not just an arbitrary feature  but it is a device for accomplishing certain communication goals  such as placing the discourse topic at the beginning of the sentence. in light of this fact  consider the semantic structure of our idioms. although the reference the hatchet does not stand for any concrete knife  it symbolically refers to the enablement of a fight between two parties. in contrast  the bucket is merely a literal. it does not refer to any object in the context. in the lexicon this difference is denoted as follows: 
 1  x:person 	bury:verb 	 y:the hatchet  
 1  x:person 	kick:verb 	 the bucket  
the marked object in  1  is merely a literal; similarly  the marked object in  1  also specifies the surface appearance of the reference. in addition  in  1  there is a variable which can be bound to a concept. accordingly  a discourse structure can be conceived  in which y  the concept associated with the hatchet  is the topic  as i tried to show in example  1  above   and consequently a communication goal exists for a speaker to apply the passive voice. however  no context can possibly be conceived in which the bucket refers to a topic-since it is merely a literal. 
in conclusion  it turns out that the question itself  can a phrase take the passive voice  is wrong. the correct question should be: is there any discourse structure  in which the phrase should appear in the passive . the phenomenon is interesting in terms of machine learning  since it enables us to examine learning concepts with and without explanation  and to show how the availability of explanation  or a 
metaphor  makes a difference in applying the acquired concepts. 
1. three machine-learning paradigms 
what is the method by which a model can predict linguistic properties of idioms  do/do-not take the passive voice  as well as their meanings  by being given a small number of examples  three machine learning paradigms are considered. 
in learning by rote  an idiom is copied as a chunk. however  this treatment is unacceptable since:  a  idioms must be generalized semantically to be applicable in a variety of situations  different from the original one   b  idioms  as shown by examples  1  and  1   possess their own internal grammar   which must also be acquired. thus idioms cannot be acquired merely as  extended words . 
in similarity-based learning  sbl   by being given a sufficiently large ensemble of examples  the model acquires surface features which are shared by a number of instances. there is no justification as to why a feature is acquired. 
this approach raises three problems:  a  humans are able to acquire idioms from few  or even from a single example   b  humans do not require negative examples  e.g.   the bucket was kicked is incorrect    and  c  humans do not acquire spurious features. imagine two coincidental instances such as in 1  x buried the hatchet  and in 1  y buried the hatchet. humans are not thrown off by this co-ocurrcnce  while an 
sbl model would assume that in 1 is a mandatory part 
1 	cognitive modeling 
of the phrase. similarly  the appearance of a phrase in the past tense could be taken as a mandatory property by an sbl model. 
explanation-based learning  ebl  remedies these problems by acquiring only features whose appearance can be 
justified. spurious similarities are thus ruled out  and significant features can be acquired from a single example. however  this method requires existence of perfect explanatory information  whereas humans are required to learn certain phenomena even without explanatory information. for example  from the learner's point of view  there is no explanation  provided by a metaphor  for the idiom kick the bucket. what is then the reason that the sequence of words kick  the  and bucket means  to die   unfortunately-for language learners- many such linguistic phenomena appear arbitrary. 
in our model  explanation is a by-product of hypothesis formation; and  accordingly  the existence of a metaphor deter-
mines the quality of the explanation. thus  three questions must be answered: 
  how is an explanation constructed for an idiom  
  to what extent can idioms be explained  
  how does explanation effect idiom application  
following lebowitz  we investigate learning as a function of the state of the explanatory knowledge. 
1. the algorithm 
a learning algorithm has been implemented within a program called rina. in the rina's phrasal lexicon  an entry  or a phrase  is an association of a syntactic pattern with a conceptual meaning. accordingly  learning is defined as formation of pattern-concept associations  unlike other systems  1 1  which acquire concepts in general . the learning algorithm is provided with two knowledge sources:  a  linguistic knowledge and  b  world knowledge. 
the lexicon: a partial lexicon is assumed to be given. this given lexicon includes the single words and phrases involved in the input text. 
world knowledge: the representation of the explanatory context is assumed accessible to the program. this includes  a  knowledge about the specific domain  and knowledge about other domains alluded to as metaphors. 

figure 1: the learning algorithm 
the algorithm takes as input  a  the sentence provided by the user and  b  the explanatory context. the inductive leap in learning involves  a  the extraction of the pattern from 

the context and  b  the extraction of the concept from the context. explanation provides the association between the two acquired elements and supports both steps  1  and  1 . the construction of the explanation is not a process on its own* as in   rather it is a by-product of learning. moreover  explanation cannot always be constructed. in fact  the point of this paper is to compare cases where explanation can and cannot be constructed. 
1. the process model 
next  we show the steps in learning bury the hatchet from an explanatory context. 
detecting a discrepancy: the acquisition of a new phrase is initiated only if there is no other valid interpretation for the sentence. there is an interpretation for the input sentence in 1  israel and egypt buried the hatchet  based on the single words. 
pattern: x:person bury y:phys-obj concept: x ptrans y  causing y to be under the ground 
while syntactically intact  this interpretation  which amounts to  in 1 they put a hatchet under the ground   fails on semantic grounds. burying a hatchet docs not relate to the given goal-plan situation. in fact  the program detects a near miss . the buried object is not some arbitrary physical object  but it is a fighting tool-albeit for a different kind of fight. thus  a new hypothesis must be formed. 
extracting a phrase pattern: four discrepancy-driven strategies are employed in this case  where the general intuition is to maintain frozen elements which cause parsing failures and to generalize elements which can be explained by the parser. 
 1  the modifier in 1 is excluded altogether as it is matched by an existing lexical phrase  and it is taken as a standard modifier.  the prepositional phrase in t:year exists as a lexical phrase which is taken as a time modifier.  
 1  both israel and egypt can be resolved in the context; 
and  therefore  these names are variabilized. 
 1  the conjunction itself is not taken as a mandatory element conjunction is explained by the context  since israel and egypt are both linked by the goalconflict situation. thus  the reference becomes: 
 clsrael and egypo -   n:nation  
 1  in contrast  the reference the hatchet cannot be resolved  and henceforth it is maintained as a literal: 
 the hatcheo -   the hatcheo 
clearly  this process depends on the actual contents of the lexicon  in t:year exists in the lexicon  and actual world knowledge. in the state of knowledge assumed here  the new formed pattern is: 
n:nation bury:verb the hatchet 
* to avoid confusion  notice that  explanation  is used here to denote a static object and not a process. 
extracting a phrase meaning: the meaning is constructed by parsing the user's clarification: 
israel and egypt had been involved in a bloody conflict. in 1  they signed a peace treaty. 
the first sentence establishes the goal-conflict situation  gc  between israel and egypt  i&e . gc can be resolved by two alternative plans:  a  fight  ol   or  b  negotiate  1 . the second sentence is taken as a switch from ol to 
1. thus  the meaning is taken as: 
  goal conflict  gc  exists between israel and egypt  i&e  
  i&e quit the fight 
at this point  the new phrase has a pattern and a meaning: 
pattern:  n:nation  bury  h: the hatchet  meaning: n is involved in a conflict c n quits fight f in contrast to the variable n which is bound to a concept in the meaning  the variable h is unbound. no hatchet was found in the context  so the binding for h will be obtained from the metaphor. 
the explanation: the explanation maintained by a phrase connects the phrase concept to the phrase pattern. this is only a connection and not a proof since  by their nature  metaphors do not fully account for meanings of idioms. in our example  four clauses are used in the explanation obtained by the metaphor: 
 1  i&e bury hatchet h 	% the sentence itself 
 1  if 	xburyy 
and y is a tool 
	-  x disenable-use of y 	% generalizing  bury  
 1  hatchet h -   war-implement h % generalizing  hatchet  
 1  if x disenable-use of implement i for plan p and x executing plan p 
	 .   x intend to quit plan p 	% an inference rule 
these four given clauses interact in the following sequence: 
 1     i&e disenable-use of hatchet h 	% by  1  and  1  
 1  -  i&e disenable-use of war-implement h % by  1  and  1  
 1  -  i&e intend to quit fight p 	% by  1  and  1  
proposition  1  matches the meaning of the phrase  so the entire explanation is maintained as a clause in the phrase. 
	pattern: 	 n:nation  bury  h: the hatchet  
meaning: n is involved in a conflict c. n quits fight f explanation: 
  i&e disenable-use of hatchet h 
-  i&e disenable-use of war-implement h 
-  i&e intend to quit fight f 
consequently  the variable h in the pattern gets its binding in the explanation clause  and not in the concept itself . 
1. learning without explanation 
in learning kick the bucket  no such explanation exists. the pattern and the meaning are both extracted  but the metaphor which could provide an explanation remains obscure. 
	zernick 	1 

the constructed phrase is: 	