 
this paper shows how the semantics of frames with exceptions can be described logically. we define a simple  purely declarative  frame language allowing for multiple inheritance and meta classes  i.e. the instances of a class may be classes themselves . expressions of this language are translated into first order formulas. circumscription of a certain predicate in the resulting theory yields the desired semantics. our approach allows the intuition that subclasses should override superclasses to be represented in a very natural way. 
i  introduction 
inheritance systems have a long tradition in ai. they allow the description of hierarchies of objects and classes  we use the term hierarchy in the sense of an acyclic network throughout the paper  and the inheritance of properties in such hierarchies. there are two main types of inheritance systems: those which admit exceptions to inheritance and those who do not. kl-
one 	 brachman/schmolze 	1  	and 	omega 
 attardi/simi 1  are examples of the second type. systems with exceptions are for instance frl 
 roberts/goldstein 1   flavors  symbolics 1  and the babylon-frame-system  di primio/brewka 1 . 
a common way of defining a semantics for a formalism 
f1 is to translate it into another formalism tz for which a well defined semantics exists  this amounts to stating that fl is a notational variant of  a subset of  f1 . in the knowledge representation field first order logic is a good candidate for f1 since it is well understood and has an appealing semantics. 
it is not too difficult to describe the semantics of inheritance systems without exceptions in first order logic  see for instance  hayes 1    hayes/hendrix 1   where frames are interpreted as unary and slots as binary predicates. 
inheritance with exceptions is much more difficult since exceptions introduce nonmonotonicity. etherington and reiter use default logic  reiter 1  to describe the semantics of netl-like inheritance networks  etherington/reiter 1  etherington 1 . the problem with their approach is that the intuition underlying all inheritance systems  namely that subclasses should override superclasses  we will call this intuition the specialization principle   is not present in their formalization. they require exceptions to be explicit  as exception links  in the network. 
touretzky tries to capture the specialization principle in his inferential distance ordering  touretzky 1   touretzky 1 . but 1 think he is not right in stating that  inferential distance is a partial ordering on defaults that implements this intuition    touretzky 1  p.1 . the reason is very simple. the inheritance system he uses cannot represent the notion of subclass. it only uses defeasible links with the intuitive meaning a's are typically b's. but if we have long chains as 

it may even be the case that a1. and a are disjoint. but how can the intuition that subclasses should override superclasses be captured if the notion of subclass cannot even be represented  touretzky simply redefines the meaning of subclass. he states:   ... a is a subclass of b iff there is an inheritance path from a to b.   touretzky 1  p.1 . but changing the definition of subclass is certainly not a solution. 
as sandewall  sandewall 1  has shown  there are cases where touretzky's approach leads to counterintuitive results. we will discuss an example in section 
vi. 
sandewall argues for defining a partial semantics for inheritance systems by a collection of structure types since this  semantics by examples  is the best we have up to now. he  also  does not distinguish between strict and defeasible links . this can lead to situations where we expect different results from the same structure type. let's discuss a slight generalization of his type ib structures which can be represented as follows  is-a links are represented by   not-is-a links by 

	brewka 	1 
we try to show in this paper that at least for special types of inheritance systems the situation is not that bad. we will concentrate on frame systems  class/property inheritance systems in touretzky's terminology  touretzky 1  . they allow to represent hierarchies with strict subclass relations as well as properties  slots with slot values  that members of classes  frames  typically possess. on one hand the expressiveness of these systems is stronger than that of inheritance systems which only admit is-a and not-is-a links since defeasible and undefeasible links can be represented. on the other hand the expressiveness is much more restricted since chains of defeasible inferences are not allowed. fortunately  we do not need touretzky's formal apparatus and his predicate lattices to describe the semantics of such a frame system. 
in principle  second order logic would be a good formalism to express the specialization principle in a 
very intuitive way. if frames are interpreted as predicates  then the fact that one frame specializes another can easily be represented by a second order predicate. but  of course  second order logic introduces many difficulties  especially since we need a nonmonotonic logical formalism. 
fortunately  there is a well-known technique  sometimes called  reiflcation   which allows us to remain totally in first order logic. instead of writing man peter  for expressing the fact that peter is an instance of the frame man  we introduce a predicate is and a constant man and express the mentioned fact as is peter.man . if a slot age of peter has the value 1. then we write holds age peter 1  instead of age peter 1  the use of constants instead of predicate symbols allows to reason about properties of frames in first order logic. 
we will introduce a three-place predicate exceptional whose extension will be minimized. we use 
mccarthy's circumscription technique  mccarthy 1  for that purpose. circumscription is a very general formalization of nonmonotonic reasoning  many even think the most promising one  e.g. raymond reiter stated that in his invited talk during aaai-1 . the advantages of circumscription are 
1  it is quite close to standard logic  
1  it has a very appealing semantics defined in terms of minimal models. 
various different forms of circumscription have been defined during the last years. we will need a form known as variable circumscription  mccarthy 1 . variable circumscription allows predicates to vary during the minimization. it will turn out that the logical formulas we need to represent frame and instance definitions belong to the class of universal formulas. this is fine since for universal formulas variable circumscription cannot lead to inconsistencies  lifschitz 
1 	knowledge representation 

struct  e.g. defobject for all definitions. we wanted  however  to retain some similarity with other well known languages and chose the more conventional syntax  therefore . 
let us assume that frames must be defined before they are mentioned in definitions as supers or as frames to be instantiated. then our language allows to define directed acyclic graphs in which superclass and instance links may appear anywhere  but - as mentioned above - at most one instance link may go out from one node. 
we allow multiple inheritance in our frame language. 
this means that a frame is allowed to have more than one  direct  superframe. in this case an inheritance strategy must specify from which frame an object inherits a property. there are different strategies implemented in existing systems. mostly the  direct or indirect  superframes of a frame are linearized in some way. the flavors system  symbolics 1   for instance  uses such a linearization  until recently even superclasses could override their own subclasses in certain cases  this has been remedied in the newest flavors version . this is not the best idea  however  since sometimes any linearization yields unintuitive results. an old example is: quakers are pacifists  republicans are not pacifists  nixon is a quaker and a republican. how about his pacifism  the available information is ambiguous. our intuition in this case is to remain agnostic. we have evidence for and against his pacifism  but nothing allows to prefer one of the contradictory conclusions. so we simply don't know and our system should not infer anything. 
in the introduction we mentioned the specialization principle: subclasses should override superclasses. here we have the other side of the coin: only subclasses should override superclasses. this is also touretzky's view  touretzky 1 . 
in section v we will show that circumscription easily handles ambiguities the way we want them to be handled. 
iii the meaning of the frame language 
we now describe how definitions of our frame language can be translated into a set of second order formulas. we introduce the predicate exceptional which essentially is a three-place variant of mccarthy's abnormal predicate. the idea is: if frame1 has a slot slot| with value value1 this will be represented as 
forall x. 
is x frame.  ft - exceptional x.slot. frame1  
-  
holds slot 1 .x.value 1  
intuitively exceptional x slot1 frame 1 can be read as  x does not inherit information about attribute slot1 from frame frame. . 
sometimes slots are interpreted as functions  not as general relations. we prefer the second approach here since it makes multiple values for slots possible. we don't deal with multiple values in this paper  however. 
independently from the definitions to be translated we need the following four formulas: 
1   meaning of specializes  
forall p.q. 
specializes  p.q  
-  
 forall x. is x.p  -  is x q   
if a class specializes another class then all members of the class are also members of the other class. 
z   transitivity of specializes  
forall x y z. 
specializes x y  * specializes y.z  
-  
specializes x x  
specialization is transitive. 1   meaning of has-slot  
forall frame.slot.value. 
has-slot frame blot  value  
-   forall x. 
is x.frame  & - except1nal x.slot.frame  
-  
holds slot x value   
we introduce the predicate has-slot here as a matter of convenience. it makes the rest of the translation more readable. 
1   specialization 	formula  
forall x. frame.. frame1. value . value1. slot. 
is  x.frame.  1c 
has-slot frame..slot.value.  & 
specializes  frame.  f rame1  & 
has-slot  frame1.srot value1  & 
- value. = value1 
exceptional x alot.frame1  
intuitively: x is exceptional with respect to a slot of a frame if x is an instance of a more special frame  for which different information regarding the slot is available. this is the formula representing the specialization principle. 
now we can easily map frame and instance definitions into a set of logical formulas. 
the definition of a frame 
 defframe my-frame 
 supers superframe . ... superframe.  
	 	j
	 slots	 	* 
 slot 1 value 1  
      slot1value1    is translated into the following formulas speclalizes my-frameup*r/romc ;  
speciauzes my-/rams .superframe k  
has-slot my-/ram  mot 1 .value 1  
has-slot my-/ram  tsio*n voiu n  
	brewka 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

remain agnostic. it is very easy to achieve the desired behavior in our formalization  since circumscription does most of the job automatically. we simply have to add 
forall slot.x valuel.value1. 
holds slot x taluel  & 
h1lds slot.x.value1  

with this additional formula we forbid slots having different values  of course  we could easily extend our frame language and distinguish between different types of slots  e.g. multi-valued and single-valued slots. in that case we should restrict the above implication to single-valued slots by introducing an additional condition . 
circumscription is a correct realization of minimal entailment. in our formalization ambiguities correspond to different minimal models. since circumscription only allows to derive what is true in all minimal models  we get exactly what we want. 
let us assume we have a frame quaker with slot political-view and value paclfistlc and a frame 
republican with the same slot and value nonpacifistic. let us also assume that none of the frames specializes the other. if nixon is an instance of both frames  we have minimal models where 
h1lds p1jtical-view. nixon. pacifistic  is true and 
holds political-view. nixon. non-pacifistic  false but there also exist minimal models which make the first formula false and the second true. circumscription only allows to derive the disjunction of both formulas but does not favour one of them. 
vi. future work and discussion 
many frame systems allow additional information to be associated with slots  often called facets . for the sake of simplicity we did not deal with facets in this paper  but it is straightforward to extend our approach accordingly and to represent them as well. sometimes the facets are given a special meaning in frame systems. for instance  a facet possiblevalues of a slot could restrict the values that this slot may have. if. for instance  the possible-values facet of slot1 of frame1 has the value poss-valpred  we can represent this as 
forall x. y. 
is x.frame  & holds slot1 .x.y  
poss-val-pred y  
of course  poss-val-pred has to be defined according to its intended meaning. in a more elaborate formalization  also values representing unknown or undetermined need special treatment  e.g. if they participate in ambiguities . but there are no theoretical difficulties. 
inheritance in general is very hard to deal with. we have shown  however  that for simpler classes of inheritance systems quite natural logical representations exist. of course  it would be fine to see how our formalization deals with sandewall's structure types  sandewall 1 . obviously  we cannot match the frame hierarchies definable in our frame language directly against sandewall's examples since he admits only defeasible links  i.e. there is no guarantee that every royal elephant is an elephant  and we cannot represent chains of defeasible inferences. but for most of the examples an analogous representation in terms of frame hierarchies exists and we get the desired results. let us discuss the example for which touretzky's approach fails: 

to represent this example in our language  we have to define clyde as an instance of a frame royalafricanelephant which has royalelephant and africanelephant as superframes. the last two frames each have the superframe elephant. for royalelephant and elephant a slot color must be defined with value nongray and gray respectively. now our formalization yields exactly what we expect  i.e. holds color. clyde  non-gray . 
we have defined the semantics of a frame system with exceptions by means of circumscribing a certain predicate in a first order theory. our approach formalizes the intuition that subclasses and only subclasses should override superclasses in a very natural way. expressions of our frame language can be translated independently from the translation of other expressions. moreover we don't need a complicated new mathematical apparatus. it should be mentioned  however  that most current implementations of frame systems  in fact all implementations i know of  are not correct with respect to the proposed semantics since they favour one inheritance path instead of remaining agnostic in case of ambiguities. 
acknowledgements 
thanks to all members of our research group  especially thomas christaller  tom gordon  joachim hertzberg  franco di primio and karl wittur. tom also helped to make this paper as english as possible. of course  the paper totally depends on the fundamental work of john mccarthy. without his ideas no part of it could have been written. 
	brewka 	1 
