 
james allen defined a calculus of time intervals by identifying time intervals as pairs of real numbers  and considering binary relations that can hold between such pairs  alll1 . we call this the interval calculus. we consider the system of interval time units defined in  lad1   the tus   which was intended for the natural representation of real clock time on any scale. we introduce the convex part of the t u s   and show that it may be regarded as a canonical model of the interval calculus. we discuss the consequences of this result. 
1 	introduction 
the interval calculus 
the representation of time by means of intervals rather than points has a history in philosophical studies of time  e.g.  ham1  vben1  hum1  dow1  rop1  new1  . james allen defined a calculus of time intervals in  au1   by considering binary relations on pairs of real numbers definable using only the natural ordering on the real numbers. he investigated the use of the calculus for representing time in the context of planning  all1  aukau1  pela1 .. allen and pat hayes have investigated the firstorder logical formulation of interval theories in  allhay1  allhay1  auhay1 . a modal logic using similar interval concepts was introduced in  halsho1 . 
   ladkin and maddux  ladmad1  showed that allen had defined the primitives of a proper relation algebra in the sense of tarski  jontar1   and showed that there is  up to isomorphism  a unique countable representation of this algebra. this representation is derived from the set of pairs of rational numbers  in the same way that allen used the pairs of real numbers to define his calculus. we also showed that there is a canonical translation of an arbitrary finite relation algebra into a first-order theory  so a firstorder axiomatisation of the interval calculus is obtained. this theory is complete  countably categorical  i.e. has a unique countable model up to isomorphism   and decidable  by vaught's test   ladmad1  chakei1 . 
   *this work has been partially supported by u.s. navy under contract n1-c-1  and by rome air development center under u.s. government contract f1-c-1. the views and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the author and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies  either expressed or implied  of kestrel institute  the u.s. navy  or radc. 
1 	knowledge representation 
　　recently  we showed in  lad1  that this theory admits elimination of quantifiers  any statement in the theory is equivalent to a quantifier-free statement in the same theory   and gave an explicit decision procedure for the theory. 
　　we use the expression interval calculus to refer to either the algebraic or the first-order formulation  and we use the expression interval algebra to refer specifically to 
just the relation-algebraic formulation of the calculus. 
　　the first-order interval calculus theory is stronger than the first-order axiomatisation of intervals in  auhay1  auhay1  allhay1 . the interval calculus entails the density of the underlying ordering  ladmad1j. we characterised precisely all the models of the allen-hayes theory in  lad1   as pairs of distinct  ordered points over an arbitrary  not necessarily dense  unbounded linear order. we showed in  lad1  that the allen-hayes theory is decidable  but at the time of writing we do not yet have a really practical decision procedure for it  in contrast to the situation for the interval calculus  for example  the allen-hayes theory does not admit quantifier elimination . 
　　allen was particularly concerned with constraint satisfaction techniques in the interval calculus  and he presented an algorithm for detecting a limited class of inconsistencies in  au1 . vilain and kautz have shown that constraint satisfaction in the calculus is np-hard in general  vilkau1 . ladkin and maddux extended allen's constraint propagation algorithm so that it detects inconsistencies missed by his algorithm  ladmad1 . the decision procedure of  lad1  combines quantifier elimination techniques with allen's algorithm  as extended by ladkin-maddux  to decide arbitrary first-order formulas. 
background to this paper 
in our work  we have considered the use of the interval 
calculus for reasoning about all aspects of time. two of our major concerns are  firstly  that using intervals without gaps  convex intervals  makes it hard to reason about interruptable processes  where the more natural model would use intervals with gaps; and  secondly  that it is often unnatural to use pairs of real numbers for representing intervals of real time  especially when standard everyday time units are needed  as in project management or realtime programming. 

   the first concern led us to a taxonomy of binary relations on intervals that had gaps  called unions-of-convex intervals  lad1 . we refer to this system as the extended interval calculus. we provided an example of the use of the extended interval calculus for the highlevel specification and synthesis of concurrent processes in  lad1 . the second concern led to a system of interval time units  lad1   which can represent all kinds of standard time intervals such as years  days  and picoseconds in a natural manner  and we introduced primitive operations for building up arbitrary intervals  both convex and non-convex  from these interval time units. we refer to this time unit system as the tus. another system 
for constructing time units was presented in  lemcfo1 . 
   we show here that the tus contains a canonical model for the interval calculus. specifically  the definable part of the tus which refers to convex intervals  the convex tus  is a countable representation of the interval algebra. since there is  up to isomorphism  only one countable representation of the interval algebra  or  countable model of the interval calculus   the convex tus is canonical in the following sense: if a statement in the interval calculus is not a theorem of the calculus  then there is a counterexample to that statement in the convex tus  and if a statement in the language of the interval calculus is true for all the intervals in the convex tus  then it is a theorem of the interval calculus. these facts follow from theorems in  ladmad1 . 
   the representation of time intervals in the tus is richly structured  compared with a pairs-of-points representation. for example  there is a natural notion of duration that may be imposed  lad1   which is essential for 
real-time reasoning. 
   we present in this paper a one-to-one mapping from time units to pairs of rational numbers  to show canonicality of the convex tus. the decision procedure in  lad1  can make use of the map to provide a model within the tus of an arbitrary satisfiable collection of first-order constraints in the interval calculus. we refer the reader to  lad1  and sequels. 
   the tus and the interval calculus have been implemented at kestrel institute  as part of the ongoing task of implementing and using the extended interval calculus. the full decision procedure for the interval calculus has not yet been implemented. currently  the tus is used as the base for the time package in a prototype project management system developed at kestrel institute. 
organisation 
section 1 introduces the time unit system from  lad1   and defines the language used for the statement of the main result. section 1 contains the main result  and section 1 is a summary. 
1 	t h e t i m e u n i t s y s t e m 
the tus was introduced in  lad1  by example. there are basic time units  which are sequences of integers of a certain sort  and a binary operator convexify  which enables us to build arbitrary convex intervals from the basic units. the full tus includes other structure needed for the extended interval calculus  lad1   which need not concern us here. we are concerned only with that part of the tus which deals with convex intervals. we introduce this by example  and later give a more formal definition via the language i and the associated theory j. j is the convex part of the tus defined by the axioms given in  lad1   or  alternatively  may be obtained from j by using the algebraic methods in this paper. 
t h e convex p a r t o f the t u s 
we represent the basic time intervals in the tus by sequences of integers. each element of the sequence represents a particular year  month  day  hour  minute  second ....  the first element represents the year  the next is the month in that year  the third is the day  etc. we illustrate the system down to seconds  hence our sequences will have lengths of up to six elements. the system is clearly extendable to smaller units such as microseconds and picoseconds  indeed needs to be extendable to arbitrarily small units of time in order to prove our main theorem. it was indicated in  lad1  that the system is adequate for defining other kinds of intervals that are not basic intervals such as weeks and centuries  providing there is some logic programming ability in the implementation language. 
some example real-time intervals in this system are: 
   representing the year 1 
   1  representing the month of march  1 
   1 1  representing the day of 1st march  1 
   1 1  representing the hour starting at 1am on 1st march  1 
   1 1 1  representing the minute starting at 1am on 1st march  1 
   1 1 1  representing the 1rd second of 1am on 1st march  1  the first second starts at 1  
   in addition to the basic sequences that represent fixed units of clock time  we need to be able to make arbitrary convex time intervals. the operator convexify accomplishes this. 
convexify iyj  = the smallest convex interval 
that contains both i and j 

so  for example: 
  convexify    = the interval containing all of the years from 1 to the end of the century 
  convexify  1 l    1   = the interval from january 1 through december 1  i.e. the year 1. 
thus convexify  1 l    1   = . 
  convexify  1 1    1 1   = the  amer-ican  working morning of monday march 1  from 1am until noon  the hour of 1am extends up until noon . 
axioms for convexify were given in  lad1 . for the purposes of this paper  the intuitive definition and illustrations given above should suffice. 
1 	t h e m a i n r e s u l t 
in this section  we introduce the languages i and i1  and the associated theory j'  of the tus. we thus present the tus as a formal theory  but of course this theory is about time intervals. we choose this method of presenta-
tion because we wish to later map the tus intervals into pairs-of-rational-numbers  for the main theorem. it is easiest to do this by presenting the theory as a language of terms  with an axiomatised equality on those terms  which we indicate first intuitively  and later give a more formal presentation   and then defining the mapping to the set of pairs-of-rational-numbers  by means of the language  in a way which preserves the equality on those terms. this is a standard technique from universal algebra  see e.g.  bursan1 . 
   we in fact obtain our results for a more general family of languages  g. the result for j is an instance of the general result. 
t h e language j 
we need to distinguish between actual convex time intervals  and terms in the language for denoting time intervals. this is because  as we saw  we can have two different terms denoting the same time interval  e.g. convexify  1    1   and . 
   to be more precise  our language j for time units has constants for some finite sequences of integers   which we denote by e.g.  a b c  for the 1-element sequence whose first element is the integer a  whose second is the integer 1  and whose third is the integer c ; contains the binary operator symbol conv  to stand for the convexify operator ; and contains a standard set of punctuation symbols for constructing terms from these constants and the operator  which we write prefix . the terms of this language are obtained in the standard manner from the sequence constants and conv. 
1 	knowledge representation 
   the precise collection of finite sequences that we want to denote are just those that denote actual parts of years  months  days  etc. the technical definition is straightforward  but detailed: 
  the first item is an arbitrary  positive or negative  integer  i.e. a member of z  the set of integers. 
  the second item is an integer between 1 and 1  in-clusive  
  the third item depends on the first and second items  and is always an integer between 1 and 1  we have to allow for 1  1 and 1 day months . 
  similarly for the hour elements  minute elements  
   we shall use the convention that when we want to refer to a term  we write it in boldface  and when we use a term to refer to an interval  we write it in light face. for those familiar with the use/mention distinction  this means that we use in light face  and mention in boldface. 
   so convexify  1 l    1   is the same interval as   but conv  1 l    1   is not the same term as . j contains the statement  conv  1 l    1   =   as a theorem  since the intervals denoted by these two terms are the same interval. 
   j is just the theory in the language j which is obtained by considering which terms in i refer to the same interval. in other words  j is the theory of the equality relation obtained from considering the equations true of the operator convtxify. this theory j was axiomatised in  lad1   p1. 
   the sublanguage of j which we are most interested in is the language j1 which consists of all the sequence constants from j along with those terms of the form conv i  j   where i and j are sequence constants  i.e. there are no iterated applications of conv in terms in x1 . 
   the importance of the sublanguage j1 is that every convex interval in the tus may be represented by a term in i1. in other words  iterated applications of the convex' ify operator may be replaced by a single application of convtxify to basic intervals. this fact is stated precisely in the following lemma: 




1 	knowledge representation 

b i b l i o g r a p h y 
a1 : allen  j.f.  maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals  comm. a.cm. 1  1   november 1  1. 
a1 : allen  j.f.  towards a general theory of action and time  artificial intelligence 1  1   july 1  1. 
allkau1 : allen  j.f. and kautz  h.  a model of naive temporal reasoning  in hobbs  j.r. and moore  r.c.  editors  formal theories of the commonsense world  ablex 1. 
allhay1 : allen j.f. and hayes  p. j.  a commonsense 
theory of time  in proceedings ijcai 1  1. 
allhay1 : allen j.f. and hayes  p. j.  short time periods  this proceedings. 
allhay1 : allen j.f. and hayes  p. j.  a commonsense theory of time: the longer paper  technical report  dept. of computer science  university of rochester  to appear. 
bursan1 : burris  s.  and sankappanavar  h.p.   a course in universal algebra  springer verlag  1. 
chakei1 : chang  c.c. and keisler  h.j.  model theory  north-holland 1. 
dow1 : dowty  d.r. word meaning and montague grammar  reidel  1. 
hum1 : humberstone  i.l.  interval semantics for tense logic: some remarks  j. philosophical logic 1  1  1. 
halsho1 : halpern  j.y. and shoham  y.  a propositional modal logic of time intervals  in proceedings of the symposium on logic in computer science 1  1  ieee 1. 
ham1 : hamblin  c.l.  instants and intervals  studium generale  1   1  1. 
hum1 : humberstone  i.l.  interval semantics for tense logic: some remarks  j. philosophical logic 1  1  1. 
jontar1 : jonsson  b. and tarski  a.  boolean algebras with operators ii  american j. mathematics  1   1  1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  comments on the representation of time  proceedings of the 1 distributed arti-
ficial intelligence workshop  sea ranch  california. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  time representation: a taxonomy of interval relations  proceedings of aaai-1  1  morgan kaufmann  1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  primitives and units for time 
specification  proceedings of aaai-1  1  morgan kaufmann  1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  two papers on time representation  kestrel institute research report kes.u.1  1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  specification of time dependencies and synthesis of concurrent processes  proceedings of the 1th international conference on software engineering  march 1   monterey  ca  ieee 
1  also available as kestrel institute technical report kes.u.1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  a self-reference  also available as kestrel institute technical report kes.u.1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  models of axioms for time intervals  proceedings of the 1 national conference 
on ai  aaai-1   seattle  wa.  u.s.a.  also available as kestrel institute technical report kes.u.1. 
lad1 : ladkin  p.b.  deciding first-order st.atem.ents 
about time intervals  forthcoming kestrel institute technical report. 
ladmad1 : ladkin  p.b. and maddux  r.d.  the 
algebra of convex time intervals: short version  kestrel institute technical report kes.u.1. 
ladmad1 : constraint propagation in interval structures  forthcoming kestrel institute technical re-
port. 
lemcfo1 : leban  b.  mcdonald  d.  and forster  d.  a representation for collections of temporal intervals  proceedings of aaai-1  1  morgan kaufmann  1. 
mad1 : maddux  r.d.  topics in relation algebras  
ph. d. thesis  university of california at berkeley  1. 
new1 : newton-smith  w.h.  the structure of time  routledge kegan paul  1. 
pela1 : pelavin  r.  and allen  j.f.  a formal logic of plans in temporally rich domains  proceedings 
of the ieee 1  1   oct 1  1. 
rop1 : roper  p.  intervals and tenses  journal of philosophical logic 1  1. 
vben1 : van benthem  j.f.a.k.  the logic of time  reidel 1. 
vilkau1 : vilain  m.  and kautz  h.  constraint propagation algorithms for temporal reasoning  proceedings of aaai-1  1  morgan kaufmann  1. 






	ladkin 	1 

	ladkin 	1 

	ladkin 	1 



	ladkin 	1 



