 
   this paper describes a system that performs temporal event recognition  ie.  the task of forming causal and conceptual descriptions of stimulii given to a system over a period of time. a temporal logic that integrates state based and interval based representations is is used to represent and maintain knowledge about the temporal relationships between events . a knowledge based system is then constructed that uses this temporal knowledge to generate higher level conceptual abstractions that describe the events occurring at the input. an implementation of the system called muse is described and examples of the system working in a blocks world are presented. 
1. introduction 
   in this paper we study the problem of temporal event recognition  ie. forming causal  conceptual descriptions of discrete  uninterpreted stimuli to a system. this problem has been studied both directly and implicitly  by many researchers in psychology  miller&johnson-laird'1   behavioral science  newtson'1   and artificial intelligence  schmidt sridharan&goodson'1 . in al research the problems of goal based story understanding and plan recognition  wilcnsky'1  and the work of  tsuiji'1  on understanding cartoon films implicitly address this task. however  most of these systems are concerned with the specifics of the domain they seek to interpret and the management of temporal information is only peripherally addressed in these systems. 
   recent work by  mcdermott'1     allen'1  and others has concentrated on providing formal deductive representations for temporal knowledge and they have developed extensive general theories of time.  borchardt'1  is one of the first attempts to bring these works together and the event calculus developed by him is directly related to the kinds of representations we try to develop in this paper. the work of  thibadeau'1  is also similarly motivated though his work is more oriented towards simulating human performance in action perception. 
   our intent is to develop a domain independent framework in which event conceptualization may be performed. the basic paradigm we consider is the following. the system is presented with a set of stimuli at discrete instants. the task is to form a conceptual description of abstract events occurring in these instants and to provide a causal interpretation of these stimuli. 
   the overall framework presented in this paper has been implemented in an event recognition program on a symbolics 1. the paper that follows is a description of the theory behind this system  which we call muse. the paper is organised as follows. section 1. briefly discusses the temporal logics of  mcdermott'1  and  allen'1  and argues that while both of them have useful properties neither is completely adequate for the task at hand. sections 1 to 1 then present an alternate hybrid representation and discuss its properties and develop the basic structure of the event recognition system. section 1 gives an example of the system working in the blocks world. 
   a longer version of this paper  kumarf&mukerjee'1  contains a more complete account of the motivations behind this work and the implementation details of our system. the reader is referred to that report for additional information. 
1. representing temporal knowledge 
   recent work on temporal reasoning has given rise to two basic symbolic models of time. in one approach   for example   mcdermott'1   the basic unit of time is an atemporal entity called a state or an instant. in the second approach  allen'1   allen'1  ladkin'1  the basic unit is the interval  which represents a finite  chunk  on some 
1 	knowledge representation 
time tine. in the state based approach  the passage of time is represented using a partial ordering between states. intervals of time are thus represented using sets of states in this approach. intervals are first class entities in the second approach and here points are defined using intersections of intervals  allen'1 . the following discussions assume that the reader is familiar with the basic features of both these models. space considerations preclude a detailed analysis of the comparative merits of the two models. below we outline briefly the motivations behind our choice of representation. the reader is referred to the longer version of this paper for a detailed comparison. 
   we are primarily interested in representing temporal information about events. in state based systems events are defined indirectly as facts that are true over sets of consecutive states. thus temporal relations between events can be determined by examining the respective set of states. in interval based systems on the other haned  events can be directly associated with intervals and the temporal relationships between events can be directly expressed by the interval relationships  say for example  of  allen'1  . thus intervals are powerful source of temporal abstraction in representing information about events. however  intervals are awkward to use for global or situational information. if  for instance  we wish to know what facts are true at a particular point in time  the interval notation is awkward to use since such information has to be derived by pairwise comparision of events using binary relations between them. in typical event recognition problems  the input information is usually global and consists of descriptions that hold at varoius points in time. thus a direct use of the interval logic is inconvenient. 
   another major problem with the interval notation is that intervals require both a starting point and ending point to be completely defined. all the temporal relationships of  allen'1  require that the two intervals be completely defined. this means that temporal relations between incomplete intervals cannot be expressed using this notation. as we show in the longer paper none of the relationships can be automatically derived until a time when at least one of the events has terminated. this means that we cannot build an incremental temporal reasoner that deals with ongoing events using the interval logic. 
   in this paper we show that the above problems can be solved if we re-interpret the interval notation using a state based approach. in particular we show how these relationships can be automatically derived using strictly local deductions from situational information. we thus end up with a hybrid representation which uses states to encode global information and constructs intervals implicitly by deriving interval relationships between facts in the states. we thus gain the advantages of the  world centered  state space approach and tne  event centered  interval approach. 
1. basic definitions 
   in our representation factual world knowledge is represented by two sets of propositions pr  and pd. pr is a set of primitive propositions from which all inputs to the system are drawn. pd is a set of derived propositions such that pd n pr -a  the null set . intuitively  the task of temporal event conceptualisation involves defining a mapping between the two sets such that the elements of pr may be re-expressed in terms of those in pd. we define the set v = pr u pd. 
   time is represented by a linearly ordered set of states s. a function ii u  a  which ranges over the set {true false} determines the truth values of a proposition p € v at a specific instant r € s. the set of states in s is utilised to provide a frame of reference for describing events in a domain. we thus place a restriction on this set that it be of a sufficiently high  resolution  ie. for all  p € v  if p is true over a set of instants {a1 ...ak } and if it becomes false at ak+1 then ok+1 € s. similarly  if a is false over a set {o- ...ak} and becomes true at 1-fc+i  then o%+i € s .the above restriction places a minimal bound on the resolution of the set s required to perform event conceptualisation 


	kumar and mukerjee 	1 

the following instants at which ife is active. once n1 ends  however  this assertion no longer holds. 
1. derived events 
   we view temporal event conceptualisation as a process of temporal abstraction. this involves aggregating a set of events that occur in a certain sequence into a single abstract event. such abstract events are called derived events in our representation. these are events whose occurrences are totally constrained by the occurrences of other events. the temporal assertions of the previous section define the allowable temporal constraints between events. 
formally  we represent a derived event by a statement of the form 
where a and w are formulas that may contain quantified variables  such that some ground instance of a belongs to n. and some ground instance of w belongs to pd. variables quantified over the entire expression are prefixed with a    . the previous definition of a temporal assertion as a proposition allows us to evaluate the truth value of a at any instant. 
   the extent r of the derived event is defined as being equal to the scope of the constraining assertion a . 
   the final notion that needs to be defined is the idea of temporal semantics for events. in deriving abstract events as shown above  we must consider not only how they are conceptualised  but also the points of time at which they are said to be occurring so far  it has been implicitly assumed that the extent of an event is also the period of time for which the event occurs while this holds true for primitive events  this definition is too restrictive for derived events. in many cases  simply assuming that an event occurs when the corresponding proposition becomes true and ends when the proposition becomes false leads to descriptions of events that are rather counter-intuitive. let 
us consider some examples below. 
   consider an event going-from-college-station-to-austin. the event itself is not realised until the agent has reached austin  and yet  once it has reached austin  the agent is no longer going from college station to austin. if we were to use the extent to report the period of time at which the event occurred then the event would activated the time the agent reached austin and would end when he was no uld be activated 

longer at austin. this is certainly not the period for whi when he was no was going from college station to austin! for this event we would like to use the fact that the agent reached austin as confirmation of riod for which the agent the fact that it was going to austin but would like to adjust the set of instants at which the event was presumed to occur to include only those points at which the agent was on the road from college station to austin. 
   another case that is possible is one of instantaneous actions. consider  for example the action of dropping a ball. we may say that someone drops a ball if he is initially holding the ball and then he opens his hand  thus releasing the ball. if we were to represent this situation using a derived event that was constrained by the events  holding  and  opening  then  the  dropping  action would  by the above scope rules  imply that the ball is being dropped at all instants that the hand remains open. however  this is not the way we perceive the dropping action. effectively  the agent is said to drop the ball only at the instant when the hand opens. 
   it can be seen from the above examples that in practice the mapping to intuitive descriptions can be extremely complex and the simple notion of extent cannot account for many types of events. thus  we need additional mechanisms that will allow us to make these distinctions. the idea of associating a descriptor with an event that will allow the computation of the period for which the event is active is our approach to providing a partial solution to this problem. we do not claim that this technique can account for all possible situations  but the methods outlined below are quite powerful and provide a means for  customising  the temporal semantics of an event. 
   n  a is an abbreviation for  every such that is an event whose corresponding proposition is a subformula of a . 
   for a derived event the set o will  by the above definition  contains every instant from the starting point of the earliest primitive event that was involved in an assertion constraining that event to the termination point of the event. in effect this set maybe thought of as a universal set of all the instants which may have some relationship to this event. 
1 	knowledge representation 
   muse takes as its input low level propositional descriptions 1f a hypothetical scene. in the blocks world example which will be considered here  the scene consists of a number of mocks on a table and a 
   set of agents  hands  which are performing some actions in this world. the task given to muse is to provide a high level description of the actions of the agents. the input is provided in a series of snapshots of the world at various instants. as an example consider the sequence of situational descriptions in fig 1 that are presented to muse. 
   each of these instantaneous descriptions naturally map on to the states in our model. the propositional descriptors primarily describe positions and motions of the agents and the blocks. thus we have descriptions like ontable a    on b a    move-right  hand .  etc. our premises here are somewhat similar to  miller&johnson-laird'1  though at a slightly higher level of abstraction in the primitives assumed. 
   muse takes this set of situational descriptions and produces the higher level description of fig 1. 
   high level descriptions are represented by derived events which are constrained to occur when certain sequences of low level events occur. they include grasp  pick-up  move-holding  puton  etc. 
thus an event like grasp would be described as follows 


   here  x  y are variables thai may be instantiated by the hand and some block in a specific case. this definition compactly defines the fact that the hand may be presumed to grasp the block if a motion of the hand ends with the hand surrounding the block and consequently the hand closes. besides defining the action itself the scope and extent of the action may be determined from the above definition using the scope of the assertion on the rhs. this may be graphically described as shown below. 
   in figure 1  the thin boxes represent assertions and the points at which they remain valid. since the grasp event is defined as a conjunction of temporal assertions  it is activated when both assertions are activated  ie. at t1. the scope of the  m  assertion is the same as the extent of the surround event. the scope of the  sb  assertion is the intersection of the scopes of the surround and closed events  ie  when either the surround or closed events ends the assertion becomes false  and the relationship between the two events will change according to the rules and transition diagrams of section 1. thus the extent of the grasp event is the intersection of the scopes of the two assertions and this ensures that the hand is seen to be grasping the block as long as both the surround and the closed events are active. 

1. results & discussion 
   the representation language for events is a subset of the first order predicate calculus  which is a language with known expressive adequacy  moore'1 . situational descriptions are naturally expressed in the state based representation. since temporal reasoning is performed using an interval based logic  efficient temporal abstraction is also facilitated. moreover  since we have integrated state based and interval based representations  we can use the advantages of both. the major advantage of interval based logic is that it can handle imprecise temporal information elegantly. given a set of statements about the temporal relationship of events  the inference procedures of  allen'1  or  villain'1  can be used derive some implicit information in these statements. although we do not use such procedures in our system  our derived events are created using precisely the assertions of the form that the interval logic uses. so  in deriving higher level descriptions  muse could very well take as its input expressions generated by a system such as allen's. unlike these systems however  muse has the additional capability of automatically deriving the temporal information from purely situational descriptions. the system was specifically designed to operate in an on-line environment and it can handle ongoing or partially defined events. 
   there are many areas where temporal reasoning needs to be performed even before the derived events are completed. for example  in system breakdown evaluation  the events leading up to the breakdown have already started much before the actual breakdown occurs. in analysing opponent strategies  it is necessary to analyse events as they happen. in fact all temporal reasoning about the present time involves abstracting some high-level events which are yet to be completed. by using the features of state based temporal logic systems  our representation scheme can deal with situations involving incomplete events  while retaining the abstraction facilities of the interval l ased systems. thus we feel that this work adresses a significant issue in temporal knowledge representation and temporal reasoning. 
1. bibliography 
 allen'1   allen j. 'towards a general model of action and time   artificial intelligence  1  1  july 1. 
  allen'1  allen j. and hayes  p.   a common sense theory of time   proc. of the ninth international joint conference on artificial intelligence  los angeles  ca  1. 
  borchardt'1  borchardt g.   event calculus   proc of the ninth international joint conference on artificial intellgence  los angeles  ca  1. 
 braehman'1  brachman r.  what is-a is and isn't.an analysis of the tuxonomic links in a semantic network   ieee computer special issue on knowledge representation  september  1. 
  kumar&mukerjee'1  kumar  k. and mukerjee  a.  temporal event conceptualization   technical report tamu dcs 1  de partment of computer science  texas a&m university  tx  1. 
 ladner'1  ladner p. 'time representation: a taxonomy of in-
terval relations   proceedings of the aaai-1.  philadelphia  1. 
  mcdermott 1  mcdermott d.  a temporal logic for reasoning about processes and plans   cognitive science 1  1. 
  miller&johnson-laird'1  miller g.a  and johnson-laird p.n   language and perception   harvard university press  ma  1 
  moore'1  moore r.c   the role of logic in knowledge representation and common sense reasoning   proc. of the aaa1  pittsburgh  pa 1  pp  1 . 
  nowtson'1  newtson.d.   attribution and the unit of perception of behaviour   journal of personality and social psychology  1  1. 
  schmidt sridharan&goodson'1  schmidt c  sridharan n.s  goodson.j.l   the plan recognition problem : an intersection of psychology and artificial intelligence  artificial intelligence  1  1. 
  thibadeau'1  thibadeau  r. artificial perception of actions   cognitive science  1   1. 1 
  tsuiji'1  tsuiji s   understanding a simple cartoon film by a computer vision system   in proc. of ihe fifth international joint conference on artificial intelligence   cambridge  ma  1. 
 vilitun'1  villain m.  a system for reasoning about time    proc. of aaai-1  pittsburgh  pa  1 . pp  1 . 
 wilensky'1  wilensky r.   planning and understanding   addison-
wesley publications  advanced book program  reading  mass. 1 
	kumar and mukerjee 	1 
