: early attempts at combining multiple inheritance with nonmonotonic reasoning were based on straight forward extensions of tree-structured inheritance systems  and were theoretically unsound. in the mathematics of inheritance systems  or tmois  touretzky described two problems these systems cannot handle: reasoning in the presence of true but redundant assertions  and coping with ambiguity. tmois provided a definition and analysis of a theoretically sound multiple inheritance system  accompanied by inference algorithms. other definitions for inheritance have since been proposed that are equally sound and intuitive  but do not always agree with tmois. at the heart of the controversy is a clash of intuitions about certain fundamental issues such as skepticism versus credulity  the direction in which inheritance paths are extended  and classical versus intuitive notions of consistency. just as there are alternative logics  there may be no single  best  approach to nonmonotonic multiple inheritance. 
1. introduction 
   early attempts at combining multiple inheritance with exceptions were based on straightforward extensions of treestructured inheritance systems  and were theoretically unsound. two well-known examples are frl  roberts and goldstein 1  and netl  fahlman 1 . in the mathematics of inheritance systems  or tmois  touretzky de-
scribed two classes of problems that these systems cannot handle  touretzky 1 . one involves reasoning with true but redundant assertions; the other involves ambiguity. 
¡¡¡¡tmois provided the definition and analysis of a theoretically sound multiple inheritance system  along with some inference algorithms based on parallel marker propagation. other definitions for inheritance have since been proposed in  sandewall 1  and  horty et al. 1  that are equally sound and intuitive  but do not always agree with the system defined in tmois. at the heart of the controversy is a clash of intuitions about certain fundamental issues in inheritance reasoning. in this paper we catalog the issues  map out a design space  and describe some interesting properties that result from various choices of definitions. just as there are alternative logics  there may be no single  best  approach to nonmonotonic multiple inheritance. 
this material is bated on work supported by the national science foundation under grant no. ist-1. 
1 	knowledge representation 
elephant  and royal elephants are not gray. the redundant is-a link from clyde to elephant causes problems for simple-minded inference algorithms because in the presence of such links inheritance paths are no longer independent. in particular  shortest path reasoning algorithms no longer apply. 
   the intuition underlying inheritance with exceptions is that claims about subclasses are more specific  and so can incorporate information about exceptional cases. therefore  subclasses should be allowed to override superclasses. clyde is not gray because royal elephants aren't gray; the information from royal elephant overides the information from elephant despite the presence of a direct redundant link from clyde to elephant. 
	1. 	reasoning in the presence of ambiguity 
   figure 1 illustrates the problem of reasoning in the presence of ambiguity. this familiar example is known as the nixon diamond. quakers are typically pacifists while republicans typically are not. nixon is both a quaker and a republican. is he a pacifist or isn't he  one might choose to draw no conclusion  or one might generate two extensions as tmois does  with nixon being a pacifist in one and a non-pacifist in the other. the crucial point is that the ambiguity must be recognized. 
   simple depth-first search algorithms  which work perfectly well for tree-structured networks  have no way to recognize the ambiguities that can arise in multiple inheritance situations. shortest path reasoners will either choose one of the two possible conclusions about nixon arbitrarily  or else report that both conclusions are true at the same time  i.e.  that nixon simultaneously is and is not a pacifist. neither behavior is theoretically sound. the inability to recognize ambiguity is another reason why shortest path algorithms are unacceptable for reasoning about situations involving nonmonotonic multiple inheritance. 
touretsky  horty  end thomason 1 
   since skeptical reasoning always generates a unique extension  there is no need to consider sets of extensions. we expect skeptical reasoning algorithms to be simpler and more efficient than credulous ones; in our investigations so 
   
   although inferential distance is important for distinguishing inheritance systems from other nonmontonic reasoning systems such as default logic  touretzky 1   it does not by itself yield a unique definition of nonmonotonic multiple inheritance. there are a number of other choices to be made. touretzky built into tmois certain assumptions about reasoning that other investigators  approaching inheritance with a different set of intuitions  may not share. in the remainder of this section we describe four areas in which intuitions have clashed. it should be stressed that all of these systems treat redundancy and ambiguity in the correct way  and appear both theoretically sound and intuitively appealing. nonetheless  we will describe cases in which they give conflicting results. 
1. skeptical vs. credulous reasoning 
   a skeptical reasoner refuses to draw conclusions in ambiguous situations.1 a skeptical reasoner would therefore offer no opinion as to whether nixon was or was not a pacifist. credulous reasoners  on the other hand  try to conclude as much as possible. to avoid inconsistency  a credulous reasoner must generate multiple extensions so that contradictory conclusions can be isolated from one another. tmois describes such a reasoner. in one of the two credulous extensions of figure 1 the inference path nixon -. quaker -  pacifist is admissible; in the other  the path nixon republican pacifist is admissible. 
1 this was the attitude toward reasoning of the first philosophical skeptics; they refused to draw a conclusion in cases in which any reason could be produced for the opposite conclusion. 
far  this has indeed been the case. on the other hand  one advantage of credulity is that after generating all permissible extensions they can be examined for interesting properties. 
   skeptical inheritance as defined in  horty et al. 1  is not equivalent to taking the intersection of all credulous extensions. one reason is that  in the presence of multiple ambiguities  skeptical inference may permit certain paths that are not permitted in all credulous extensions. consider figure 1. nixon's pacifism is ambiguous here  and consequently  so are his feelings about the military. but a simple skeptical reasoner would not recognize the second ambiguity. the reason is that since it is ambiguous whether or not nixon is a pacifist  there are no valid paths from nixon to pacifist to anti-military in the skeptical extension. therefore the path from nixon to football fan to not-anti-military is unopposed  so one may conclude that nixon is not anti-military. this is the approach recommended in  horty tt al. 1 . 
   it might be preferable for ambiguity to be propagated from pacifist to anti-military  based on the following argument: we are reserving judgement about whether nixon is a pacifist or not  but conceivably he could be one. in that case he could conceivably be anti-military. being a football fan he could also conceivably be not anti-military  so we should reserve judgement on whether he is anti-military. 
   an ambiguity-propagating version of skepticism would be more compatible with credulous reasoning  in that the skeptic never draws conclusions about matters that would be decided differently in different credulous extensions. the goal of ambiguity-propagating skepticism is to produce a single extension whose conclusions are consistent with the intersection of all credulous extensions. it is not yet known whether this can be done without computing all the credulous extensions. 
1. upward vs. downward view of reasoning 
   the most common intuitive model of inheritance has properties flowing downward from classes to their subclasses and instances-though the flow can be interrupted by an exception. this downward view is the one promoted in tmois and  informally  in frl and netl. an opposing view of inheritance has inference working upwards. this conception  which is explicitly chosen in  horty et al. 1   stresses arguments  or proof sequences   and imagines them being constructed from the bottom up.1 the upward and downward views aren't always compatible  as the following two examples illustrate. 
1.1. coupling in downward reasoners 
   figure 1 demonstrates an important difference between upward and downward credulous reasoners.  in this section we consider only credulous reasoners; the skeptical approach would generate a single extension with no interesting conclusions about a or b.  a downward credulous reasoner produces two extensions from figure 1  due to the ambiguity about whether b's are e's. one extension con-
the conclusion about a's being e's is identical to the conclusion about b's being e's. the property that a subclass is always in agreement with its superclasses  in the absence of explicit exceptions  is known as coupling. downward reasoners necessarily produce coupled theories because the only properties a node can inherit are those of its superiors. upward reasoners are not so constrained. 
   in an upward credulous reasoner the arguments made about a in figure 1 need not depend on conclusions that were drawn about b  since properties are not flowing down from b to a. so in addition to the above two extensions  an upward reasoner could produce two uncoupled extensions. 

   intuitively  coupling appears to be a desirable property for reasoners to have. it may be possible to constrain upward reasoners to produce only coupled theories  but this could compromise their ability to reach unambiguous conclusions where downward reasoners do not  a property known as opportunistic inference. 
1.1. opportunism in upward reasoners 
   node b is ambiguous in figure 1 for the same reason it's ambiguous in figure 1: there are two mutually contradic-

1  note that although both frl and netl present properties as flowing downward from classes to individuals  in fact their search algorithms proceed in the opposite direction  starting with the individual and proceeding up the is-a hierarchy to increasingly general superclasses. only tmois generates inference paths from top to 
figure 1: b is ambiguous about property e; should a be  

only skeptical reasoners. no skeptical reasoner should draw a conclusion about whether b's are e's. but what should it conclude about a's being e's  in a downward skeptical reasoner  since b is ambiguous and therefore neither an e nor a non-e  there is no property for a to inherit. so a downward reasoner would draw no conclusion about whether a's are e's. 
in an upward skeptical reasoner  the link 
the upward reasoner seizes on any chance to prove something  in this case that a's are e's  even though b remains ambiguous on this point. because upward reasoners are opportunistic  they sometimes reach conclusions in situations where a downward reasoner would abstain. 
   upward and downward credulous reasoners also behave differently with respect to figure 1. a credulous upward reasoner would generate two extensions: one in which b's were e's  and one in which they were not. a's would be e's in both extensions. tmois  a credulous downward reasoner  
	touretsky  horty  and thomason 	1 
even though royal elephant is on the path from clyde to elephant  preemption doesn't hold because royal elephant is not on any path from clyde through african elephant to elephant; in other words  figure 1 contains no redundant links. 
   choosing the downward view of reasoning for a moment  we note that royal elephants are not gray while african elephants are gray. since neither class is a subclass of the other  and clyde is an instance of both  he could inherit either one's grayness property. clyde's grayness is therefore ambiguous  so the network should have two extensions. a similar argument holds if we choose the upward view of inheritance. 
   sandewall argues that on-path preemption in tmois is too restrictive  citing figure 1 as an example where our intuitions suggest that clyde is unambiguously not gray  sandewall 1 . he proposes a more permissive rule  one which we call off-path preemption. the argument for off-path preemption begins with the fact that both royal elephant and african elephant's paths to gray thing must go through elephant. the fact that african elephants are typically gray shouldn't influence clyde  because african elephants aren't explicitly gray  they merely inherit grayness from elephant. royal elephant overrides the elephant node's grayness property with more specific information. 
   this argument does lead to the desired conclusion that clyde is not gray in figure 1. off-path preemption in gen-

1 instead of 'preemption   the term  preclusion  was used in tmois. the concept it the same. 
figure 1: a possible counterexample to sandewall's net  with the same topology. 
eral is more permissive  more willing to let one path override another rather than cause an ambiguity  than on-path preemption. but is it more intuitive  
   consider figure 1  which has the same topology as figure 1 but different node labels. marines are typically men  and most men drink beer. chaplains are typically men but they typically don't drink beer. george is a marine chaplain. in this sitution we are less certain that george doesn't drink beer  which the off-path version of preemption would insist is the case. marines and chaplains are quite different from each other; possibly even antithetical. both types of individual are rather different from the typical man. it is therefore difficult to predict which properties george will inherit from chaplain and which from marine. perhaps the specific knowledge that chaplains don't drink beer should take precedence over what we know about men  but perhaps not. the most relevant missing bit of information is the rate of beer drinking among marines. if this is far higher than the rate of abstention among chaplains  one would be better off assuming george is a beer drinker than not.1 
   like sandewall's system  the skeptical reasoner described in  horty et al. 1  uses off-path rather than on-path preemption. a permissive view of preemption allows a skeptical system to reach conclusions where a strict on-path approach would see an ambiguity. on the other hand  a credulous reasoner that chose off-path preemption would simply produce a subset of the extensions allowable with on-path preemption; for credulous reasoners it may pay to take a more cautious  strict approach. 
1. classical vs. intuitive notions of consistency 
   according to classical logic  if it is possible to derive any pair of statements p and ~ p then the initial axioms are inconsistent and the only theory that the axioms generate is the one containing every statement. this theory of course destroys any useful information that may be contained in the axioms. 
   graph-oriented approaches to reasoning avoid this problem  since a statement a cannot be derived from a set of statements t unless t creates a path supporting a. in fact  even strictly monotonic inheritance networks are non-classical in this respect  as we show in  thomason et al. 1 . figure 1a is a classically inconsistent net: it contains the statements p a  and  such a net might represent the sentences  clyde is an elephant  and  clyde is not an elephant.  although we can't use it to derive all possible statements  the logical inconsistency of the network is easily apparent. 
   this side-effect of graph-based reasoning is clearly desirable  since it enables graceful degradation of information retrieval in the presence of inconsistent data. here  classicial logic is inadequate as a theory of inheritance reasoning  and should be replaced with a more adequate approach. in  thomason tt al. 1   we show that the simple fourvalued logic of  belnap 1a    belnap 1b  is adequate for characterising monotonic inheritance. 
   in other cases  classical logic is overly liberal: figure 1b is not classically inconsistent. this figure could represent the sentences  elephants are gray  and  elephants are not 

as long as there are no instances of elephants  there is no logical contradiction here  even though the topology of the network is the same as that of figure 1a. tmois labels figure 1b inconsistent because even if there are no instances of p's  it makes no sense to simultaneously believe both  the typical p is a q  and  the typical p is not a q  another argument for the inconsistency of 1b is that it simplifies things if networks with identical topologies are treated identically. 
the intuitive notion of consistency put forth in tmois  
1 in fact  if marines art unusually avid consumers of bear  out might argue that marine should have a direct link to beer drinker. such a link would be redundant as far as the marine node itself is concerned  but it would supply additional evidence in favor of beer drinking for particular instances of marine  such as george. 

	to 	 b  
figure 1: two inconsistent nets. 
motivated by the desire to talk about vaguely-specified concepts such as  the typical p   is at odds not only with classical logic but with the default and nonmonotonic logic formulations of inheritance as well. for example  figure 1b is usually expressed in default logic  reiter 1  as: 

   if multiple instances of p's exist  some may be inferred  via the first default  to be g's  and others  via the second default  not to be q's; in any case no contradiction will arise. the same is true in nonmonotonic logic  where figure 1b would be expressed as: 

   a conservative reasoner could refrain from assigning any interpretation to a net containing even a single inconsistency. but since an inconsistency in one part of the net doesn't necessarily affect inference in other parts  it may be possible to reason around the inconsistency and in some cases produce useful inferences. 
1. conclusion 
   the study of inheritance reasoning has rapidly moved through stages similar to ones that deductive logic has passed through  at a much more glacial pace. reflection on reasoning practices has produced a large body of patterns and generalizations relating to sound inheritance reasoning; this reasoning was formalized in tmois  and metatheoretical results were established about the formalization. in this paper  we have described the discovery of several dimensions along which alternative approaches to inheritance reasoning can be generated  all of which appear to be equally sound. 
   the existence of these approaches has many theoretical consequences  which we are exploring in our current research. the inheritance theory of tmois needs to be generalized; and other treatments of nonmonotonic reasoning may need to be liberalized. for instance  the modal 
	touretsky  horty  and thomason 	1 
   
valid. on the natural interpretation of this inference in nets  it does hold good for credulous reasoners. but it fails for skeptical reasoners. this makes it desirable to search for a more general logic  that is neutral with respect to the design space of sound inheritance reasoners. 
   however  this theoretical work needs to be combined with more  empirical  investigations of the alternatives. sandewall has suggested that a useful way to approach the question of sound multiple inheritance reasoning with exceptions proceed might be to create a catalog of problematic networks  sandewall 1 . inheritance formalisms can then be compared by contrasting their handling of the cases in the catalog. as new definitions of inheritance are proposed  new examples may be added to the catalog to further refine the distinctions between the various schemes. 
   we have in effect been pursuing this approach. although the various examples appearing throughout tmois were not collected in a formal catalog  the two primary examples  known as the clyde level skip  figure 1  and the nixon diamond  figure 1   were used in  touretzky 1  to contrast tmois with other formulations such as shortest path reasoning and etherington's formalization of inheritance in reiter's default logic  etherington 1 . of course  the project of collecting examples has to be combined with extracting generalizations from the data and relating these generalizations to systematic theories. thus  as well as presenting interesting examples where intuitions clash  we have presented in this paper a taxonomy of inheritance systems  and have presented four areas where definitions of multiple inheritance can disagree. a more systematic catalog is presented in  touretzky et al. 1 . 
   even after the careful analysis conducted in tmois  the problem of nonmonotonic multiple inheritance is far from conclusively resolved; its subtleties continue to surprise us. 
acknowledgements 
   we thank david etherington and erik sandewall for illuminating correspondence  and jon doyle for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper. 
