 
qualitative spatial reasoning has seen little progress this paper attempts to explain why we provide a framework for qualitative kinematics  qk   qualitative spatial reasoning about motion we propose that no general-purpose  purely qualitative kinematics exists. we propose instead the md/pv model of spatial reasoning  which combines the power of diagrams with qualitative representations next we propose connectivity as the organizing principle for kinematic 
state  and describe a set of basic inferences which every qk system must make. the framework's utility is illustrated by considering two programs  one finished and one in progress we end by discussing the research questions this framework raises. 
	i. 	introduction 
recently there has been signficant progress in qualitative physics. however  this progress has focussed on qualitative dynamics  the representation and organization of qualitative time-varying differential equations  c.f. 1  1. 1  1. . qualitative spatial reasoning has mainly been ignored. this paper presents a theoretical framework for qualitative kinematics  or qk   the aspect  of spatial rea-
soning concerned with the geometry of motion. figure 1 provides an example of a problem involving qualitative kinematics  namely understanding a rachet  from 1 . we exclude problems of navigation  relating function to form  and robotics. 
　　the framework we propose is organized around three ideas: 
1. the poverty conjecture: there is no purely qualitative general-purpose kinematics. 
1. the md/pv model: qualitative kinematics requires metric diagrams in addition to qualitative representa-
tions. 
1. the connectivity hypothesis: the appropriate notion of state for qk concerns connectivity  since changes in connection usually determine when forces change. 
     we start by explaining these ideas and describing a set of basic inferences for qualitative kinematics which can serve as a basis for organizing theories and algorithms. we then illustrate the utility of the md/pv model two ways. first  we use examples from a working ai program. 
1 	knowledge representation 
frob 1. 1. second  we outline a system being developed which uses this model to reason about mechanisms  such as mechanical clocks. finally  we analyze other relevant research in terms of this framework and raise questions for further research. 
t 
d 
     figure 1: an example of qualitative kinematics the parts of a rachet  shown below  are free to rotate. the kinematic problem is  how can they contact each other  and how can they move  

i i . 	a f r a m e w o r k f o r q u a l i t a t i v e 
k i n e m a t i c s 
motion pervades the physical world - things roll  swing  fly  gyrate  spin  and slide. the breadth of the phenomena and wide variation in the kinds of answers we desire argues against a single representation for all of qualitative kinematics. nevertheless  we believe there are underlying commonalities which  if made explicit  will serve to focus the search for specific solutions. here we describe what we think these commonalities are. 
a. 	the poverty conjecture 
the first idea is a conjecture about the limits of qualitative representation. specifically  we claim that there is no purely qualitative  general-purpose kinematics. unlike 
qualitative dynamics  where weak representations of timevarying differential equations suffice for a broad spectrum of inferences  weak qualitative spatial representations appear virtually useless. 
　　to see this  consider the rolling problem: given two objects  can one smoothly roll across the other  for prototypical cases little information is needed: a ball can roll across a table  and if two meshing gears are aligned properly then one can roll across the other. but a generalpurpose reasoning system cannot rely solely on prototypes: it must at least have the ability to compose prototypes  and preferably provide the ability to generate new shapes from surface or volume primitives. and here is where purely qualitative representations fail. without some metric information as to the relative sizes and positions of the parts of a compound surface  the rolling problem cannot be solved. consider for example two wheels  one with a bump on it and the other with a notch carved out of it. without more details one cannot say how smoothly they will travel across each other: both perturbations of the shape could be trivial  or the notch might include sharp corners that cause the bump to catch. stating that the shapes are complementary and their sizes are identical is cheating  of course. 
　　it is difficult to make  purely qualitative  precise because there is a spectrum of representations. clearly a 
　　representation which includes elements of r as constituents is not purely qualitative. symbolic algebraic expressions  while closer  we still exclude from our conjecture. representing a 1d boundary by a list of segments described as concave  convex  or straight  on the other hand  is exactly the kind of tempting representation we are talking about. there are several arguments for the poverty conjecture: 
1. negation by failure: many smart people have tried to find a  pure'' qk for years  without success. 
1. human performance: people resort to diagrams or models for all but the simplest spatial problems   1  1. 
1. no total order: quantity spaces don't work in more than one dimension  leaving little hope of concluding much by combining weak information about spatial properties. 
　　the first argument simply makes one think; after all  one could be invented tomorrow. the second argument is more serious. if people can't do it  then we know that it isn't needed to be intelligent. the third argument is the strongest. 
　　what we want from a qualitative representation is the ability to combine weak relationships between its elements to draw interesting conclusions. for numbers inequality information suffices for many inferences. allen's temporal logic  l  is another example of a system of relationships which individually are weak but together provide enormous constraint. both allen's logic and quantity spaces crucially rely on transitivity. and except for special cases   e.g. equal and inside   transitivity is unusable in higher dimensions. we suspect the space of representations in higher dimensions is sparse; that for spatial reasoning almost nothing weaker than numbers will do. 
b . 	the m d / p v model 
we believe the best way to overcome these limitations is to combine quantitative and qualitative representations. we call this the md/pv model because it has two parts: 
  metric diagram: a combination of symbolic and quantitative information used as an oracle for simple spatial questions. 
  place vocabulary: a purely symbolic description of shape and space  grounded in the metric diagram. 
　　a reasoner starts with a metric diagram  which is intended to serve the same role that diagrams and models play for people. the metric diagram is used to compute the place vocabulary  thus ensuring the qualitative representation is relevant to the desired reasoning. 
　　the particular form of these representations varies with the class of problem and architecture  as will be seen below. the quantitative component of the metric diagram could be floating point numbers  algebraic expressions  or bitmaps. the place vocabulary can be regions of free space  configuration space  or something else entirely. the key features are that  a  the place vocabulary exists and  b  it is computed from a metric representation. these features mean that we can still draw some conclusions even when little information is known  by using the place vocabulary as a substrate for qualitative spatial reasoning  and that we can assimilate new quantitative information  such as numerical simulations or perception  into the qualitative representation. 
	forbus  nlelson  and fallings 	1 
c. 	the connectivity hypothesis 
we claim that qk state is organized around connectivity. connectivity is important because contact  of some kind  is required to transmit forces. the kinematic state of a 
system is primarily the collection of connectivity relationships that hold between its parts. changes in connectivity signal changes in qk state. for example  the rachet is clearly in a different state when the pin is against a tooth than when jammed in a corner. 
     a system's total state is the union of its kinematic and dynamic state. the dynamical component can be represented in many ways  including qualitative state vectors 1  1 and qualitative process theory 1 . the particular connectivity vocabulary will be domain-dependent. 
d. 	basic inferences in qualitative kinematics 
the key to progress in qualitative dynamics was finding appropriate notions of state and state transitions. the use of connectivity for kinematic state suggests a similar set of basic inferences for qualitative kinematics which can be combined for more complex reasoning. these operations are analogous to the basic dynamical inferences of qp theory. 
1. finding potential connectivity relationships: computing the place vocabulary from the metric diagram must yield the connectivity relationships that will be the primary constituents of kinematic state. in the rachet this corresponds to finding consistent pairwise contacts. the qp analog is finding potential process and view instances. 
1 finding kinematic states: the constituent connectivity relationships must be consistently combined to form full kinematic states. although typically quantitative information will still be required  being able to calculate relative positions and sizes is essential   we claim the resulting symbolic description can suffice for the remaining inferences. the result of these first two stages for the rachet is shown in figure 1. the qp analog is finding process and view structures. 
1. finding total states: by imposing dynamical information  i.e.  forces and motions  complete system states are formed. the key to this inference is identifying qualitative reference frames and the ways in which objects are free to move. the qp analog is resolving influences. 
1. finding state transitions: motion can eventually lead to change in connectivity  providing kinematic state transitions. dynamical state transitions are also pos-
sible  pendulums exhausting their kinetic energy  for instance  as well as combinations of kinematic and dynamical transitions. figure 1 shows some transitions for the rachet. the qp analog is limit analysis. 
1 	knowledge representation 
　　　figure 1: a place vocabulary for the rachet below is a partial representation of the rachet's place vocabulary. the teeth of the rachet are labelled clockwise around the wheel by a  b .... each node is a configuration space region and each arc indicates a geometrically possible transition between kinematic states. the corresponding physical configuration for several states is shown underneath. the arrows in the place graph indicates the path the rachet takes in normal operation. notice that a transition to state b1 results in the rachet locking  as expected. 



	i i i . 	e x a m p l e : 	f r o b 
figure 1: envisionment for the rachet 
the table below summarizes the kinematic transitions possible for each kind of motion for the fragment of place vocabulary 	in 	figure 	1. 
	forbus  nielson  and faltings 	1 

masses have no spatial extent the kinematic states are exactly the connectivity relationships  i.e.  where a ball is . frob's dynamics are organized around qualitative state vectors  so the total state includes the type of activity  e.g.  fly  collide  etc.   place  and symbolic direction. state transitions are found by determining where the ball might be next  since changes in place are designed to herald changes in activity and direction. in short  frob is aptly described by the md/pv model. 
	i v . 	t h e c l o c k s y s t e m 
since understanding why frob worked was a motivation for this framework the conclusion of the previous section should not be too surprising. however  we are using this framework to develop a new system  working name: clock  which reasons about mechanisms such as mechanical clocks. while clock is incomplete  it is far enough along to be encouraging. 
　　methodologically  the md/pv model suggests splitting the system design in half  since the first two inferences require metric diagrams and the last two don't. this approach has proven successful so far  although of course all the data isn't in. falting's program starts with a metric diagram and computes a place vocabulary based on configuration space 1 . nielsen's program starts with the place vocabulary  imposes qualitative reference frames  finds potential directions of motion  and computes envisionments. we summarize these programs below. 
a. c o m p u t i n g place vocabularies 
the input to clock is a collection of shapes described as extended polygons  i.e. segments can be arcs of circles as well as lines . each part of the mechanism has a defined attachment to a global reference frame  and the union of the parameters implied by these attachments comprises the configuration space  cspace  for the mechanism. 
　　each point in cspace corresponds to a geometric layout of the mechanism's parts. we assume no objects can overlap  hence cspace is divided into free and blocked parts. the cspace constraints arising from points of contact between surfaces are the starting point for creating a place vocabulary. the places are quasi-convex and monotone  and it turns out that to satisfy these conditions requires introducing new  free-space divisions  in cspace  see 1j for details . the computation of places from pairwise object interactions is implemented and has been tested on several examples  including the rachet shown above and an escapement   but the code to combine pairwise places into a full place vocabulary is not yet finished. 
b. completing a qualitative mechanics 
the first step in using the place vocabulary is assigning frames of reference. reference frames are chosen to maximize dynamical information  i.e. along surface normals and surface contacts. nielsen has developed a qualitative 
1 	knowledge representation 
representation for vectors by taking lists of signs with respect to given reference frames. these qualitative vectors are used for representing contact directions  forces  velocities  and other parameters. 
　　our dynamics is based on qualitative state vectors  including activities like slide  roll  and collide. the first step in determing total state is finding what forces are possible and in which ways objects are free to move. to do this nielsen has developed a clean theory of  freedoms   see . given the freedoms  the possible motions can be ascertained for each kinematic state. once the motion for a state is known  the spatial relationships in the place vocabulary can be used to determine state transitions. at this writing the freedom computation has been implemented and tested  see  . 
	v . 	o t h e r q k s y s t e m s 
here we examine other qk efforts and relate them to our framework. the earliest are hayes' naive physics papers 1  1. his seminal concept of histories was one of the inspirations for this work  and his arguments about the locality of histories  i.e. things don't interact if they 
don't touch  indirectly suggest the connectivity hypothesis. we differ in our view of how rich and varied the spatio-temporal representations underlying histories must be  and see no clues in hayes' work pointing to the poverty conjecture. 
　　lozano-perez's work on spatial reasoning for robotics  which led to the configuration-space representation 1 is obviously pivotal to our approach. we expect that progress in robotics will lead to complementary progress in qk. 
　　gelseys system for reasoning about mechanisms 1 fits the md/pv model perfectly. his metric diagram is a 
constructive solid geometry cad system  and his place vocabulary is the set of motion envelopes and kinematic pairs computed from this representation. his system only performs kinematic analysis  it does not generate total states or full qualitative simulations   but one can easily imagine adding this capability to make a complete mechanisms reasoner we believe his geometric analysis  being heuristic  is more limited than our configuration-space approach. 
　　stanfill's system :1l is organized around prototypical objects  with all the advantages and limitations of that approach. 
　　several attempts to axiomatize qk have been made  notably by shoham   1  and davis . while suitably formal  neither have been very successful. shoham's formalization of freedoms is far more complex and less useful than nielsen's  who can handle surface contact and partially constrained objects. davis has made an excellent case for the addition of non-differential  conservation-like arguments to qualitative physics. however  the generality of his formalization is not yet convincing. 

	v i . 	d i s c u s s i o n 
a complete account of qualitative physics must include qualitative dynamics and qualitative kinematics. we have presented a framework for qk in hopes of speeding progress in this area. we believe the framework explains why there has been so little progress; many failures  never reported in the literature  have been attempts to build a purely qualitative kinematics. if the poverty conjecture is right much of this effort has been wasted. 
　　our claims are not all negative; we offer the md/pv model as a characterization of successful research in qk  both in our group and others cited above. the md/pv model offers a new set of research questions and opportunities: 
  form of metric diagram: there is a spectrum of potential representations for metric diagrams. little is currently known about which are useful for what tasks. 
  form of dynamics: when is a qualitative state vector description versus a process-centered description appropriate  are there other reasonable possibilities  can the distinctions introduced in qk provide a foundation for formalizing spatial derivatives  
  theory of places: what are the commonalities underlying place vocabularies across various domains  it appears convexity  or at least quasi-convexity  is important. more empirical studies are needed to gain the insight needed for a general theory. 
  links to vision and robotics: we view ullman's theory of visual routines 1 in part as a theory of human metric diagrams. understanding these routines better could lead to improvements in qk  and qk theories of place vocabularies may provide theoretical suggestions for what spatial descriptions people might be computing. 
	v i i . 	a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
this research was supported by the office of naval research  contract no. n1m-1-k-1. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
;l! allen  j.  maintaining knowledge about temporal intervals   tr-1  department of computer science  university of rochester  january 1 
 davis  e.  a logical framework for solid object physics  new york university computer science department technical report no. 1  october  1 
 de kleer. j.  causal and teleological reasoning in circuit recognition'' mit ai lab technical report no. 1  september  1 
'1  de kleer  j. and brown  j.  a qualitative physics based on confluences . artificial intelligence  1. 1 
 faltings  b.  a theory of qualitative kinematics in mechanisms   university of illinois at urbanachampaign  department of computer science technical report no. uiucdcs-r-1  may  1 
 faltings  b.  qualitative kinematics in mechanisms   ijcai-1  august  1. 
 1j forbus  k.  spatial and qualitative aspects of reasoning about motion   aaai-1  palo alto  california  august  1. 
 forbus  k.  a study of qualitative and geometric knowledge in reasoning about motion . mit ai lab technical report no. 1  february  1 
 forbus  k.  qualitative process theory  artificial intelligence  1 
 lo  gelsey  a.  automated reasoning about machine geometry and kinematics  to appear in the third ieee conference on ai applications  orlando  florida  february  1 
 hayes  p.  the naive physics manifesto  in expert systems in the micro-electronic age  d. michie  ed.   edinburgh university press  1 
 hayes  p.  naive physics 1: ontology for liquids  in hobbs  r.  moore  r.  eds.   formal theories of the 
commonsense world  ablex publishing corporation  norwood  new jersey  1 
1 hinton  c.  some demonstrations of the effects of structural descriptions in mental imagery . cognitive science  vol. 1  no. 1  july-september  1 
 kosslyn  s. image and mind harvard university press  cambridge  massachusetts  1 
 kuipers  b.  common sense causality: deriving behavior from structure  artificial intelligence  1  
1 
 lozano-perez  t.  spatial planning: a configuration space approach . ieee transactions on computers c-1. february  1 
 nielsen  p.  a qualitative approach to mechanical constraint   technical report in progress  december. 
1 
 l1j shoham  y.  naive kinematics: one aspect of shape  ijcai-1  los angeles  august  1 
 1  simmons  r.  representing and reasoning about change in geologic interpretation   mit artificial intelligence lab tr-1  december  1 
 stanfill  c.  the decomposition of a large domain: reasoning about machines  aaai-1  washington  d.c.. august  1 
 williams  b.  qualitative analysis of mos circuits . artificial intelligence  1  1 
1! ullman. s.   visual routines   in pinker  s.  ed.  
visual cognition. mit press  cambridge  ma. 1 
	forbus  nielson  and faltings 	1 
