 
　since hardly any of people's everyday decisions are made with certainty  it is often necessary to retract earlier conclusions on the basis of new input. this aspect of common-sense reasoning in humans is often cited as a raison d'dtre for non-monotonic theories. going beyond this intuitive notion  this paper is based on well-documented psychological experiments. in these experiments it turns out that inferences are often remarkably unresponsive to new input even if the original basis for the inferences is discredited. the focus in the present paper  therefore  is on modeling this pervasive  yet counter-intuitive retraction behavior. 
1. introduction 
　in everyday life we frequently draw conclusions which on the basis of further information may have to be retracted. artificial intelligence has been interested since its early days in the reasoning underlying belief for which there is no proof  and it has advanced several theories to deal with its non-monotonic character. the paradigmatic example is about tweety  who is a bird and therefore can fly  but who is subsequently found to be an ostrich. in real life  conclusions are not always so quickly withdrawn. since common sense reasoning in people is the prevalent motivation for non-monotonic theories  e.g.  winograd  1; mccarthy  1; mccarthy  1 **   this paper goes beyond artificial examples and looks at well-documented experiments in which nonmonotonic reasoning takes place. the present paper is divided in two parts. the first part reviews experiments on belief 
'author's address: psychological laboratory  montessorilaan 1  nijmegen  the netherlands. i am grateful to anthony jameson  eric meyer and peter shell for discussions about the work reported. 
**five out of seven uses mentioned by mccarthy f 1  are psychologically motivated. 
perseverence  the second part shows how the notions found there can be formalized to give a more coherent and transparent framework for the experimental paradigm. 
1. a case for non-monotonic reasoning in humans: 'debriefing' after deception experiments. 
　a speaker at a conference may be heartened afterwards by someone from the audience who congratulates him for his interesting and clear exposition. if later he finds that this person mistook him for a potential referee  his self-esteem may decline again somewhat but it will probably not sink all the way back to its original level. in contrast to the ai examples of belief revision  people are often reluctant to adjust their opinion after the original evidence is descredited. this phenomenon has received special attention in connnection with psychological experiments in which subjects are deceived about the true nature of the setting  and are later 'debriefed' about the manipulation  baumrind  1; holmes  1; ullman & jackson  1 . the subject must be convinced that the information was fraudulent  i.e. he must be dehoaxed. sometimes  the subject's feelings about himself  e.g. due to having behaved unethically  milgram  1   must be altered. this aspect concerns the subject's behavior  which cannot be refuted. dehoaxing on the other hand  concerns the experimenter's deception. for this aspect  conclusions accepted earlier during the experiment can be disproved. therefore  in the context of nonmonotonic reasoning the dehoaxing aspect of debriefing is the more appropriate one to study. 
1 experiments on dehoaxing per se 
　the aspect of dehoaxing would be difficult to isolate from the experiments  since these differ greatly in the nature and degree of deception. fortunately enough  many experiments have been conducted on dehoaxing per se  employing different designs  different domains  and varying degrees of external validity. a 

source 
valins 
1 walster et al. 1 
holmes 
1 
ross 
et al. 1 andersen etal. 1 
caretta et al. 1 domain 
s watches slides taken from playboy magazine s fills out a 'social aptitude 
achievement test' 
instructions on tape informs s he will receive electric shocks during subsequent period 
s discriminates authentic from unauthentic suicide notes 
s examines relationship between risk-taking and success as firefighter 
1 nixon voters were selected  vs. mcgovern voters  deception 
hartbeat feedback c hanging rate with some slides high  vs. low  scores are reported 
 no shocks are administered  
report of success  vs. failure  data suggestive of positive  vs. neg.  relationship 
 not applicable  debriefing information 
feedback was prere-
corded sound tape no such test exists experimenter interups and tells electrode is fake ratings were prepared in advance 
data on ability are 
manufactured 
watergate hearings perseverence after discrediting 
s prefers 'reinforced' slides 
s rates herself as similar to person with high  low  score 
arousal remains 
s rates herself according to original feedback 
s perseveres in estimates for new cases 
nixon voters retain positive feelings table 1. a representative selection of experiments on debriefing  with an approximate account of the setup. 'vs.' indicates  where applicable  the success vs. failure manipulation. 's' refers to the subject. 
	hoenkamp 	1 

sample of representative studies is summarized in table 1. as the paradigmatic example i will use an experiment by ross  lepper  and hubbard   which was very carefully designed and has been replicated many times. in it  the subject was presented with cards containing pairs of suicide notes. she was told that one note in each pair was genuine  the other bogus  and she was asked to indicate the genuine one. in addition she was informed about the average score in a pretest. the subject received false feedback indicating success or failure after each card. after completion of the task she was informed that the feedback had been determined prior to the experiment  and that it was not related to her actual performance  this was called outcome debriefing . nevertheless  the greater the apparent initial success  the higher she estimated her scores for past and future performances. in short  subjects showed a substantial perseverence of the initial  erroneous impressions. only after the process underlying the perseverence was explicitly discussed was the initial perception abandoned  the process debriefing . 
 ross et al.'s explanation for the phenomenon has essentially two parts. the first part stems from the literature on attribution theory: an individual who witnesses a surprising  or extreme  outcome generates  searches for  confirmatory evidence capable of explaining the observed outcome. second  if the original evidence for the outcome is removed  these antecedents may survive to give independent evidence for the outcome. for example  a subject may attribute her success on the discrimintion task to the fact that she was once personally acquainted with a suicide victim. 
 it may be argued that ross et al.'s experiment does not in itself prove the presence of self-generated confirmation-biased evidence. independent support for its presence has been found in various ways  however. for example  enhancing the possibility of reducing such evidence increases perseverence  anderson  cpper  ross  1 . on the other hand  when an interference task  e.g. counting backwards from 1 by 1  prevented the subject from engaging in explanations  no perseverence effect could be established  fleming & arrowood  1; barefoot &. straub  1 . 
1. a model for the process of debriefing 1 debriefing modeled using tms 
to introduce the model for ross et.al.'s experiment i will use 
doyle's  tms  a technique that allows for non-monotonic reasoning***. in this technique every assertion entering the data base is represented by a node. a record is kept of the dependency of nodes on inferential steps  i.e. the justifications of a node. this 
dependencies 
	belief 	in out 	i ii iii iv 
a. i am good at this kind of task b e     b. i performed well on this task c d   | c. e said i performed well     m  | d. e provided bogus information   ml| e.  self-generated confirm  evidence c     table 1. the debriefing experiment by ross et al. the colums labeled  dependencies' show how beliefs depend on other beliefs. a black dot indicates the belief is in for the situation before the experiment  i   after feedback  ii   after outcome debriefing  iii   and after process debriefing  iv . 
***the example is too simple to justify a comparison with other techniques. tms was chosen because it is the most general technique proposed to date. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
way the inference steps can be retraced to maintain consistency in a system. an assertion that is believed is called in. an assertion that depends on the fact that another assertion is not believed  i.e. is out   is called an assumption. in the debriefing example someone else's assertions are believed as ions as it is not believed that the other person is lying. if the latter belief comes in  the assumption will go out  is not believed anymore . the debriefing experiment is depicted in table 1. with the different stadia in terms of tms. the subject starts out with no particular beliefs about the task. when the experimenter says the subject has performed well  c   she infers that this is the case  b . from this she generalizes to the belief that she is generally good at recognizing real suicide notes  a . this can be probed  e.g.  by asking a subject how she would score in the future  or how she thinks she compares to other subjects. at the same time she generates confirmatory evidence  e   which comes in. this evidence itself is an additional justification for belief a.the debriefing takes place by informing the subject about the deception  d . smce b depends on d being out  b goes out when d comes in. but when asked  the subject will still believe a  on the basis of the independent support 
e. the process debriefing consists of an elaborate discussion of the perseverence phenomenon itself. the subject becomes aware of the self-generated confirmatory evidence she used  and leaves this out of the argument  i.e. e goes out  and as a consequence  a  goes out as well. 
 there is more to say about factors that are conducive to belief perseverance  see e.g.  schul & burnstein  1  . keeping things simple however  consider a variation of the experiment by ross etal. one could start the system with d in. in other words  the subject is told in advance that feedback will not be genuine. what will happen  we will come back to this after i have taken a closer look at the states of belief involved in the experiment. 
1 states of belief as admissible extensions 
　the model developed so far describes the intended behavior  i.e. in the ross et al.'s experiment  by showing how the subject gets from one state of belief to another. to ensure that the system represents the intended model  however  it must also rule out behavior not found in  or falsified by  the experiments. a way to find this out is by examining what belief states the system is capable of generating. to this end i will cast ross et al.'s experiment in the form of a non-monotonic theory. remember that at the heart of the model lies the notion of 'assumption.' specifically  the subject believes the experimenter in the absence of reasons not to. the reason for believing c in the presence of a and in the absence of b will be denoted as: 
a || b ||- c. if b is empty  1   the inference from a to c is like an ordinary implication****. if b has the form 'defeated r '  the reason r is called defeasable. let us describe the dependencies from table 1 as a set of reasons r  indexed by consequent : 
r	 r	 r	 r	 r	 r	 w i t h 
  - { ai  a1  %  c  d  e   rai-b||1||-a  ra1  e || 1|-a  rb-chdh-b  rc- 1ii 1 lr-c  rd= 1 || 1 ll-d  re= c || 1|-e. 
　from a set of reasons a set of extensions can be derived. they are the analogue of the 'deductive closure1 in ordinary logic  and represent the internally consistent beliefs. computing the closure  e.g.  ethcrington  1   r* of r gives two extensions: 
rj*  r u {a  b  c  c} 
　　　r1*- r u {a  c  d  e} which are precisely the statements believed before and after debriefing. now  where does the process debriefing come in  statement a perseveres via rc  re and ra1. at least one of these reasons is apparently attacked by e  the experimenter . reason rc cannot be refuted since c is a fact. so  by discussing the perseverence process itself  the experimenter either defeats rft  or 
****but note: a reason is used to justify a belief. it is not an inference rule. so while e in table 1 is justified by c  this does not mean it is logically implied by it; in general it isn't. 

ra1. let us first assume the former. this can be formalized by rewriting re  and r changing accordingly : rel c||defeated rcl ||-e rc1li1ll-defeated rei  
now  in addition to rx* and r1*  two new extensions result: 
r1*  r u {a  b  c  defeated rcl } 
　　　r1*- r u {d  c  defeated rcl } where r1* gives the belief state after process debriefing. r1* shows the efficacy of the process debriefing  i.e. as measured by the subject's prediction of her future performance on a similar experiment. another interpretation is that a subject may be forwarned not to generate confirmatory evidence  i.e. to have re1 ready in advance. a natural setting where this could occur is the courtroom. indeed  in such a situation subjects are much easier to debrief  hatvany & strack  1 . independent support to propose rcl and rc1 stem from the experiments with an interference task. the interference effectively blocks the generation of confirmatory evidence  or formally  defeats rej. in this case r1* and r1* represent the states of belief before and after outcome debriefing in the interference task. now rel and re1 have been sufficiently justified  it remains to discuss the role of ra1. it could be that this reason is defeated during process debriefing  although this cannot be ascertained on the basis of the experimental evidence currently available. in any case  it can be fromalized in a manner analoguous to our treatment of rc above. 
1 the model is neither too weak nor too strong 
　since the model proposed above is based on an existing formalism for non-monotonic reasoning  i want to relate it to a criticism that has been advanced concerning such formalisms. recently  hanks and mcdermott  questioned whether these formalisms produce die expected results. they provide axioms for a simple problem  the 'yale shooting scenario'  and show that a well-established technique  c.q. predicate-circumscription  produces not only the intended extension  but in addition one that is counter-intuitive. now  whereas hanks and mcdermott could have chosen between attacking either the axioms or the inference technique  they chose the latter. for this reason  in the section above i generated all the extensions of the proposed axioms for the ross et al. experiment  and checked if they indeed belonged to the states of belief i wanted to model. they did. so the model is guaranteed neither too weak  nor too strong in generating states of belief. yet  this is not enough to ensure the same holds for the intended behavior  i.e. for the sequence of states. to see this  suppose in the ross et al. experiment the subject is briefed in advance that the feedback will not be genuine. that is  we start in table 1 with d in. following through the experiment we will see that the same behavior ensues as before. in other words  the subject believes she performs well on the experiment even knowing beforehand that the feedback is bogus. this surely runs counter to our intuition. a similar reasoning as in the 'shooting scenario' therefore leads us to believe that our model  as defined by r  is too weak  it predicts unintended behavior . yet  let us stay in the vein of this paper  and sec if the prediction can be tested. in fact this has been done already bv wegner  coulton and wenzlaff  who briefed the subjects in advance with the same words that were used by ross et al. during debriefing. they found the same perseverence phenomenon  on the basis of which they rejected the theory of ross et al.  and formulated a principle of transparency of denial. this principle basically says that when people encounter denied information  that information is available despite the denial. however  in their experiment wegner et al. tell the subject in advance that the information she will obtain is false  i.e. the information is not available at that time. in my opinion it is not necessary to introduce a new principle. using our terminology  wegner et al seem to think they defeat reason rcj  whereas in fact they produce d  so that b cannot be derived but c can. whichever may be the case  the experiment confirms the counter-intuitive behavior predicted by our model. 
1. conclusions 
 people often cling to their initial beliefs more strongly than appears warranted. based on a wide variety of experimental settings  this paper undertook a formalization of this phenomenon. 
it may contribute to psychology and to al in the following way: 
for psychology: 
1. it formalizes and specifies experiments in the debriefing paradigm  and thus 
1. it oners a better framework for analyzing these experiments and comparing explanations forai: 
1. it demonstrates how truth maintenance techniques and nonmonotonic theories can be used in modeling experiments on belief revision 
1. it calls attention to the role of self-generated confirmatory evidence as an important factor in human non-monotonic reasoning 1. it demonstrates that intuitive appeal of predictions is not a reliable criterion for evaluating a descriptive model. 
