 
a persistent problem in machine planning is that of repairing plans that fail. two solutions have been suggested to deal with this problem: planning critics and met a-planning techniques. unfortunately  both of these suggestions suffer from lack of flexibility due to an extremely restricted view of how to describe planning failures. 
   this paper presents an alternative approach in which plan failures are described in terms of causal explanations of why they occurred. these explanations are used to access different abstract replanning strategies  which are then turned into specific changes to the faulty plans. the approach is demonstrated using examples from chef  a case-based planner that creates and debugs plans in the domain of szee hwan cooking. 
i. the problem of plan failure. 
   all planners face the problem of plans that fail. as a result  most planner's have some mechanism for plan repair or debugging. these have ranged from simple backup and replanning algorithms  to complex meta-planning techniques . unfortunately  all of these mechanisms have suffered from a very restricted view of what is involved in describing a failure. they describe failures in terms of the individual states that define them but are not concerned with the causes of those states. because of this  plan repair techniques have been limited to local changes that do not make use of the range of responses that a more global understanding of why a failure has occurred would allow. 
   this paper presents a different kind of approach to plan repair that uses a causal description of why a failure has occurred to index to a set of strategies for repairing it. this approach is embedded in the computer program chef  a case-based planner that creates new plans in the domain of szechwan cooking. when chef encounters a failure in one of its own plans  it explains why the failure has occurred  using a set of causal rules concerning the effects of the actions in its domain under different circumstances. this explanation includes a description of the steps and states that led to the failure as well as a description of the goals that were being planned for by those steps and states. this description is used to index to a set of abstract repair strategies appropriate to the general description of the problem. chef then tries to implement the different strategies and chooses the one best suited for the specific problem. because the planner has a detailed description of what has gone wrong in a situation  it is able to find and make use of strategies that are less general purpose but are more powerful in the specific situations. 
   *this report describes work done in the department of computer science at yale university and the computer science department at the university of chicago. it was supported in part by onr grant #n1k-1. 
   the problem that this technique addresses is one that crops up again and again in knowledge intensive systems: the problem of the control of knowledge access  1 1 . in this case  the problem takes the form of choosing which plan repair  among many  should be applied to a faulty plan. the goal is to have a planner that is able to diagnose its own failures as being one type or another and then use this diagnosis to choose and apply the change  or repair strategy  that will actually result in a correct plan. the approach described in this paper  one which also reflects the approach taken by human planners  allows a planner to do this diagnosis and repair without having to do an exhaustive or even extensive search of the possible results of applying the different plan changes that the planner knows about. 
ii. an overview of chef  
   chef is a case-based planner that  like other case-based reasoning systems  1 1 1 1   builds new plans out of its memory of old ones. chef's domain is szechwan cooking and its task is to build new recipes on the basis of a user's requests. chef's input is a set of goals for different tastes  textures  ingredients and types of dishes and its output is a single recipe that satisfies all of its goals. its basic algorithm is to find a past plan that satisfies as many of the most important goals as possible and then modify that plan to satisfy the other goals as well. 
   before searching for a plan to modify  chef examines the goals in its input and predicts any failures that might rise out the interactions between the plans for satisfying them. if a failure is predicted  chef adds a goal to avoid the failure it to it1 list of goals to satisfy and this new goal is also used to search for a plan. the power of chef lies in its ability to predict and thus avoid failures it has encountered before. the topic of this paper  however  is its ability to repair planning failures when it encounters them. 
chef consists of six modules: 
  the anticipator predicts planning problems on the basis of the failures that have been caused by the interaction of goals similar to those in the current input. 
  the retriever searches chef's plan memory for a plan that satisfies as many of the current goals as possible while avoiding the problems that the anticipator has predicted. 
  the modifier alters the plan found by the re-
triever to achieve any goals from the input that it does not satisfy. 
t the repairer is called if a plan fails. it builds up a 
causal explanation of the failure  repairs the plan and then hands it to the storer for indexing. 
	hammond 	1 

  the assignee  uses the causal explanation built by the repairer to determine the features which will predict this failure in the future. 
  the storer places new plans in memory  indexed by the goals that they satisfy and the problems that they avoid. 
the important module for plan repair is the repairer. 
this module is handed a plan only after it has been run in chef's version of the real world  a  cook's world  simulation in which the effects of actions are symbolically computed. the rules used in this simulation are able to describe the results of the plan chef has created in sufficient detail for it to notice the difference between successful and unsuccessful plans. 
   the final states of a simulation are placed on a table of results that chef compares against the goals that it believes that a plan should satisfy. plans that fail in one way or another to satisfy all of the goals of a plan are handed to the repairer for repair. 
iii. chef's repair algorithm. 
chef's process of failure repair has five phases to it: 
  notice the failure. 
  build a causal explanation of why it happened. 
  use the explanation to find a planning top with repair strategies. 
  apply each of the general repair strategies using the specifics of the problem. 
  choose and implement the best repair. 
   the reason behind most of these steps is straightforward. chef has to notice a failure before it can react to it at all. it has to try each of its strategies in order to choose the best one. it has to implement one of them to fix the plan. the only steps that are not quite as straightforward are the second and third steps of building an explanation and using it to find a thematic organization packet  or top. 
   the explanation that chef builds for a failure is a causal description of why that failure occurred. these causal descriptions correspond to planning tops. these tops are planning versions of the understanding structures suggested by schank to store information that relates to complex interactions of goals. 
   in chef  each top stores the repair strategies that will fix the faulty plans it describes. these top1 are not just descriptions of problems. they are descriptions of problems that are paired with the solutions that can be applied to fix the problems. the strategies under a top are those and only those alterations of the causal structure of the problem described by the top that can solve that problem. the strategies themselves are not specific repairs  they are the abstract descriptions of changes in the causality of the situation that chef knows about. finding a top that corresponds to a problem means finding the possible repairs that can be used to fix that problem. 
   each of chef's tops is stored in memory  indexed by the features of the explanation that describes the problem the top deals with. to get to the strategies that will deal with a problem  then  chef has to explain why it happened and then use this explanation to find the top and strategies that will fix the plan. this is a simple idea: the solution to any problem depends on 
1 	cognitive modeling 
 size object  beef1  size  chuik   
 size object  br1cc1li1  size  chumk   
 texture object  beef1  texture  teider   
 texture object  broccoli1  texture  soggy    taste object  beef1  taste  savory iiteisity  1.    
 taste object  broccoli1  taste  savory iiteisity  1.    
 taste object  dish  
taste  aid  salty iiteisity  1.   
 garlicy iiteisity  1.    savory ikteisity  1.     
figure 1: section of plan result table. 
the underlying causality of the problem. it makes sense  then  to index solutions to problems under the causal descriptions of the problem themselves so that these descriptions can be used to access the appropriate solutions. 
iv. yfqtiqinq the failvre 
   after chef has built a plan  it runs a simulation of it. this simulation is the program's equivalent of the real world and a plan that makes it to simulation is considered to be complete. the result of this simulation is a table of statements that characterize the final states of the objects manipulated by the plan. 
   for example  after running a plan to make a beef and broccoli dish the table of results includes descriptions of the taste  texture and size of the different ingredients as well as the tastes includes in the dish as a whole  figure 1 . 
   once a simulation is over  chef checks the states on this table against the goals that it believes should be satisfied by the plan that it has just run. these goals take the form of state descriptions of the ingredients  the overall dish and the compound items that are built along the way. goals have the same form as the states placed on the simulator's result table  allowing chef to test for their presence after a simulation. chef tests for the satisfaction of goals by comparing expected states against those on the table of results. 
   if a plan's goal is not found on the result table it generates when run  then the plan has not succeeded in achieving it and is considered a failure. this is the first kind of failure that chef can recognize. it is the failure of a plan to achieve one of its goals. another type of failure is when a state is present on the table of results that is itself an objectionable state. these  objectionable  states include unwanted textures {e.g.  soggy broccoli and flat souffles  and undesirable tastes  e.g.  the iodine taste of fish and the oily taste of grease . the set of states that is considered objectionable is dynamic  changing in response to the different types of plans that are created. some of these states are associated with particular types of dishes and only checked for when that type of dish is being made while others are more general and are always checked for. if one of these states is found on the table of results  the fact that it is there is also considered a failure of the proper running of the plan. 
   one example of a failure that is both a failure to satisfy a goal and the inclusion of a negative state is a problem that arises when chef is running a plan it has built for strawberrysouffle. to build this plan  chef has modified an existing vanilla-souffle plan  adding strawberries to the original. unfortunately  the strawberries add extra liquid  which creates 

an imbalance between the liquid in the souffle batter and leavening. this causes the souffte to fall. this fact is recorded by the simulation of the plan  and chef picks up the failure by testing the plan against the goals it is supposed to achieve. 
checking goals of recipe -  strawberry-souffle 
- checking goal -  
it should be the cat* that: the batttr is risen. 
the goal: the batter is now risen. is not satisfied. 
it is instsad ths cass that: the battsr is flat. 
- checking for negative features -  unfortunately: ths battsr is now a bad texture. in that: the batter is now flat. 
recipe -  strawberry-souffle has failed goals. 
	v. 	explaining the failvre 
   once a failure has been recognized  chef sets upon the task of building a causal explanation of why it has occurred. chef needs this explanation because the causal descriptions of failures are used to access the strategies that can be applied to them. the best way to organize plan repairs is under the descriptions of the problems that they solve so that the problem itself is a pointer to the solution. and the best description in this case is a causal explanation of the problem. 
   to build its explanations  chef uses the trace left by the forward chaining of the simulator. steps are connected to the states that follow from them by result links. states lead 
into new steps by filling slots and by satisfying preconditions. failures are traced back from the failed states themselves through the steps that caused them  back to the conditions that caused the steps to fail  and so on back to the step that caused the unexpected condition itself. 
   chef's movement through the causal network built up by the simulator is controlled by a set of explanation questions. these questions tell chef when to chain back for causes and when to chain forward for goals that might be satisfied by a particular state or step. these questions are aimed at discovering the actual step that caused the failure  the conditions that had to be true for it to occur  the cause of those conditions and the goals that the various steps and states were trying to satisfy. 
   in the example of the failed strawberry souflte  chef starts with the fact that the batter has ended up flat and chains back through the steps and their results to find that the chopped strawberries are the actual cause of the problem. on the path to this discovery  it finds that the relationship between liquid and leavening that is needed to make the souffle rise is out of balance and that the goal being served by the the strawberries is that of having the overall dish taste like berries. all of these facts participate in choosing the abstract strategies that will be suggested to repair the plan. 
askiig tee questioi:  what is the failure ' 
aisver-  the failure is: it is not the case that: the batter is now risen. 
askiig tee questioi: 'what is the preferred state ' aiswer-  the preferred state is: 
the batter is now risen. 
askiig tee questioi: 'whet was the plan to achieve 
the preferred stats 1 
aiswer-  the plan was: 
bake the better for twenty five minutes. 
askiig tee questioi: 'what were the conditions that led to the failure 1 aiswer~  the condition was: 
there is an imbalance between the whipped stuff and the thin liquid. 
only one aspect of the imbalance: there is an imbalance between the whipped stuff and the thin liquid is unexpected. 
the state: 
there is whipped stuff in the bowl from the total equaling 1 teaspoons  
normally participates in the goal: the batter is now risen. 
only the other aspect of the imbalance: there is thin liquid in ths bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons 
is an unexpected condition. 
¡¡askiig tee questioi: 'what caused the conditions that led to the failure ' 
aiswer-  there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons  was caused by: pulp the strawberry. 
askiig tee questioi: 'do the conditions that caused the failure satisfy any goals ' 
aiswer-  the condition: there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons 
is a side effect only and meets no goals. 
askiig tee questioi: 'what goals does the step that caused the condition enabling the failure satisfy ' aiswer-  the step: pulp the strawberry. establishes the preconditions for: nix the strawberry with the vanilla  egg white  egg yolk  milk  sugar  salt  flour and butter. 
this in turn lsads to ths satisfaction of: the dish now tastes like berries. 
vi. indexing to the top 
   chef's repair strategies are all stored under planning tops  structures that correspond to different planning problems. the tops themselves are stored in a discrimination network  indexed by the features of the explanations they correspond to. the strategies organized under a top describe the fixes to the failed plans described by the top. these fixes are designed to repair the failure without interfering with the other goals in any plan that the top describes. chef has sixteen tops that correspond to different causal situations and store different repair strategies. these tops include structures such as side-effect:disabled-condition:balance and side-featureienables-bad-condition. the strategies include changes such as reorder steps  remove condition  and split-and-reform step. 
   chef uses the answers to each of its explanation questions as an index through a discrimination network that organizes its tops. the features that are important in this discrimination include the nature of the violated condition  the temporal relationship between the steps and the nature of the failure itself. 
	hammond 	1 

   there are three parts to each of chef's repair tops: the indices used to access it  the repair strategies stored under it and the features of the situation that it describes that are to be marked as predictive of the problem later on. in this paper  only the first two of these are important  the indices and strategies. the answers to the explanation questions chef has asked are used to find a top. the choice of a top is dependent on the causality of the problem and each top corresponds to a different causal situation. the strategies that are stored under a top are a reflection of this  in that they are those and only those strategies that can be applied to repair the problem described by the top. the causal description of a problem is used to access the top that corresponds to it and thus access the strategies that can be applied to solve it. 
   in the case of the strawberry souffle failure  the fact that the condition violated in the plan is a balance requirement between two amounts and the fact that the condition that causes the imbalance is a side-effect of a step that does not satisfy any goals are very important in discriminating down to the top that corresponds to the situation. if the condition that caused the imbalance had not been a side-effect or the requirement had not been one for a balance condition  different tops  with different strategies would have been found. 
searching for top using following indices: 
failure   it is not the case that: the batter is now risen. 
initial plan = bake the batter for twenty five minutes. 
condition enabling failure = there is an imbalance between the whipped stuff and the thin liquid. 
cause of condition = pulp the strawberry. 
the goals enabled by the condition * mil the goals that the step causing the condition enables   the dish now tastes like berries. 
found top -  se:dc:b 
top -  side-effect:disabled-coiditioi:balaice has 1 strategies associated with it: 
alter-plai:side-effect 	alter-plai:precoiditioi 
adjumct-plai 	recover 
adjust-balaice:up 
side-effect:disabled-condition 
is recognized when one step for satisfying a goal has a sideeffect which disables a satisfaction condition for a later step and this satisfaction condition is a balance requirement between two states. each strategy under this top suggests an alteration to the initial plan that will cause a break in one part of this causal chain. each change suggested by a strategy is  in principle  sufficient to repair the plan. so they are used individually and are not designed to be used in concert. each changes one link in 
the causal chain that leads to the failure. the strategies under 
side-effect:disabled-condition:balanceare: 
e alter-plan:side-effect: replace the step that causes the side effect with one that does not. the new step must satisfy the goals of the initial step. 
e alter-plan:precondition: replace the step that has the violated condition with a step that satisfies the same goals but does not have the same condition. 
e adjunct-plan: add a new step that is run concurrent 
1 	cognitive modeling 
with the step that has the violated condition that will allow it to satisfy the goal even in the presence of the violation. 
e recover: add a new step between the step that causes the side-effect and the step that it blocks that removes the violating condition. 
e adjust-balance:up: adjust the imbalance between conditions by adding more of what the balance lacks. 
each of these five strategies suggests a change in the causal situation that will solve the current problem without affecting the other goals of the plan. 
   if the features of the problem had been different  the top and the strategies found would also be different. for example  if the condition violated by the side-effect had not been a balance condition  the top found would have been the more general side-effect:disabled-condition structure that lacks the adjust-balance:up strategy. as the situation changes  the fixes that can be applied to it change and thus the top and strategies that are found to deal with it change as well. 
vii- applying the strategies 
   once a top has been found  the strategies that are stored under it are applied to the problem at hand. for chef  applying a strategy means generating the specific change to the failed plan that is suggested when the abstract strategy is filled in with the specifics of the current situation. the idea here is to take an abstract strategy such as recover  figure 1  and fill it in with the specific states that it suggests recovery from. in this way a general strategy for repairing a plan becomes a specific change to the plan at hand. 
 def:strat recover bindings 
  condition* expanswer-condition 
    step* expanswer-step  question 
 enter-text   is there a plan to recover from m 
            condition*  test  search-step-memory *condition* nil  exit-text   there is a plan  *answer*  fail-text   mo recover plan found    
response 
 text   response: after doing step:   *step* t 
	  	do:   *answer*  
action  after *step* *answer*    
figure 1: definition of the recover strategy 
   each strategy has two parts: a test and a response. the test under each strategy determines whether or not the strategy has an implementation in the current situation. the response is the change that is suggested. in most cases  the results of the test run by the strategy is used in the response. for example  one of chef's strategies is recover  which suggests adding a new step between two existing ones that removes a side-effect of the first before it interferes with the second. the test on recover checks for the existence of a step that will work for the particular problem. the response is a set of instructions that will insert that step between the two existing ones. the action that is returned when chef searches for the step described by recover is used in building the response. the general format of the strategies is to build a test and then use the response to that test in building the set of instructions that chef has to follow in order to implement the change directed by the strategy. 
   in building the tests and responses during the application of a strategy to a particular problem  chef uses the answers to its explanation questions to fill in the specific steps and states that the strategy will test and possible alter. the tests and responses are actually empty frames that are filled with the specifics of the the current explanation. the strategy recover  for example  uses the answer to the question of what condition caused the current failure to construct its test and the answer to the question of what step caused that condition to build its response. this is so it can find a step that will remove the condition and run it immediately after the condition arises. the definition of each strategy refers to the answers to the explanation questions that are important to it  making it possible to build the specific test and response at the appropriate time. each definition begins with a binding of the existing explanation answers to variables that the strategy will then use to construct its query and response. when the strategy is actually applied  the specific answers are inserted into the appropriate slots in the strategy structure. 
   in the example of the strawberry souffle  the five strategies associated with the top end up generating four possible changes that will repair the plan. chef generates all possible changes so that it can compare the specific changes and choose which one to actually implement on the basis of the changes themselves rather than on the basis of the abstract strategies. 
applying top -  
side-effect:disabled-condition:balahce to failure it is not the case that: the batter is now risen - in recipe bad-strawberry-souffle 
asking questions needed lor evaluating strategy: 
alter-plan:side-effect 
asking -  is there an alternative to 
 pulp the strawberry  that will enable 
 the dish now tastes like berries  which does not cause 
there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons 
response: instead of doing: pulp the strawberry do: using the strawberry preserves. 
asking questions needed for evaluating strategy: alter-plan:precondition 
asking -  
is there an alternative to 
 bake the batter for twenty five minutes  that will satisfy 
 the batter is now risen  which does not require 
it is not the case that: there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons. 
response: no alternate plan found 
asking questions needed for evaluating strategy: adjunct-plan 
asking -  
is there an adjunct plan that will disable 
there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons 
that can be run with 
bake the batter for twenty five minutes. 
response: before doing step: pour the egg yolk  egg white  vanilla  sugar  strawberry  salt  milk  flour and butter into a baking-dish. 
do: nix the flour with the egg  spices  strawberry  salt  milk  flour and butter. 
asking questions needed for evaluating strategy: recover 
asking -  
is there a plan to recover from there is thin liquid in the bowl from the strawberry equaling 1 teaspoons 
response: after doing step: chop the strawberry do: drain the strawberry. 
asking questions needed for evaluating strategy: 
adjust-balance 
asking -  
can we add more whipped stuff to bad-strawberry-souffle 
response: increase the amount of egg white used. 
   each of chef's strategies generates a change that is a combination of the abstract description of a repair provided by the strategy itself and the specifics of the failed plan. because each top only stores those strategies that will repair the causal situation described by it and used to find it  any one of them will fix the plan if implemented. because each top does have multiple strategies  however  chef must have a mechanism for not only generating these changes  but also choosing between them. 
viii. choosing the repair 
once all of the possible repairs to a failed plan are generated  
chef has to choose which one it is going to implement. to do this chef has a set of rules concerning the relative merits of different changes. by comparing the changes suggested by the different strategies to one another using these heuristics  chef comes up with the one that it thinks is most desirable. 
   this set of heuristics is the compilation of general knowledge of planning combined with knowledge from the domain about what sort of changes will be least likely to have side-effects. some of these heuristics are closely tied to the domain  such as 
 it is easier to add a preparation step than a cooking step.  and  it is better to add something that is already in the recipe than something new.'1 others are more domain independent  such as  it is better to add a single step than to add many steps.  and  it is better to replace a step than add a new step.  
   once a change is selected  chef actually implements the change using its procedural knowledge of how to add new steps  split steps into pieces  remove steps and add or increase ingredients. 
   in the strawberry souffle example  the final repair that is chosen is to add more egg white to the recipe. this change is generated by the strategy adjust-balance:up which sug-
gests altering the down side of a relationship between ingredients that has been placed out of balance. this repair is picked because it is the least violent change to the plan that can be made 
	hammond 	1 

and has the least likelihood of creating one problem as it solves another. 
	ix. 	the repairs 
   the repair strategies used by chef owe a great deal to the work on plan repair that has preceded it  1 1 . chef's repair rules  however  are somewhat more detailed than those that have gone before and make greater use of an organization that links the description of a problem to the solutions that can be applied to it. 
   chef uses seventeen general repair rules in the normal course of its planning. each one of these is associated with one or more tops and suggests a fix to a specific causal problem. each one of these rules carries with it a general description of a fix to a plan  through reordering of steps  an alteration of the objects involved or a change of actions. these general descriptions are filled in with the specific states that the planner is concerned with at the time when the repair rule is suggested. 
these strategies are: 
  alter-plan:side-effect: replace the step that causes the violating condition with one that does not have the same side-effect but achieves the same goal. 
  alter-plan:precondition: replace the step with the violated precondition with one that does not have the same precondition but achieves the same goal. 
  recover: add a step that will remove the side-effect before the step it interferes with is run. 
  reorder: reorder the running of two steps with respect to each other. 
  adjust-balance:up: increase the down side of a vi-olated balance relationship. 
  adjust-balance:down: decrease the up side of a violated balance relationship. 
  adjunct-plan:remove: add a new step to be run along with a step that causes a side-effect that removes the side-effect as it is created. 
  adjunct-plan:protect: add a new step to be run along with a step that is affected by an existing condition that allows the initial step to run as usual. 
  alter-time.up: increase the duration of a step. 
  alter-time:down: decrease the duration of a step. 
  alter-item: replace an existing ingredient with one that have the desired features but not an undesired one. 
  alter-tool: replace an existing tool with one that has the desired effect but does not cause an undesired one. 
  split-and-reform: split the step into two separate steps and run them independently. 
  alter-placement:before: move an existing step to run before another one. 
  alter-placement:after: move an existing step to run after another one. 
  alter-feature: add a step that will change an unde-sired attribute to the desired one. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
  remove-feature: add a step that will remove an inherent feature from an item. 
   each of these strategies is associated with one or more planning tops. each top is indexed by a general description of the type of plan failure that its strategies can repair. this allows the explanation of a failure to be used to access the top that contains the strategies that can repair it. 
	x. 	conclusions 
   by explaining plan failures chef is able to make use of a broad range of plan repairs that a less informed system would not be able to apply reliably. the explanation gives the planner the knowledge it needs to chose those and only those repairs that will fix a plan without introducing new problems to it. as a result  strategies with greater power but less general applicability can be used with confidence. further  by dividing the task of plan repair into diagnosis and treatment the system has the flexibility to try multiple strategies for repairing a single failure and then choose the one most appropriate for the particular problem. the method as a whole  then  gains in range of different strategies that can be applied and the power of individual strategies. 
