proving facts about   i   
michael millera'b and donald perlisa-c 
a	b	c
computer science 	systems research 	nstitute for advanced department 	center 	computer studies 
university -of maryland college park  maryland usa 1 

	miller and perlis 	1 

ability to say x. that is  the problem really seems to be asking   what statement  when made by anyone  will convince the princess that the person making the statement is a rich knave.  this then is the first problem with that representation:   i   should not be bound to a fixed individual  but should represent any  man in the street  who might state x. we then suggest the alternative version: 

     we claim to have now adequately represented the goal statement; but this is still not enough. for although this goal statement expresses what we want  there are other problems arising from the truth conditions of utterances which enter into other axioms in the problem representation. 
hi. utterance instances 
     this brings us to what we think is the key issue in this pussle  and which has broader significance as well. specifically  it is that utterances are instances of statement uses  and it is these instances that  in general  have truth-values  rather than the statement in and of itself. in particular  terms in a statement may have no definite reference outside of the context of an utterance. although this is familiar to linguists* and philosophers  it is the so-called problem of indexicals  it is worth going into detail in the current paper  since the issue of representing knowledge in the knights and knaves problem hinges on this very phenomenon. 
     typically  we think of a statement as being either true or false. this  however  is not always the case. for example  the statement: 
 i am a knave  
will have a truth-value dependent upon who the speaker is; and so would be falsely uttered by any knight and truly by any knave.** thus statements that contain indexicals  the word   i   in the above example  have meanings  and hence truth-values  that depend upon context. 
     because of the indeterminacy of truth-values of sentences that contain indexicals  we will only refer to the truth-value of utterance-instances of such statements. an utterance-instance of a statement contains a context in which the statement was  or is  made including who the utterer is. 
iv.  who a m i   
　　'including those who work in natural language processing; for tor instance  allen 1|   allen and perrault 1|   harper and charniak 1 . 
　　 hence  this statement can be uttered by neither knights ner knates  in the knights sni kneves problem! 
1 	knowledge representation 
     if we look closely at any of ohlbach's representations of the knights and knaves problem  we notice that the constant   i   seems to be playing two different roles. in all of his goal statements   i   is presumably used as a particular person. for example ohlbach's second goal statement  ohl  illustrates this usage. on the other hand  in the intended solution to the problem  the  x  of the goal statement is bound to anriki:... 
and not rich i   knave i   
where  the same symbol   i   appears as before but now what is of interest is its presence inside the  x  in cansay i x ; i.e.  as part of a potential utterance whose truth value depends upon who the speaker is. that is  any number of people might utter anriki  and its meaning would be different in each case. we now have an utterance-instance and need to know who   1   is before assigning a truth-value. thus    i   must be viewed as a pronoun and not a person here. in particular  it is the knighthood or  knavehood  of   i   which determines the truth of anriki. of course  in the world in question  only knaves  and rich ones at that  could utter anriki. but that is the point; the princess must be able to deduce precisely that fact: that anyone at all who utters anriki must consequently be a rich knave. 
     in what follows  we have removed this ambiguity by introducing a new predicate  tu  into the language of knights and knaves. tu is used as a 1-place predicate expression with its first argument being a person and its second an utterance. intuitively  tu p t  is true if and only if t is true when uttered by person p. more precisely  we say tu p t  is true if and only if the substitution-instance of t resulting from replacing all occurrences of   i   in t by  p  is true. thus the statement: 
　　　　　　tu john 'i am six feet tall   is true if and only if john  the utterer  is indeed six feet tall.-  
v. notation and axioms 
     we now introduce our notation for representing the problem. we use a first-order theory which contains the following: 
i: 	constant  the word  i   
knave: function letter  knave x  stands for the term 
　　　　 x is a knave   rich: function letter 


vi. discussion 
     ohlbach has pointed out an interesting problem for knowledge representation. we agree in principle with his conclusion that knowledge representation is hard. in fact  if someone has to invent a new trick each time they wished to represent a problem  the task would become hopeless. furthermore  if the language used by the ai practitioner forced the need for tricks  then there would certainly be an argument for selecting another language. 
     we feel  however  that neither first-order logic nor automatic theorem-proving imposes any such restriction on the knights and knaves problem. the complexity that ohlbach discovered in trying to represent this problem is due to indexicals. in fact  his second argument to  t  might be dealing with indexical-binding in some way. we have found that a proper treatment of indexical-binding makes for a natural and correct  in that a proper solution is found  representation of knights and knaves. 
     furthermore  we feel that this problem is indicative of a whole class of problems that can be handled in a similar fashion  i.e.  not dependent upon isolated or ad hoc tricks. in knights and knaves we defined tu in terms of the indexical   i   only. this is because   i   is the only indexical of importance in this problem. in broader contexts  however  this would be insufficient. it will be interesting to see how well generalizations of tu handle other indexicals and other problems. 
