 
　　we show here how we have been able  thanks to the use of artifical intelligence techniques  to find a neat solution to the problem of the automation of reliability studies. we have introduced rule-based representation at two levels : - the modelling of the studied system  which is very general and versatile  and nevertheless quantifiable because of the rule-base re-
presentation. 
- the storage of the reliability engineers knowledge about failure modes and effects for conventional components. 
the productivity of the reliability studies has been substantially improved with this approach. 
keywords : reliability - reliability model - automation - expert system - event sequences. 
	i 	introduction 
　　as systems involved in human activity become increasingly sophisticated and as their destructive power grows  the need for more and more complex reliability and safety studies is more acutely felt. 
some attempts / l / /1/ have been made to automate reliability studies using an algorithmic approach  but they have been limited because the models used were not general enough  and could hardly allow the introduction of knowledge on studied systems. therefore  edf  electricity de france  has chosen a different and original approach  based on expert systems  which involves two levels of rules : 
- a knowledge level  using first order rules. this level is the expert system concerning the studied systems. 
- a modelling level  which results from the application of the knowledge rules to a minimum  simplified  essentially topological  description of the studied system. 
according to the nature of the studied system  two types of modelling are used. - if there are no dependencies between the components of the studied system  modelling can be simple  and results  in a straightforward way  to a very commonly used reliability model  called fault-tree. an expert system called express  building fault-trees for thermo-hydraulic systems is now operational /1/. 
n. viliatte 
university pierre et marie curie 
1 place jussieu 
1 paris france 
- but  if there are dependencies  for example  a diesel generator starts when a normal power supply fails   another type of modelling has to be used  either to solve the whole problem  or as a complement to the fault-tree. this is why we have created a new model that makes it possible to introduce all the information on the propagation of interactions throughout the system  whereas the fault-tree model cannot. at the same t i me  we have created a specialized inference engine called gsi  able to derive from this model a 
fully automatic computation of a system failure probability. gsi is designed to take into account all the dependencies in the calculation of the system failure probability. 
　　since gsi  as conventional programs that deal with fault-trees  does not contain any knowledge about studied systems  we have introduced the reliability engineers' knowledge in an expert system  that can automatically generate the gsi model of a system  from the minimum information needed to describe i t . 

bouissou and villiate 1 

   the use of such models has been considerably limited so far by the fact that the number of states increases very quickly with the size of the system  for example  a system with n compo-
nents  if each component has only two states  working  failed  may have 1 states ! . moreover  a slight modification of the hypotheses about the system thouroughly changes the graph ! this is why we have developed : 
1  a reliability calculation method /1/  based on sequences of events  that can be used for big graphs  over 1 states   whereas conventional methods are limited to graphs covering about 1 states at most. the  secret  of the method lies simply in the omission of what is negligible  and in the awareness of the extent of what has been neglected. 
1  the gsi rule based model /1/ /1/  to replace the transition matrix of the graph.that model contains all the information necessary to build the matrix automatically but is  of course  much more readable  modular  modifiable... 
/1/. 
ii the gsi model : 
　　such a model  associated with the specialized inference engine we have developed  generation of sequences by inference   is a real expert system for the system modelled. 
   by merely introducing minor changes in the facts or rules such information as the system failure probability for different missions  with different initial states..can easily be obtained. 
what is this model like   it includes : - a list of components and variables of the system  with their initial state. 
  1 distinct rule bases : 
- the interaction rule base describing the propagation of information through the system. example  
if water-supply -  none  or 
power-supply -  none  or pump -  failed  then pump-flow :- 1 
this is one of the types of rules used in diagnosis problems. for example  see the  simulation rules  of /1/ . 
- the occurrence rule base  indicating what can happen in the current state of the system. examples  if diesel-generator -  operating  then possible 
    diesel-generator :-  short-failure     diesel-generator :-  long-failure   if diesel-generator -  required-to-start  then possible 
 diesel-generator :-  operating   
 diesel-generator :-  fail-to-start   
- the failure rule base  indicating whether the system is failed. example  
if  pump-flowl + pump-flow1  1 then failure :-  yes  
　　with this qualitative knowledge  gsi can automatically generate 	the 	sequences between any given initial 	state of the system and a failed sta-
te. if  	moreover  	the 	occurrence 	rates 	of the 
1 	knowledge representation 
events listed in the occurrence rules are entered into gsi  it can compute their probabilities. an expert system has then been created for the studied system. 
i l l entering the reliability engineers' knowledge 
　　gsi is a general tool which  itself  does not contain knowledge about the studied systems. so  it is interesting to automate the writing of the gsi model as much as possible by using an expert system. so far  we have created such a knowledge base for power supply systems  and we are going to describe its use. 
　　to implement that knowledge-base  we have used the general-purpose alouette inference engine./ /. 
　　the following diagram shows the different steps  automatically linked  of the creation of a complete gsi model  using the expert system. 


  grid   next-item   cbl     cbl 	  next-item   bb   
  bbl   target   yes     grid   source   yes     dg   source   yes   
  grid   nature   grid   
	  bb 	  nature   busbar  
	  dg 	  nature   diesel-generator   
　　  cbl   nature   circuit-breaker   step 1 : 
　　a general rule base  1    1 rules    valid for any electrical or hydraulic system  builds the paths from a source to a target using these initials facts. this rule base is also used by express. in our example  two paths are created : bbl-by-grid and bbl-by-dg. 
step 1 : 
　　at this point  the user must indicate the priorities of the different possible paths to the expert system. 
in our example  he will have to enter the two facts : 
  bbl-by-grid   priority   1   
	  bbl-by-dg 	  priority   1   
step 1 : 
　　some general facts  1   valid for any electrical system  are grouped with the facts  1   and  1 . they describe all that can happen to electrical components  according to their nature  and their state. for example  a circuit-breaker can 
open inadvertently  only if it is closed  and operable. this event involves two variables which represent : 
- the position of the c.b.  closed/open  
- its operating state  ok / failed  
　　this is described in the facts base by the following facts : 
  circuit-breaker  failure-mode   inadv-opening  
  inadv-opening  initial-condition   initl   
  inadv-opening  initial-condition   init1   
  initl   name   component   
  initl   value  ok   
  init1   name   state   
  init1   value   closed   
  inadv-opening  result  resull   
  inadv-opening  result  resul1     resull   name   component   
  resull   value  failed   
  resul1   name   state   
  resul1   value  open   
the other failure modes taken into account so far are : 
- stuck-open or stuck-closed circuit-breakers 
- short-circuits on the grid  the transformers  the bus-bars 
- loss of power on the grid 
- diesel generator failure to start upon demand and while operating. 
the description adopted for failure modes makes it easy to introduce new ones ; for example  it 
may be useful to distinguish between the different failure modes of the same component according to the different repair times of the various failures. 
	geller and shapiro 	1 

　　once the whole gsi input file has been generated  gsi can be run ; it automatically gives the reliability of the system  and the most probable sequences. this is very useful to detect the weak points of the system. 
　　in our example  gsi generates the following interesting sequences  showing the effects of incorrect responses of the circuit-breakers   their numbers refer to their places in the output file  where they are arranged in decreasing order of probability. the total number of sequences with no repair is 1.  

　　for our very simple example  the general knowledge of the expert system proved to be sufficient to describe all the functioning rules of the studied system. 
of course  it is not always true  for an obvious reason : the expert system is given only minimum information describing an electrical system  and  of course  it can not guess its particular features. 
　　this is why a review of the automatically created gsi model is necessary. at this point by slight modifications  the user can easily introduce for instance the repair priorities  a frequent type of dependencies   the fact that a certain circuit-breaker has a higher failure rate than the others  because it works under adverse conditions....etc  see /1/ /1/ for a full example of gsi model and of effects of modifications  . 
iv performances 
 * a  hand-made  gsi model has been built for the 1kv power supply of the paluel french nuclear power plant. 1 engineer-months were required to develop this model and find all the results. by conventional methods  it had taken 1 enginneer-months. 
of course many other results were simultaneously obtained. the model includes 1 components ; each of them has at least 1 states  for example : operable  short failure  long failure . this model is run some 1' on an ibm 1 with a probability threshold that gives a satisfactory precision. the number of selected sequences is 1. 
 * the application of the expert system to a simplified version of the system quoted above  incorporating ; 1 circuit-breakers  1 busbars  1 diesel-generators  1 transformers  1 grids  gives the following cpu times for the steps described 
in section i i i ; 
- step 1 	: 1s 
- steps 1 and 1 : 1s 
- compilation of the gsi model : 1s 
- gsi model run  with a good precision  the neglected sequences represent 1% of the result  : 1s. 1 sequences were selected. 
1 	knowledge representation 
v conclusion : 
　　the adoption of an easily modifiable  rule-based  quantification model  the gsi model  proved to be very efficient  because it permits a two step modelling procedure. 
　1  the expert system  from the minimum information needed to describe the studied system  automatically creates a preliminary version of the model. 
　1  then  the reliability engineer transforms that sketch in a final  very detailed model. in the design phase of a system  the first step provides enough information  and is quick enough. it takes less than one hour to change some facts in the topological description of the system and spot the weak points of the new design. in a detailed reliability study  it is possible to go much further by refining the gsi model. but the time needed is s t i l l negligible  when compared to the time that it would take with conventional methods. 
