 away from all issues of formal syntactic operations. 
　　many people initially find this approach quite odd. they are accustomed to thinking of a model theory as specifying what can be concluded validly from what-in some sense  as a competence theory of inference. i suggest that those who are comfortable with this viewpoint consider the weaker model theory as a performance theory of inference. other people are accustomed to thinking of a model theory as a way of assigning meaning to symbols and are skeptical of producing a new meaning assignment. but i am not suggesting that the original model theory be discarded; on the contrary  it is still a valuable device in the study of meaning. the new model theory can be thought of as providing an additional meaning assignment. if the inference engine is working under this alternative meaning then it is complete. hence  the symbols mean one thing to us and another to the inference engine. according to our theory of meaning the inference engine is incomplete but according to its weaker theory of meaning it is complete. 

     1  one entailment relation is weaker than another if the inferences sanctioned by the first are a subset of those sanctioned by the second. 



1 	knowledge representation ability to chain as necessary to reason completely with taxonomic information  though the system remains incapable of doing any other form of chaining. for example  the system can chain together  clyde is an elephant    all elephants are mammals  and  all mammals are warmblooded  in order to conclude that  clyde is warmblooded.  the key to this system's ability to chain lies in treating  elephant  and  mammal  as special taxonomic predicates  which are distinct from the ordinary predicates. an atomic formula formed with a taxonomic predicate can only be assigned true or false by a model  never jtrue  false . thus  taxonomic information is given a tarskian interpretation  which sanctions complete reasoning  while all other information is given a weakened 1valued interpretation  which disallows all chaining. 
1. conclusion 
　　the problem of specifying  constructing  and understanding specialized  limited inference systems arises in many areas of ai. the development of inference systems that do no chaining is an important first step to solving this problem. in this respect the inference system presented in this paper is of particular interest because it is the strongest such system that does no chaining  modulo the quantization method used. furthermore  the model theoretic specification technique employed here may prove to be an important tool in the study of limited inference; it certainly proved invaluable here in specifying the inference engine  proving that it had certain 
properties  and comparing it to other systems. 
acknowledgements 
　　i thank fran evelyn for her assistance in editing and printing this paper. 
