. 
following the principles of locality and compositionality during semantic interpretation  we propose a semantic representation formalism which manages to deal with reference problems  i.e. with the interpretation of nps  in particular  of those beginning with an article : the addressed problems are generic / specific / class readings  and collective / distributive interpretations. 
the formalism follows the semantic net approach  and uses different representation plans  semantic  content and reference  and particular structures  called ambiguity spaces  that hide the ambiguities from the other parts of the sentence and remain neutral with respect to the various interpretations until certain disambiguation clues are found. besides presenting the formalism  the paper discusses which clues may be used to disambiguate among the various interpretations and shows the way this representation is used to update the hearer's knowledge base *. 
	i 	introduction 
       the interpretation of natural language is a process aimed at converting a linear sequence of word forms  a  text   into a semantic representation that can be worked on in order to perform inferences  produce answers  and  more generally  to modify the knowledge base of the hearer **. many knowledge sources cooperate in a more or less synchronized way to perform the task: they include lexicon  syntax  knowledge about the way utterances are connected to each other  and knowledge on how the structured representation of a sentence can be converted into the corresponding semantic representation ***. the present paper is concerned with the last of them  and in particular with what is usually called  semantic interpretation process . 
       one of the most common assumptions about the way this process is carried on is the principle of compositionality  stating that the meaning of a given constituent can be obtained by combining in some way the meaning of its components  where by  constituent  it is usually intended a suitably defined portion of the syntactic representation. this principle establishes a clear and effective relationship between the syntactic structures and their semantic counterparts  of course the overall context has to be taken into account to solve  for instance  anaphoric references   but it still allows a semantic theory to model the interpretation process in an apparently unnatural way. an example is provided 
       * current address  dipartimento di automatica e informatica - pohtecmco di torino -corso duca degii abruzzi 1 - 1 tonno - italy 
       * this research has been supported by a grant from ministero del la pubbhca is-truzione - mpi 1%  u has been earned on while the first author was granted a fellowship from mesarteam s.p a - tonno 
        * we will use the terms  speaker  and  hearer  to refer to the producer and the receiver of the message  without any commitment about the fact that the message is written or spoken 
       *** we assume that such a structured representation exists the debate on this assumption is exemplified by  schank  birnbaum 1   marcus 1   tanenhaus et al 1  
by first order predicate calculus: 
 the sentence floyd broke a glass translates into 1 x  glass  x  a break  floyd  x   or  in the notation of restricted quantification     x : glass   break  floyd  x  . 
in either case  the syntactic constituent a glass does not correspond to any semantic constituent; rather  its interpretation forms several discontinuous parts of the logical expression.   jackendoff 1  p.1 . 
       a principle that should guide the search for a perspi:uous semantic theory is the grammatical constraint: 
 the grammatical constraint says that one should prefer a semantic theory that explains otherwise arbitrary generalizations about the syntax and the lexicon   jackendoff 1  p.1  
       the first aim of the representation presented in this paper is to respect the grammatical constraint  in order to increase further the naturalness of the interpretation process   n fact  it will be shown that the analysis can be carried on in a deterministic way. the features of the representation will be described by discussing its suitability to handling a difficult problem in nl analysis  i.e. the interpretation of determiners. the analysis of determiners is strictly confined with the relationships between sense and reference  intension and extension  concept and class. it is not possible to analyze here in detail the aistinction among the different terms *  but we will try to make clear wnich kinds of linguistic phenomena have to be modelled. 
       the purpose of a natural language utterance is to make some assertion or to ask for information about something. this something must be specified by the speaker in some way. to do that in an understandable way  the speaker must make some assumptions about the knowledge available to the hearer. in order to be as informative as possible  and if s/he assumes that the involved entity is known to the hearer  the speaker must try to enable him/her to identify that entity; otherwise  s/he can leave it  more or less  unspecified  see  appelt 1j . the same identification issues arise if the predication does not concern an individual entity  but applies to each entity of a given set. a very different :ase is the one where the predication does not refer to the elements of the set  but to trie set as a collective entity: here  the fundamental process known as  inheritance  does not apply  so we need some way to keep apart the two kinds of 'set' statements. 
       still another different case is the one where there is no specific entity  or set  involved in the predication  but the assertion is  generic   in the sense that it applies to all possible entities satisfying the description. in principle  nothing nore than context-dependence seems implied by this distineion; for instance  exl:  the girls are very nice  expresses i fact about a well-defined set  both in case it is understood 
* the most thorough discussion is  to our knowledge   lyons 1  chapt.1 . see also 
 woods 1   in particular  the fourth section  and  castelfranchi  stock 1  

as a reference to a subset  contextually determinable  of girls  and in case it is intended to state a generic property of the  context-independent  set of all girls. on the other hand  specific and generic expressions are worth being represented in different ways for two reasons. the first is mainly semantic: in definite references the set is fixed  i.e. it does not change over time   whilst in generic expressions the property applies to any member of the set  even in case some current members were not in the set when the proposition was issued. the second reason is linguistic: genenc statements can also be expressed in the singular  intuitively  without reference to a set} as in ex1:  a bear hibernates in winter  or ex1:  the dog is a friendly animal *. this is one of the main sources of problems in the design of an effective interpreter of nl expressions. 
a. interpretation problems for determiners 
       as  seen above  the same article may indicate different types of referents. for instance  in case of a definite article  there are three alternatives: a single individual  or a specific group of individuals   as in ex1:  the bear is eating meat ; the generic element of a set  as in ex1:  the bear eats meat  or ex1:  the bears eat meat   this sentence is likeky to sound unnnatural to english speakers  because they would say  bears eat meat ; on the other hand  in italian we seldom have bare plurals ; the class corresponding to a particular concept  as in ex1:  the bear is dying out   di eugenio et al. 1 . the choice of the correct interpretation is not easy and  although some clues may be provided by syntactic  semantic and/or pragmatic knowledge  this choice is sometimes impossible without taking into account the discourse history. 
       another point from which ambiguity arises is the possibility of having distributive readings  like in ex1:  the soldiers who hit hannibal have been praised   or collective ones  like in ex1:  the soldiers who defeated hannibal have been praised **. in both cases  the initial representation we give to the np must be neutral  in order to be specified  if this is possible  during the further processing of the sentence. 
       notice that the neutrality required of the initial semantic representation as regards the two problems of generic vs. specific or collective vs. distributive reading is different: in the former case  the ambiguity concerns the interpretation of the np itself  i.e. what kind of reference is made; in the latter one  it concerns its links with the other parts of the sentence. in fact  a plural np defines a set through its members  and the set and its individual members must be both present in the representation ***  as either of them may be referred again in the sentence: disambiguating a reading as distributive or collective  then  does not mean to furtherly specify some elements of the representation  but to individuate which element - set or individual member - must be linked to the other parts of the sentence. 
       some of the representation formalisms that have been proposed in the literature seem to have a strong expressive power  because they manage to represent the different 
       * this is probably one of the reasons that led many researchers lo postulate the existence of  prototypes  their use and their import have been widely discussed in the literature  sec  for instance  ibrachman 1  ; although prototypes are not part of the representation that we propose herein  this representation is amenable to the same discussion. however  this is not a paper on knowledge representation  at least in its usual sense  but on semantic interpretauon; this simply means that we will not consider problems about inheritance  cancellation  classifiers and so on  but only the internal structure of the molecular entities which the representation is composed of. 
       ** actually  as webber points out |webber 1   a plural np may have another reading  the conjunctive one  three boys bought five roses  may mean  three boys bought five roses  each     three boys bought five roses  together    or  the total of rose-buying boys is three and the total number of roses is live  without any commitment to the relation between each boy and each rose  we will not address this problem  since it seems to be more related to the treatment of quantifiers than to the one of determiners. 
       *** a similar point is made by hobbs  hobbs 1   who states that  the logical form for a plural np will include reference lo a set and its typical element . 
readings we talked about above  at least some of them   but they lack to explain  or do not stress enough  the way in which this representation is built. 
       for example  webber's logical formalism  which resorts to restricted quantification  webber 1  is able to represent definite and indefinite nps  collective and distributive readings  generic sets; on the other hand  her aim is to derive entity descriptions that allow her to solve subsequent anaphoras  so that she generates those descriptions from sentences that have already been translated into a logical formalism  but the way she represents the nps appearing in the sentence while the sentence itself is processed is not clear. 
       hobbs's approach  hobbs 1  is based on a flat logical formalism where the predicate set and the so-called 'typical element' of a set nicely account for distributive and collective readings. the drawback of this representation is that it does not seem to allow the most natural treatment of generic assertions: in fact  the deduction that the individual about which the predication is made is the typical element of a set is left to the discourse interpretation process; in our opinion  as the generic reading of an np is sometimes clearly pointed out by clues present in the sentence itself  it is not the case to systematically demand this task to the discourse interpretation process; on the contrary  there must exist a distinct way to represent generic sentences. 
       another flaw of trie approaches previously adopted is their inability to model the nps of type 'class'; e.g. in hobbs' representation they could be solved by using an entity for which the predicate set holds  but this would fail to distinguish between set and class. notice that assertions on classes are not to be confused with collective readings of sentences  although they are very similar: first of all  'class' readings are generic assertions  collective ones not necessarily; moreover  collective readings usually express a parti:ipation  not necessarily active  in some event  something that is true of every member of the set  while no particination of the single individual to an event * is asserted in class assertions. 
       a last case  which deserves particular attention  since it is substantially different from all others  occurs in the socalled opaque contexts: no individual is involved  but neither inheritance applies  nor the class is referred. it is exemplified by sentences as exlo:  john wants to marry a norwegian   e x l l :  mary is looking for a knife . in these cases  though these examples are ambiguous  there is a reading where the meaning of the indefinite noun phrase can be roughly characterized as  some entity which has the characteristic properties denoted by the term used . opaque contexts are very strictly correlated with the concept of  intension . what is peculiar is that the 1 quantifier that is usually associated with indefinite singular nps  denoting the  existence  in the universe of discourse of an entity satisfying the predicates that apply to the quantified variable  is loosing now its power. in fact  in exlz:  every boy needs a dog no existing dog is involved  neither a single one that every boy needs  nor a specific one associated with each different boy  perhaps via a suitable skolem function . instead  what is said is that for each boy there should be at least one entity to which the  dog  intension applies and which is needed by that boy. note that it is by no means said that any dog can satisfy the needs of a particular boy  so that the inheritance mechanism cannot apply to dogs  thus inhibiting an interpretation as  a property ofeach dog is that it is needed by the boys . it is clear that opaque contexts require a very special treatment. 
　　　　* the word 'event' here does not mean single occurrence of a particular fact  but it is used in the broader sense of situation  state or action  possibly generic  expressed by a verb phrase 
di eugenio and lesmo 1 

ii tri-concepts and ambiguity spaces 
       the solution we propose for the problems outlined in the introduction involves new representation tools that we called tri-concepts  tcs  and ambiguity spaces  ass . we introduce them by means of an example. 
fig. 1 shows the final representation relative to exl1: 
 ilorso che vive nella gabbia sta mangiando   the bear which lives in the cage is eating  *. the representation involves three different plans: 
- the semantic plan  sp   which contains the semantic knowledge of the system  i.e. the - more or less - static knowledge about the world ; 
- the content plan  cp   on which the representation of the content conveyed by the sentence is built; 
- the reference plan  rp   on which the possible referents of the nps are built. 
the reference plan  whose existence is limited to the single sentence orocessing  stores the initially ambiguous representations of the nps  ind not the entities previously mentioned in the discourse; the rp allows to take apart the problems of the referential interpretation of an np and the semantic role that the object that the np denotes plays in the sentence. in fact  what seems important is to maintain distinct those features of the representation that concern the semantic roles that constituents play with respect to each other and those regarding the ambiguities mentioned above. we solved this problem by means of the reference and content plans and by means of what we call 'ambiguity spaces' **: they are structures that embody the ambiguities internally  ana  in a certain sense  hide them from the other components of the representation. if the ambiguity can be solved at the syntactic and semantic level  the contents of these spaces are modified to convey this information without affecting the other parts of the sentence; otherwise  the still ambiguous  or partially ambiguous  spaces will be passed to the processes that access the pragmatic knowledge and/or the discourse context. 
       there are two types of ambiguity spaces: the reference ambiguity spaces  rass   regarding the genenc / specific / class readings  and the aistributivity ambiguity spaces  dass   that concern the collective / distributive readings. 
before talking about the ass  we must explain the 
kb representation that corresponds to a noun: it is not merely a node  but a ternary structure  called a triconcept  that includes three atomic nodes: the concept  the extension and the class. 
the concept node will be used in the usual way: it will take part in taxonomies and will accumulate assertions  but only those inheritable by every individual corresponding to that concept. 
the class node will accumulate the generic assertions that are not inheritable by individuals  like those contained in ex1 . 
the extensional node will not accumulate any assertion  but it will make it possible to have the specific readings of plural nps linkea to the correct set referent and to express membership to a set. 
a. reference ambiguity spaces 
       when an np head is met  a new node on the content plan  *i in fig.l  and a ras on the reference plan are created; the initial content of the ras depends on the type of the np determiner: while the definite determiner may be involved in a generic  specific or class reading  sec ex1  ex1  ex1  and 1  in section la   the indefinite determiner is not used in class assertions: you cannot say  a bear is dying out  or  a bear is studied by naturalists  ***. 
       * from now on  the examples will be in italian  because our fido system works on the italian language. 
        * both the three plans and the ambiguity spaces are under some respect similar to spaces in partitioned networks fhendnx 1 . 
       *** perhaps the sentences above may be uttered if the meaning of 'a bear' is 'a  type of  bear'  but we do not consider this case. 
therefore  the ras initially associated to a definite np will contain a complete copy of the tc  the one associated to an indefinite one only the concept and the extensional nodes; besides  the arc connecting the node on the content plan and the ras will be labelled by same for definite nps  by iof  instance-of  for indefinite ones: in the former case the np refers to a precise individual  or set   concept or class  while in the latter nothing can be said on the individual denoted by the indefinite np besides its belonging to a certain set or its being a random exemplar of the concept  in case of the generic reading of the indefinite article . in fig. 1 we can see the situation occurring after an np head has been met  the other parts of the representation are omitted . 
       this initial representation will be augmented during the processing of the sentence if the np has specifications  e.g. a restrictive relative clause  see ex 1   an adjective  the white bear   a relation with other objects  georee's bear : these specifications are not directly linkea to tne content node that refers to that entity  x{ in fig. 1   but to another node  x1 in fig. 1  by means of a def-as arc. the meaning of this connection is that the subset  subconcept or subclass that the np refers to is defined as the portion of the content net indexed by the def-as arc itself. the introduction of a pair of nodes  xx and x1  is justified by the need of keeping apart the entity that participates in the main predication and the way it is defined; this is impossible if x  and x1 coincide. 
b. distributivity ambiguity spaces 
       to a plural definite np a second as  the das  is associated on the content plan  as we can see in fig. 1: it allows to represent both the set that a plural np defines and the members of this set without any commitment to the role that each of them plays in the sentence. another das will be created on the content plan to express the specifications of the np  in an analogous way to that described above for the specifications of a singular np. 
       in fig.1 the final representation of complex nps is shown: the rass are internally transformed according to the particular reading. if the np has no specifications  it will simply consist of the node  or das  connected to the ras by the arc same or i-of; the ras will be linked to the tc on the semantic plan by an arc labelled by equal  because no subset  subclass or subconcept has been defined. note that there is no incompatibility between the representation of an entity on the content plan by means of a das  i.e. as a pair  set-member  and the possible class reading that to that pair can be given; in fact  we may have sentences like exl1: 
 'gli orsi cne vivono in alaska si stanno estinguendo   the bears which live in alaska are dying out   where we have a set of bears  which in turn corresponds to a particular class of bears  upon which a predication is made. 
       as far as intensional context are concerned  they are simply represented by marking the ras with  intensional  and by connecting the cp node with the concept node in the 
id disambiguation rules 
       although the task of disambiguating among the different interpretations of an np is not easy and cannot be fully dealt with without taking into account world knowledge and the discourse history  some useful syntactic and semantic criteria do exist  and they have been easily embodied in the framework constituted by the fido system  flexible interface for database operations   see {lesmo torasso 1    lesmo torasso 1    di eugenio et al. 1  . the features that we have taken into account follow *. 
a. the verb 
       one useful feature of the verb is its tense: verbal forms different from habitual past and habitual present  and 
　　　　* we will only discuss the problem of generic / specific /class readings  as collective / distributive interpretations seem solvable by resorting to the semantics of the verb. 

future  which needs distinct considerations  express a specific reading if the subject is indefinite  while for definite subjects the same is true  provided that the verb cannot be referred to a whole class  like  estinguersi   i.e.  to die outm . notice that italian and english differ  because in english there are two different forms expressing progressive and habitual present  while in italian we have a unique present form  a progressive form does exist  but its use is not compulsory as it is in english ; on the other hand  we have two different simple past forms to express a durative action or a specific event  although in english the form 'used to' exists . by resorting to trie verb tense and sometimes by taking into account its meaning  we can disambiguate sentences like exl1  ii leone sta mangiando le muccne   the lion is eating the cows   where we have the progressive form also in italian  exl1:  i leoni uccisero le mucche   the lions killed the cows   exl1:  ii leone si sta estinguendo   the lion is dying out . a sentence that remains ambiguous is exl1:  ii leone mangia le mucche   that  in italian  may mean both  the lion is eating the cows  and  the lion eats the cows . the future tense gives some problems  as sentences like exl1:  ii leone mangera' le mucche   the lion will eat the cows  can be disambiguated only resorting to world knowledge and the discourse context. 
b. np specifications 
       the features that we have taken into account are a  possessive adjectives and b  restrictive relative clauses. 
a  it should not sound strange that possessive adjectives may help to disambiguate an np with a determiner  because in italian possessive adjectives are very often preceded by a determiner. in most cases  a possessive adjective  especially in the first or second person  makes a generic reading impossible. in ex1: '1 tuo cane mangia sempre carne   literally   the your dog always eats meat    the specific reading of the subject is forced by the presence of the possessive adjective; in fact  if we omit it  in ex1:  ii cane mangia sempre carne   the dog always eats meat  the generic reading is preferred  if the sentence is taken in isolation. 
b  restrictive relative clauses point to a specific reading of the np they refer to if they contain a reference to a specific individual; this holds both if the relative pronoun is not the subject of the clause  as in ex1:  the castle that i visited yesterday ...   and if it is the subject and one of the other complements refers to a single individual  like in ex1:  the dog which bit john is ferocious . 
c. mutual influence of np interpretations 
there seems to be a certain preference for a global generic or specific interpretation versus one where some nps are specific and others generic. in particular  the np head cannot be given one interpretation  specific / generic  and its specifications the other  generic / specific ; the disambiguation can go in either direction  i.e. we may disambiguate an np specification on the basis of the np head  or the np head on the basis of one of its specifications. for example  ex1:  la donna con la gonna e' molto elegante   literally   the woman with the skirt is very elegant   may be generic or specific  while ex1:  la donna con la tua gonna e' molto elegante   literally   the woman with the your skirt is very elegant   can only be specific. the same considerations hold for different complements of the same verb  although the disambiguation of one complement by means of another is not certain  because counterexamples do exist  like ex1:  ii cane di giorgio mangia le aringhe   literally   the dog of giorgio eats the herrings    where  although  the dog of giorgio  refers to a specific entity  the sentence does not refer to a specific event  but to a habit of that dog. 
       these disambiguation criteria have been inserted in the fido system  a system which accepts natural language sentences and addresses a relational database. the disambiguation criteria have been implemented as condition-action rules; their activation is subordinate to some predefined event  like the analysis of a content word  implemented as a node filling process  or the completion of a constituent  implemented as a node closure operation . the rules are subdivided in packets  each of which concerns the definite or indefinite determiner and a particular situation of the parsing process. the condition parts of the rules test the already built tree; they examine the np head  verify whether there are other disambiguated determiners  check the verbal form etc. the action part augments the internal structure of the rass. 
       as an example  we report a rule relative to the disambiguation of a definite np as a specific reference: 
condition: 
 and 
 or   current tense present progressive  
 currenttense simple past   
　　 not  class verb current verb    action: 
 createjndiv current ras newjndiv  
 link current ras newjndiv extension m of  
 direct currentjras newjndiv contentlink  
the condition part verifies that the current verb does not require a class subject and that its tense is present progressive or simple past  remind that in italian simple past has no duration meaning ; in this case  the specific reading is accepted and the actions modify the current ras  i.e. the one connected to the np under examination  in the following way: 
createjndiv creates a new individual node - newjndiv in the current ras; 
link links newjndiv to the extensional node - extension of the tc contained in the currentras by means of an arc labelled mof; 
direct directs the arc content jink coming from the content plan  whose head pointed to the ras  onto newjndiv. what is obtained is the structure shown in fig.1 al. 
       a last word on the certainty of these rules: while the one above is certain  other rules only give a preferential reading to a given np  one of these rules concerns the mutual influence of two complements  like in ex1 above . in case a rule is not certain  its action part is not executed  but it is delayed until other rules are activated that may confirm that interpretation. at the moment  we are studying a weighting mechanism to balance the interaction of the rules. if contradictions are detected  or if insufficient evidence in favour of an interpretation has been collected  rass remain ambiguous. 
	iv 	how the representation is used 
       the formalism previously described aims at representing the information content of a sentence independently of the context where it has been uttered. of course  the way it is built is just the first phase of the interpretation process; although this paper is mainly concerned with it  it seems worth while giving an idea about how the resulting representation is used afterwards. 
       the described proposal tries to exploit the advantages of a description of the interpretation process called transient-process account in  woods 1  without being subject to the same criticism. in other words  the rp and the cp are transient  in the sense that they disappear at the very end  but they are an unambiguous representation of the sentence *. when this representation is made available  the hearer must access his/her contextual knowledge in order to find possible referents or to build structures to associate with newly introduced entities. but now all the information needed for guiding the search has been made explicit. this 
       * the discussion in  woods 1  ia primarily addressed to relative clauses  but the distinction we made between  same  and  def-as  links allows to keep apart the referred entity from its description  whatever the form of the latter is. 
	di eugenlo and lesmo 	1 

does not mean that what remains to do is an easy task  cfr. examples like ex1:  harry saw an hungry lion; the poor beast ...    but the network representation makes it rather straightforward to verify that  lions  form a subset of  beasts   this knowledge should be available on the sp  so that the rules of correct reference can be defined on wellknown subsumption arcs *. 
       we can now introduce a preliminary version of the rules that govern the execution of the last phase  i.e. the mixing of previous  contextual  and new  rp-cp  information. 
       the updating of the knowledge base of the hearer can be done in two ways  depending on the contents of the reference plan  rp  and of the content plan  cp . 
       the contents of the rp determine the mode of this updating: 
a  if there is one or more i  individual  or s  set  nodes on the rp  then the corresponding nodes have to be looked for by the hearer in his knowledge base  to be more precise  in that part of his kb that regards the current situation of the world  analogous to the a-box in a krypton-like framework  brachman et al. 1 . the node to be found must satisfy the given description both in terms of the extension of the rp node  as given by the outgoing m-of or ss arc  i.e.  it must be of the right 'type'   and in terms of the possible def-as arcs exiting from the rp node. moreover  both in case it is an individual and a set  it must be unique  i.e. there must not be two different nodes satisfying the description **. when the relevant node has been found  the assertion about it expressed by the utterance   assert'' entry point  has to be added to the knowledge base. 
in case no node satisfying these requirements is found  two possibilities arise: ir the nodes i and/or s are defined by means of a def-as arc  new individuals or new sets are to be added to the kb; otherwise  i.e. if the reference is a bare np without any specification   the bear    the woman    as we do not consider situations where the referent is perceptually available  an inconsistency is found: either the speaker has used an inappropriate expression  but this can be disregarded  because we suppose the speaker follows the conversational postulates  searle 1    or the system has misinterpreted the reference  which is not specific  but either generic or class. at this point  a diagnostic process should be triggered; our provisional solution is to ask the user. 
b  if the reference is definite  arc same between cp and rp   but generic or class  the general kb *** will be updated  according to two different modalities: if the np has no specifications  the assertion will be made on the node  concept or class  in the tc corresponding to the np head and contained in the kb; otherwise  as there is a def-as arc coming out from the ras  a new tc will be created  whose concept node will be a subconcept of the concept corresponding to the head of the np  tnis corresponds to creating a new term in a tbox  and the assertion will be stored there ****. 
c  in case the reference to a single individual is indefinite  arc 1-of pointing to an ext node   then an individual node corresponding to the description  in the same 
       * of course  if harry was my dog and it was devoured by the lion  the reference assumed in the text is not the right one moreover  it is clear that any mechanism for accessing the previous context should pay attention to more general problems of anaphoric references  and in particular to their relationship to the organization of discourse - on the problem of focussing see  for ex.   sidner 1  igrosz 1 . 
       ** this search process has not yet been implemented. of course  it is not only a matter of efftciency  but also of taking into account the relevant data. for instance  the uniqueness condition must apply to a suitably specified current context  otherwise  the boy  or  john  could never be used 
*** its contents are similar to a t-box's  brachman et al. 1 
       * * * * notice that we do not consider really definitional sentences like  the whale is a mammal . 
sense explained above  must be created in the knowledge base. 
d  in case an indefinite reference gives rise to a generic reading  arc i-of pointing to a concept node in a ras   this generic assertion is stored on the concept node; however  the problem is still under investigation  because this use of the indefinite article does not imply generic universality  an assertion of this kind can be considered 'defeasible'  croft 1  . 
e  the final point regards intensional contexts. the problem of their interpretation  i.e. what to do when the ras is marked as  intensional   is still open. the solution we are currently implementing is to maintain nested spaces which block some kind of inferences. for instance  in the case of ex 1  every boy needs a dog   we get something that correspond to a formula as: 
vx  boy x  -  need x    1y  dog y  a own x y     
where the higher order predicate need is opaque in the usual sense. as the paper is mainly concerned with the previous phase of the interpretation and the import of this solution is currently under study  we will not go in more details here 
       a last word on the situation in which the rass on the rp are ambiguous: the disambiguation task is dealt with by the processes that access world knowledge  however  they take into account the possible clues in favour of a certain interpretation found during the analysis of the sentence . these processes act as a filter that eliminates some interpretations; e.g. in ex1:  l'uomo ha sofferto per molti secoli   literally 'the man has been suffering for many centuries   the maximum length of a single person's life forces the generic interpretation. 
	v 	conclusions 
this paper introduces a new formalism for representing the information contents of a nl utterance. the main advantages of this proposal are: 
- the different readings of an np can be represented in an unambiguous way. that is  distinct representations are obtained for specific  generic  class  collective  distributive  intensional readings; 
- ambiguous expressions result in partially specified representations; in principle  other kss could operate on them in order to solve ambiguities; 
- the analysis can be carried on in a deterministic way  i.e. without reshaping temporary structures  but only adding new data. 
       the whole interpretation process is assumed to work in two steps that are currently applied sequentially  but could be interleaved in a subsequent version. the first step  with which this paper is more concerned  regards the construction of a context-independent representation of the sentence. the second one regards the actual update of the hearer's knowledge base on the basis of the representation that has been built. in this second step context-dependencies are taken into account. 
       we believe that the approach described in the paper is a first step towards a perspicuous treatment of quantifiers in natural language  which accounts both for the intrinsic complexity of the matter and for the apparent ease that seems to characterize human processing of quantified phrases. the paper does not treat generalized quantifiers but only determiners; the results obtained for them are encouraging and the studies on real quantifiers  di eugenio  lesmo 1  seem to show that the formalism can be extended quite easily to cover them. 

