 
     this paper describes the preliminary results of the first research effort toward a mandarin dictation machine in the world for the input of chinese characters to computers. considering the special characteristics of chinese language  syllables are chosen as the basic units for dictation. the machine is divided into two subsystems. the first is to recognize the syllables using speech signal processing techniques. because every syllable can represent many different characters with completely different meaning  the second subsystem then identifies the exact characters from the syllables and corrects the errors in syllable recognition by first forming all possible words from the syllables then finding out one combination of the words which is grammatically valid in a sentence. the preliminary test results indicate that such a 
     dictation machine is not only practically attractive  but technically achievable. 
1. 	introduction 
     today  the input of chinese characters into computers is still a very difficult and unsolved problem  which is the basic motivation for the development of a mandarin dictation machine. we define the scope of the research by the following limitations. the input speech is in the form of isolated syllables instead of continuous speech  the choice of syllables as the dictation unit will be discussed in detail later. . the machine is speaker dependent. the first stage goal of this system is to have 1% correction for the sentences in the chinese textbooks of the primary schools in taiwan  rep. of 
china. the errors can be found by the user on the screen and corrected from the keyboard. such a performance is still much more efficient than any of the currently existing input systems. also  only a small dictionary for demonstration purpose is to be established in the first stage. the machine will work well for sentences formed by the words in the dictionary  otherwise the new additional words have to be keyed into the dictionary. to our knowledge  this is the first research effort toward a mandarin dictation machine in the world. 
the dictation machine is divided into two subsystems. 
the first one is to recognize the syllables using speech signal processing techniques  but this is not very helpful at all because in general every syllable can represent many different characters and can possibly form different multi-syllabic words with syllables on its right or left. therefore the second subsystem is to identify the correct characters from the syllables by forming correct words which is grammatically valid in a sentence and carefully considering the characteristics of the chinese natural language. 
il considerations for the special structure of chinese language 
     there are at least 1 thousands of commonly used words in chinese. therefore the words can not be used as the dictation units. there are at least 1 thousands of commonly used chinese charaters  each character is mono-syllabic. each word is composed of from one to several characters. a nice feature is that the total number of different syllables in mandarin speech is only about 1. if we use the 1 syllables as the dictation units  all the words or characters will be covered. however  the small number of syllables implies another difficult problem  that is  many different characters will share the same syllable. this is why we need the second subsystem. based on the above observations on the special structure of chinese language  the use of syllables as the dictation unit becomes a very natural choice. 
     another very special important feature of mandarin chinese language is the tones for the syllables. every character is assigned a tone in general. there are basically four different tones. it has been shown * that the primary difference for the four tones is in the pitch contours  and the tones are essentially independent of the other acoustic properties of the syllables. if the differences among the syllables due to lexial tones are disregarded  only 1 syllables are required to represent all the pronunciations for mandarin chinese. this means the recognition of the syllables can be divided into two parallel procedures  the recognition of the tones  and of the 1 syllables disregarding the tones. 
til 	the overall system structure 
     based on the considerations described above  the overall system structure for the mandarin dictation machine is shown in fig.l. the system is basically divided into two subsystems. the first is to recognize the syllables  and the second is to transform the scries of syllables into the characters. for the first subsystem of syllable recognition  the corresponding syllable  disregarding the tones  and the tone are then recognized independently in parallel. because errors always happen  we therefore have to provide information for confusing syllables  and confusing tones. for the second subsystem we need to first form multi-syllabic words from each syllables. to use the above example  although there are many characters all correspond to the syllable  guo-1  and many to  iu-1   there is only one multi-syllabic word   qfltl  mandarin   has the pronunciation   quo-1   iu-1    etc.. but this doesn't solve the problem well. first  mono-syllabic words  such as  ni-1    shr-1    i-1    jia-1    huei-1    tieng-1  can't be identified in the above way. they even form ambiguous multi-syllabic words  for example  the syllable  i-1  
	lea  tseng  chan  and huang 	1 

can combine with the syllable to its lett lshr-1j to torm a wrong word   :  suitable   shr-1  |i-1d   or with the syllable to its right  jia-1  to form a wrong word    %w  move   i-1   jia-1   . the problem becomes even worse when errors occur in the recognized syllable  for example  if the syllable  ni-1  is incorrectly recognized as the syllable  ni-1   it can be combined with the syllable  shr-1  to its right to form a wrong word   
      bad situation   ni-1   shr-1   . the next operation of syntactic analysis then serves as a filter to rule out all ungrammatical combinations of multi-syllabic and mono-syllabic words and only a single syntactically valid sentence will be obtained and appear on the screen as the output text. 
tv. 	the recognition of the syllables 
     the recognition of the 1 syllables in the first subsystem is in fact very difficult ' . this is because the 1 syllables consist of about 1 confusing sets  each of which has from about 1 to 1 confusing syllables1  a good example is the a-set: { a    ba     pa    ma    fa    da   fta    na    la    ga    ka    ha    ja    cha    sha   tza    tsa    sa  . if we use 1 of these syllables to train a commercially available speech recognizer product with 1 words of recognition vocabulary designed for english words  the recognition rate is on the order of 1% - 1% only  although the rate is about 1% for english words. an initial / final two-phase recognition approach is thus specially designed1 to recognize these very confusing syllables  whose block diagram is in fig.1. we first detect the final part and recognize the final from a total of 1 different finals. once the final is determined  we then try to recognize the initial preceding the final among at most 1 candidate initials. 
     the recognition of the finals is also very difficult because there are again many confusing final sets  such as   a    ia    ua j  etc. in our research it was found that using multi-section vector quantization  msvq  techniques with branch-and-bound algorithm operated on the filter bank coefficients can give very good results while maintain relatively simple hardware/software implementation1. preliminary result of recognition rate of 1 % has been achieved for speaker-dependent case. the recognition of the initials is even more difficult because they are relatively short  unstable  and confusing. a special two-phase recognition approach is therefore developed to recognize the initials1. the first phase classifies the possible unknown initials into several small groups using formant parameters. the second phase then recognizes the exact initial. the preliminary recognition rate is found to achieve 1% for speaker dependent case. the correct recognition of the tone is also difficult. the primary problem is the confusion caused by the third tone. we use here the tone recognition method developed by j.-c. lee1  in which the sum and difference of the log pitch frequencies for adjacent frames are taken as feature parameters. vector quantization  vq  codebooks and hidden macov models  hmm  are developed to recognize the tones. the recognition rate for the tones is found to be 1%. combining the results for the final  initial and tone recognition  the total recognition rate for the syllables is only on the order of 1%. 
v. 	word formation from syllables 
     this is the first part of the second subsystem. the output characters and words for the above example   ni-1   shr-1   i-1   jia-1   huei-1   tieng-1   guo-1   iu-1   de-1|  dian-1   nan-1   is shown in fig.1. first  all multi-syllabic words 
1 	natural language 
which can be found in the dictionary will be obtained  such as   
mr  suitable   shr-1   i-1  m    	 move   i-1   jia-1  m  
	mandarin   guo-1   iu-1       	 computer  
 dian-1   nau-1   . secondly  all syllables which can not form multi-syllabic words with adjacent syllables must correspond to mono-syllabic words  therefore the most frequently used and second frequently used  if any  mono-syllabic words will be found  such as   fa  you   and   1  plan   for  ni-1     %  can   for  huei-1   etc. thirdly  if some of the syllables in the multi-syllabic words obtained in the first step correspond to very frequently used mono-syllabic words  such as   il  are   and   $  affair   for  shr-1   etc.  they are also given. in the dictionary  the words are organized in a special structure called word trees such that all words having the same first syllable will be organized in the same tree  and all words in the same tree having the same second syllable will be organized under the same node  etc. to improve the searching speed. in order to reduce the total number of words which have to be stored in the dictionary  some additional word formation rules are designed to generate new words . for example  a verb followed by the character   i$      guo-1    simply represent the past tense  such as   &¡ê      chr-1   eat  and   m   forms   jfc j¡ì      chr-1   guo-1   ate   etc. some additional word deletion rules are also designed such that redundant or impossible words can be automatically deleted without going to the syntactic level . one example rule is as follows. any shorter words within a longer word should be deleted. for example  the shorter words   f=i m      tai-1  lwan-1   taiwan   and   !:*¡ê     da-1   shiue-1   university 
  will both be deleted if the longer word   fem af      tai-1   wan-1   da-1   shiue-1   taiwan university   exists. another example rule tells that all words which can not be connected by other words on both sides  except beginning and ending words  should be deleted. 
xl-syntactic analysis to identify correct words and characters 
     this is the second part of the second subsystem. the input is the series of all possible mono-syllabic and multi-ayllabic words corresponding to the recognized syllables. the goal is to find the unique correct combination of these words which form a grammatically valid sentence. the approach is simply to take all possible combinations of the words and parse the sentences in parallel based on a chinese grammar. the ungrammatical combinations will be ruled out and only the correct solution will be left and shown on the screen. a syntactic analysis system for chinese sentences  sasc  is employed here to parse the dossible sentences and rule out ungrammatical sentences'' . in sasc  chinese sentences are syntactically analyzed from the viewpoints of generative grammar. it uses a bottom-up parser instead of a top-down parser  because the former tends to be more efficient for chinese sentence analysis. the parser uses charts as global working structures to avoid the inefficiency in duplicating many computations that a top-down parser often suffers when backtracking occurs. the parser parses sentences in such a way that phrases are built up on the chart by starting with their heads and adjoining constituents on the left or right of the heads. for example  according to the phrase structure rule  psr     vp   yzr np   v-n  transitive verb  is the head of vp verb phrase . when encountering a transitive verb  the parser's action is to try to adjoint the following np as its object. in order to solve the complicated syntactic phenomena such as passivization  relativization  topicalization  and ba-transformation in chinese sentences  a raise-bind mechanism based upon the theory of empty categories is 

developed**. in this way  the sasc parser will treat the above different transformations very easily in the same way  i.e.  if an empty element is inserted into the right position  the syntactic structure will become easy. the parser generates an empty np inserted into the vacant position where an np is expected to appear. using this approach  many syntactically sophisticated sentences can be easily parsed. 
vii  	test results and conclusion 
     by combining all the different operations described above to form the complete system  some preliminary tests are performed. the results in general depend on the text. the rate for syllable recognition is on the order of 1% - 1%  but the final rate for dictation  i.e.  the correction rate for the characters  is on the order of 1% -1%. in other words  some errors made in acoustic level can be finally corrected in the syntactic level. further improvements should be made on each part of the system and the project is still under active development. 
acknowledgement 
     the authors wish to thank many excellent students working with them in taiwan university in the last few years. without their diligent efforts such research results are simply impossible. 
