ion mappings 
josh d. tenenberg 
computer science department 
university of rochester 
rochester ny 1 

abstract 
an abstraction mapping over clausal form theories in first-order predicate calculus is presented that involves the renaming of predicate symbols. this renaming is not 1  in the sense that several predicate symbols ri ...  rn from the original theory are all replaced by a single symbol r in the abstract theory. in order to preserve consistency  however  the clauses that distinguish the rj's must be discarded in the abstract theory. this leads to a simple semantics; the union of the extensions of each of the ri's in any model of the original theory forms the extension of r in a model of the abstract theory. 
1 	introduction 
an important method of constraining search in combinatorially intractable problems is to map the representation of the problem into an abstract representation  solve the problem in the abstract search space and use the abstract solution to guide the search in the original problem space. work of this nature has been pursued by many researchers  most notably  amarel 1  hobbs 1  korf 1  plaisted 1  sacerdoti 1 . of importance in this work is that certain formal properties hold between the original and the abstract versions of the problem in order to justify the use of abstraction. in this paper we will define a syntactic abstraction mapping between two first-order theories that involves the renaming of predicate symbols  a subclass of those mappings first defined in  plaisted 1 . the mapping is demonstrated to have the following properties. first  the abstract thoery will be consistent if the original theory is; second  for each abstract theorem t  there exists a theorem t in the original theory for which t is an abstraction; third  the model-theoretic semantics of the abstract theory is intuitively appealing. 
in section 1 we present the formal definition of a 
predicate mapping  and show in section 1 both its 
this work was supported by the air force systems 
command  rome air development center  griffiss air 
force base  new york 1  and the air force office 
of scientific research  boiling afb  dc 1 under 
contract number f1-c-1 which supports the 
northeast artificial intelligence consortium  naic . 
the author would like to thank the xerox corporation 
university grants program for providing equipment used in 
the preparation of this paper. 
relation to plaisted's abstraction mappings  and its inherent problem of generating inconsistencies at the abstract level. section 1 provides a set of syntactic restrictions that satisfies a particular semantics  and section 1 demonstrates that these restrictions overcome the inconsistency problem by showing constructively that a model exists for the abstract theory given a model of the original theory. section 1 will consist of a small example  and section 1 finishes with concluding remarks. 
1 predicate mappings 
we will assume standard first-order logic terminology as in  enderton 1 . in addition  all wffs will be taken to be in clause form  robinson 1 . recall that a clause is a set of literals  and that clause c subsumes clause d if there exists a substitution  j  such that co is a subset of d. in addition  c and d are variants if c and d are instances of one another; that is  they are identical except for a renaming of variables. 
predicate mappings are functions that map predicate symbols from one first order language to those of another. given two sets of predicates pi  p1  f:p1-p1  
where the pi are the only symbols that possibly distinguish the first order languages li and l 1. what is noteworthy about f is that it is not necessarily 1  and therefore more than one relation symbol from i1 can map to the same relation symbol from l1. we can then define f over literals such that literals in li are mapped to literals in l1 by replacing the predicate symbols under f. likewise  f can be extended to clauses and sets of clauses in precisely this way. 
1 plaisted's abstraction mappings 
predicate mappings are a subclass of abstraction mappings that are defined in  plaisted 1 : 
definition. an abstraction is an association of a set f c  of clauses with each clause c such that f has the following properties: 
 1  if clause c1 is a resolvent of ci and c1 and 
d1 e fl c1   then there exist dl 1 fl cl  and d1 * ftc1  such that some resolvent of dl and d1 subsumes d1. 
 1  rnil  = {nil}.  nil is the empty clause.  
 1  if ci subsumes c1  then for every abstraction d1 of c1 there is an abstraction dl of ci such that dl subsumes d1. 
if f is a mapping with these properties  then we call fan abstraction mapping of clauses. 
	ttnenbtrg 	1 

in addition  plaisted proves the following theorem: 
theorem. suppose o is a mapping from literals to literals. let us extend to a mapping from clauses to clauses by  suppose o satisfies the following two properties: 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡~ . that is  	preserves complements. 
 1  if c and d are clauses and d is an instance of c  then is an intance of   that is  preserves instances. 
then  j  is an abstraction mapping. 
by this theorem  predicate mappings are abstraction mappings since they preserve both complement and instance. 
abstraction mappings have the property that from every clause c derivable from a set of clauses s  there exists a clause c derivable from as  that subsumes an abstraction of c  proven in  plaisted 1  . informally  we might say that every solution in the original problem space has a corresponding solution in the abstract space. this will be termed the upwardsolution property. 
a problem with abstraction mappings  however   and hence with predicate mappings  is that they may result in abstract theories which are inconsistent even though the original theory is consistent  which plaisted termed the  false proof' problem. as an example  suppose we have a clause set for a simple domain in which we have objects that are bottles ana glasses  with clauses stating that they are disjoint  note that all clauses will be in implication form for ease of interpretation : 
1  
¡¡1  and the clause stating that object a is a bottle: 
¡¡1  bottle a . 
if our predicate mapping f maps both bottle and glass to a new predicate container in the abstract theory  then from the abstract theory we can derive a contradiction: 
 - contained a  
the approach taken in the remainder of the paper is to restrict the original set of clauses over which the predicate mapping can be applied so as to preserve consistency. 
1 	restricted predicate mappings 
the intuition behind the semantics of restricted predicate mappings is that we would like the interpretation of a predicate in the abstract theory to be the union of the interpretations of each of the predicates in the original theory that map to it. so the objects that are containers are all of those objects that are either bottles or glasses  or any of the other things that map to container. 
we can obtain this interpretation syntactically by removing all of those axioms from the original theory that serve to distinguish the relations that are conflated at the abstract level. relations ri ...  rn in axiomatization 1  can be made indistinguishable in axiomatization 1 by systematically replacing each ri with a new symbol r' under some predicate mapping f as before  but including in 1 only those clauses flc  such that c is in bi and every clause mapping to c is derivable from  so  for instance  if we wish to conflate the relations glass and bottle by mapping them to the same symbol  say container  then given the axioms 

we would have in the new clause set only 

since corkability is true only of bottles  and therefore distinguishes bottles from glasses in the original theory  while breakability is true of both bottles and glasses. in other words  the clause 

would not be placed in the new clause set since one of the clauses that maps to it  namely is not derivable from the original clause set. 
this constraint  however  is stronger than required. for instance  it keeps one from ever asserting in the abstract theory that an object is a container in theories in which bottles and glasses are disjoint  as in  1  -  1  above  since it will never be the case that an object in the original theory is both a bottle and a glass. given the desired semantics  it is permissible to allow the inclusion of mapped positive clauses from the original theory  those clauses containing no negated literals  into the abstract theory. that is  if obiect a has property p  then certainly object a will have the abstract property f p   and likewise for predicates of any arity. thus  one can map the clause bottle a  to containera   since all bottles are containers  even though glass a  may not hold. in addition  this allows the mapping of clauses such as bottle a  v glass a  to container a  v container a . 
1 	formal definitions and proof of consistency 
we use  c f to denote the set of symbols or clauses that map into c under predicate mapping f. that is  
each such d will be called a specialization of c. if 1 is a clause set and d is a clause then we will use  d to mean that the null clause can be derived from the clause set d by the inference rule full resolution  robinson 1 . let 1 be an axiomatization in clause form of a theory over language l1 and let f be a predicate mapping from l1 to l1. we define restricted predicate mapping  to be a subset where 
 1  	there exists some 
and either c is a positive clause or 

the main theorem states that given a clause form axiomatization 1 and a restricted predicate mapping g  g 1  is consistent if is. in other words  consistency is preserved by the mapping. given that a first-order clause set 1 is consistent if and only if it is satisfiable  
i.e.  there exists a model that assigns truth to all of the clauses d such that  this theorem will be proven by constructing a model of g 1  from a model of 
standard formal semantic terminology will be assumed 
1 	reasoning  enderton 1 . in particular  an interpretation is a structure  d  g   where d is a set of objects  the domain  and g is an interpretation function that assigns to each constant symbol an object from d  to each n-function symbol an n-function mapping objects in d to an object in d  and to each n-predicate symbol an n-relation over objects in d. furtner  we say that y is a value assignment if it assigns to every variable symbol an object in d. if o is a symbol from the language over which g is defined  we say that g o  is the interpretation of o under m  which in the case of an n-predicate will be a set of n-tuples. in addition  clauses are assigned truth values according to semantic rules pertaining to the logical symbols  which in the case ofclause form is universal quantification  negation  and disjunction. if o is a clause and y is a value assignment  then m o  returns either true or false under y  denoted by my o . ifmy a  =truefor every value assignment y  then we say that o is true in m  or m o =true  otherwise o is false in m. an interpretation m =  is a model of a clause set if d is true in m for every clause d such that 
theorem: 
let 1 be an axiomatization in clause form of a theory over language l1  let f be a predicate mapping from l1 

to l1  and let g be the restricted predicate mapping defined relative to fas in  1  above. for any model 
m= 	is a model of 
where for every predicate symbol o of l1  
 1  
and for every non-predicate symbol o  
proof: 
let us assume that m' is not a model of g 1 . there must then be some clause  that is false in m' 
there are two cases to consider - first where c is a ositive clause  and second where c contains negated erals. 
case 1: assume c is a positive clause. for membership of c in  it must be that there exists some clause e €  c f such that by the definition of g. since m is a model of 1  e is true in m. then  for every value assignement y  my e =true. let us take truth in m andm' relative to a particular value assignment v. e is of the form 
  where ai represents the 
predicate pi's list of arguments. my e =true means that my pi ai   = true for some literal of e. since ai represents the terms  an ...  ajj  of pi  then 
additionally it follows 
g' flpi   under y  by the 
definitions of the interpretation function g given in 
 1  above  and the predicate mapping f. that is  for 
true  but this literal is 
in c  and so m'y c =true. therefore  true for every value assignment y since y was chosen arbitrarily  making m' c =true  contradicting our assumption. this dispatches the first case. 
case 1: assume c contains negated literals. 
for membership of c in g 1   for every clause 
1 h e and some by the definition of g. since m is a model of true for every such e  and therefore my e =true for every value assignment y. 
since c is false in m  there must exist a value assignment y such that m'y c  = false. let us take truth in m and m relative to this value assignment y. 
c is of the form 
...  -  sk bk k where ai and bi are the arguments of each of the literals. that is  some of the literals in c are negated  and some may be positive. for every literal l i c  my  = false. this means that for every e i  c f  for every positive literal w z e  my  w  = false  since were it not  then 
m y g w  =true for some literal w and hence m'y c =true by the definition of g'  contradicting our assumption that  therefore  under this 
value assignment one or more of the negated literals in each e e  c f must be true. 
since each -si bi  is false in nt under y  then each si bi  is true. that is  taking bi to represent the ground terms  bn ...  by  of each 
 si  for each of the negated 
literals under y. but by the definition of g'  for each of the si's there exists some 	 si f where 
under this same value 
assignment. that is  my 	false for some 
specialization qi of each predicate si of each negated literal in c. let e be the clause consisting of the negation of each such qi bi  and some specialization of each of the positive literals in c. note tnat my e  = false  since each of the literals in e are false. 
this then contradicts the earlier conclusion that every e i  c f be assigned true by m for every value assignment y. this dispatches case 1  and hence establishes tne theorem  qed 
restricted predicate mappings are no longer abstraction mappings by plaisted's definition  since the upward-solution property is notpreserved. however  abandoning the completeness afforded by the upwardsolution property is likely what is required to solve frequently encountered problems at a lower cost than if they were solved directly in the original theory. these restricted mappings do have what can be termed the downward-solution property  since a trivial corollary of the theorem is that for every clause derivable from tne abstract theory  there will be a specialization of it derivable from the original theory. note that there may be no solution to tne problem in the abstract theory since its solution requires some of the details that are ignored at that level. however  every abstract solution is guaranteed to have a specialized solution to the original problem. 
an important objection that one might have is that the syntactic mapping function g given in  1  is undecidable  since it is based upon determining 1 - d for every clause d mapping to each candidate clause in the abstract clause set. one should note  however  that the search for derivability can always be arbitrarily bounded  and if no proof is obtained within this bound then it can be assumed that this clause is not derivable. in this way  consistency is still preserved between the original and the abstract theory  the abstract theory being simply weaker than it theoretically could be  i.e.  having fewer theorems. the appropriate amount of resource that one should expend in constructing abstract theories is quite an important issue but outside the bounds of this paper. these kinds of performance choices  however  are discussed in  hartman and tenenberg 1   elsewhere in this volume. 
	tenenberg 	1 

choice about which clauses remain in the abstract theory is not done so on an arbitrary basis. 
	1 	conclusion 
a useful way of viewing abstraction is as a function that maps one first-order theory into another. we have defined predicate mappings that involve the renaming of predicate symbols  where more than one of the original symbols can map into the same abstract symbol. these predicate mappings are a subclass of plaisted's abstraction mappings  and as such suffer from the fact that consistency in the original theory may be lost in the abstract theory. to remedy this  we introduced syntactic restrictions to the predicate mapping that guarantee the preservation of consistency. these restrictions amount to eliminating the axioms in the original theory that distinguish the predicates which are being conflated in the abstract theory. this has a simple semantics; the extension of each of the predicates p in a model of the abstract theory can be constructed from the union of the extensions of each of the predicates that map to p in any model of the original theory. a proof of this was provided  along with an example demonstrating one possible use of the restricted predicate mappings. 
acknowledgements 
i would like to thank my advisor  dana ballard  for his encouragement and wealth of ideas on abstraction. in addition  i would like to thank members of the ur-ai group  especially leo hartman  who always seems a step ahead  sometimes two  and jay weber  for pushing for a semantic definition. i am also grateful to mark fulk  for finding the problems with the old versions of the main proof  and pointing the way to the correct version. 
