 away from specific times  since two different systems may have analogous behaviors  but change states at different times. this is where my formal treatment diverges from that of kuipers. 
definition 1 when a system changes from one state to any other distinct state  it is said to transition. transitions only occur at distinguished time-points  and every distinguished time point marks a transition. it will prove useful to be able to refer to these transitions independent of the time at which they occur  thus the sequence of transitions for a behavior will be denoted by the set {1 }. every behavior also has a time function  t  which takes tran-

sitions to the distinguished time-points when they occur. 
1 	reasoning 

　　the intuition is that each 1 marks an event that changes the state of the system. when comparing two behaviors  i match them up event by event and use the time functions to tell whether one system is changing faster or slower than the other. 
1 	comparing two behaviors 
to compare two behaviors  they must be distinguishable; i use the hat accent to denote the second behavior. thus t denotes the time function of the second system  and 
f t y1i   denotes the second system's value of f at the time of the first transition. i assume that only systems with identical structural descriptions will be compared. for this paper  space considerations necessitate the additional assumption that behaviors be topologically equal  as defined below. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 	the behaviors of two systems  s and s  are 
topologically equal if they have the same sequence of transitions  1   . . .   yk  and forall i such that 1   i   k  

　　the assumption of topological equality rules out possibilities like the block failing to make a complete oscillation if its mass was increased too much  but it does allow a certain pliability. if two behaviors are topologically equal  their respective sets of landmarks must share the same ordinal relationships  but the underlying real values for the landmarks can be different. 
　　as shown in   this assumption can be relaxed  but even with it  the problem is nontrivial. consider two oscillating spring-block systems. even if the blocks have different mass and the spring constants differ  the two systems have topologically equal behavior. yet the relative values of parameters such as period of oscillation may be different. this is what comparative analysis must determine. 
　before i can explain the techniques for performing differential qualitative analysis  i need to present a notation for describing the desired output. it's easy to compare the values of parameters at transition points: 
　　for example  if the two spring-block systems were both started with negative displacement and zero velocity  i.e.  x   1 and v = 1   their first transition would occur when 
x reached zero. this notation allows one to express that the second block is moving slower at the point of transition: v 1 . it is important to distinguish the relative change notation from statements about values and derivatives. even though is positive  and 
qdir{ 
1 	comparing behaviors over intervals 
it turns out to be somewhat more complicated to compare two behaviors over the intervals between transitions. what does it mean to says that one curve is lower than another over an interval  exactly what points should be compared  
  you can't compare arbitrary points on the two curves  because intuitively it seems that the curve for param-

  you can't use absolute time to link corresponding points  because  might be defined for time intervals of different lengths. 
the first line of figure 1 provides the correct intuition: 
 if the mass of the block increases  the force on the block is the same.  this doesn't mean force is invariant as a function of time-that isn't true. consider the time when the small block is at its rest position; the spring applies no force. but since the large block is moving slower  it won't have reached the rest position and so there will be a force applied. what the statement means is that force is invariant as a function of position. for every position that the block occupies  force is equal in the two systems  even though the two blocks occupy the positions at different times. although parameters are defined as functions of time  they often need to be compared from the perspective of other parameters. here it proved advantageous to consider force as a function of position. although people understand arguments that leave these changes of variable implicit  the notion must be made precise and explicit if computers are to perform comparative analysis. 
f 
weld 
proposition 1 it is possible to use a parameter  x  as a perspective over a transition interval  if and only if the following three conditions hold: 

when these conditions hold  the parameter x is called a 
covering perspective.1 
　　the intuition behind this proposition is simple. it is only possible to construct  exists; since parameters are continuous  x must be strictly monotonic to guarantee invertibility. the last two conditions ensure that  have the same domain so that the universal 
quantification makes sense. note the beauty of this result- it is computationally easy to check for covering perspectives. 
1 	non-uniqueness 
this section shows that parametric comparisons over intervals are not unique. in other words  just because for a perspective x doesn't mean that there doesn't exist some other perspective z such that 
   although this may seem like a disappointing weakness  it isn't necessarily bad. in fact  it's inevitable. after all  everything is relative to one's perspective. imagine a machine which hourly logs the linearly increasing concentration of alcohol in a fermentation tank. it produces the following sequence of measurements: 1  1  1  1  etc. but in the identical tank nearby  the logging machine has a defective motor which runs too slowly and delays the measurements. although the fermentation is proceeding at the same pace in both tanks  the second log will read: 1  1  1  1  etc. thus the plant inspector  who only sees the alcohol-time curve from the perspective of the logging device  might think that second tank was fermenting more quickly even though the only real change was a slowdown in the speed of the timing motor. 
proposition 1 given a system with parameters p x y  and z such that x  y and z are covering persvectives over  then it is possible that and 
p v   m + 1   ' 
   the example shown in figure 1 illustrates the proof by construction. the thin lines indicate the values of the first system while the dotted lines indicate the value of the second system. the first row shows that from the time perspective the behavior of p doesn't change. the second row shows the relative change of the perspectives. the third 

   'space considerations preclude an important generalisation of perspectives; see  for the details. 

1 	differential analysis 
this section presents a representative sampling of the inference rules which have been incorporated as part of ca a zetalisp program which solves comparative analysis problems using the differential qualitative technique. the rules are presented as theorems since they have been proven sound . as a result  ca is guaranteed to produce only correct answers. 
1 	duration rule 
this rule is the basis for the very powerful inference: distance equals rate times duration. if the rate is slower in the second simulation  then it will take longer to reach the same transition point. although this may seem obvious  perspectives are required to make precise the notion of 'rate is slower'; this makes it subtle. note that the parameter x has a double purpose in this theorem: it has v as its time derivative  and it is also the perspective from which v is seen to furthermore  it is unnecessary to explicitly require x to traverse the same distance in the two systems because a  is a covering perspective. 

   the duration theorem is implemented as the ark rule shown in figure 1. note the close correspondence between the ark form and the actual theorem statement; this ensures a correct implementation. 
   it would be nice if one could show that the duration rule was sound if the premise was weakened to have for some arbitrary covering perspective p. unfortunately  the non-uniqueness theorem shows that this is false. 

 it may be helpful to think of v as velocity  and x as position. 
reasoning 

rules from qualitative arithmetic 
research in qualitative simulation  1 1  has developed constraints on derivative values for parameters in add  
mult  and monotonic function constraints. for example  and the derivatives of x and y are posi-
tive  then z must have positive derivative as well. these rules can be generalized to include relative change values at transition points and over intervals. here  i present just the rule for an mult constraint at a transition point. 
proposition 1 multiplication rule 
ifx  y  and z are parameters which are related by the constraint  z = mult x y ; then the following table displays the possible relative change values for z at a transition point: 
1 	self-reference and constants 

these rules deal with establishing relative change values for perspectives and constants. although simple  they are quite important. the intuition behind the first is that if the plant manager was foolish enough to try and use the logging devices to log their own speed  he wouldn't get a useful result. both the normal and slow machines would record that they turned one full revolution during each revolution of the timing motor. 
proposition 1 self reference rule 

   frequently a system will contain a few constant parameters whose values never change. the following rules are a simple way to express relationships between constants in the notation of comparative analysis. the intuition is that since perspectives just scale time  and constants don't change over time  all perspectives agree on the behavior of constants. if there was no fermentation happening in either vat  i.e. the alcohol concentration was constant in both vats   and the concentration of alcohol was higher in vat two  then both logging devices would agree on this even though their timing motors differed. 

　　1 the antagonistic effect of the chain rule makes this rule by far the hardest to prove. i owe special thanks to dave mcallester who suggested a successful approach; see  for the details. 
1 	evaluation 
to test this theory a program  ca  has been written in zetalisp on a symbolics lisp machine. when a user selects an example  ca runs qsim  on the example to produce a set of qualitative behaviors for the example. the user selects a behavior and also a set of perturbations in the form of initial relative change values for the independent parameters. ca translates the qsim behavior and perturbations into ark1 assertions. at this point ark forward chains using the rules of the last section. figure 1 shows the encoding of proposition 1 as an ark rule. the simplicity of the transformation leads to confidence in the correctness of the implementation. and the fact that most rules get used in each explanation  establishes their utility. 

figure 1: propositions are encoded into ark rules 
1 	differential analysis usually works 
since ark maintains justifications for all its assertions  it is possible to generate explanations for ca's conclusions. consider the spring/ block example. the system is defined in terms of four independent parameters: spring constant  and velocity v and two others: 
　 ark it a 'clean' descendant of amord  implemented by howie shrobe and others. 
weld 


figure 1: ca generated explanation 
   at present ca has been tested for several different perturbations on over a dozen examples  1j. while it has never produced an incorrect answer  ca doesn't always produce a result. 
1 	differential analysis is incomplete 
there are three factors that can cause differential qualitative analysis to fail to predict all of the relative changes in a perturbed system: nonexistence of an answer  ambiguity resulting from the qualitative arithmetic  and the nonexistence of a useful perspective. 
1.1 	no answer possible 
some questions simply don't contain enough information. for example:  what would happen to the period of oscillation  if the mass of the block was heavier and the spring was more stiff   noone can answer this question  because there is no answer. the increased mass tends to increase 
1 	reasoning 
the period  but the increased sping constant tends to decrease it. thus the duration might increase  decrease or remain unchanged. 
1.1 	ambiguity 
since differential analysis uses the same weak qualitative arithmetic utilized by other forms of qualitative reasoning  it should not be surprising that ambiguity causes a problem here as well. consider the spring/block system of the last section. differential analysis correctly predicts that the block will take longer to reach the first transition  the block's rest position. but the period of oscillation requires four transitions: starting from a negative initial position  x transitions to zero  then to a positive maximum  then to zero  and finally to its original position. because of ambiguity in the extreme positions of x  differential analysis can make no prediction about duration of these last three transition intervals. why is this  because of the qualitative arithmetic  it is impossible to show that   i.e.  that x sweeps out the same distance when the mass is increased. as a result  x is not known to be a covering perspective so the derivative and duration rules can not be used. thus there is no way to determine the relative change value for the whole period. 
   if the structural description of the spring is augmented with equations describing conservation of energy 1 ca can deduce that since potential energy is equal to force times distance  increasing the block's mass leaves total energy unchanged. this allows it to recognize x as a covering perspective and deduce that the duration increases for each of the period's four transition intervals. 
1.1 	no useful perspective 
other questions are even more difficult to answer:  what would happen to the period of oscillation if the initial displacement is increased   since people have trouble with this question  it should not be surprising that differential analysis cannot answer the question either. in fact  the answer is  period does not change   but the only way to show this is to solve the differential equation for an equation for period and notice that it is independent of amplitude. the difficulty is rooted in the fact that no useful perspective exists to provide a handle on the problem. there is no system parameter p such that . clearly x won't work as a perspective  since it doesn't sweep out the same range in the two cases. in fact  it is easy to prove that no artifical perspective could satisfy the equation . 
1 	related work 
despite its importance  little work has been done on comparative analysis. forbus discussed differential qualitative 
　　1 as kuipers did to make qsim eliminate physically impossible behaviors of the spring leaving'only the correct stable oscillation prediction . 

analysis  1  pages 1   but attempted no implementation. he defined quantities q1 greater than q1 over an interval  t  if for all instants in the interval   measured at that instant. unfortunately  this definition has several problems. since the quantification is over a single interval of time  it is impossible to make comparisons of systems whose time behavior changes as a result of a perturbation. thus his attempt to formalize  distance equals rate times duration  in predicate calculus is useless. rates can only be compared if the duration of an interval is unchanged! 
   but even if the quantification was ok  forbus' comparison is almost never a useful one to make. in the spring/block case  for example  it simply isn't the case that the heavyblock is always moving slower than the small-block; the periods get out of phase. the key to solving these problems is in the use of perspectives  discussed in this paper. the comparison on velocity  necessary to predict that the period lengthens  is valid only from the perspective of position. 
   other fields of study address related problems. engineering sensitivity analysis considers quantitative answers to comparative analysis questions. however  sensitivity analysis does not generate explanations  and it could not solve the spring/block problem without an explicit equation for period. 
1 	conclusions and future work 
this paper has discussed the problem of comparative analysis and emphasized the differential solution technique. the major advance over previous work is definition of interval comparisons using perspectives. this has allowed a fast implementation of the technique  precise formalization  and a proof of soundness. 
   but differential qualitative analysis is just one way to solve comparative analysis problems. another technique is exaggeration which solves the original spring/block problem with following explanation: 
     u if the mass were infinite then the block wouldn't move  so the period would be infinite. thus  if you increase the mass by only a little bit  then the duration of the period would increase a bit as well.  
   exaggeration is a kind of asymptotic analysis-the perturbation is taken to the limit to make the effect more easily visible. exaggeration is common in intuitive descriptions of physical behavior and appears quite powerful. as the example shows it often results in a concise explanation. 
   but exaggeration is also tricky. it works only when the system responds monotonically to perturbations. furthermore  it requires non-standard analysis to reason about infinity; it's quite easy to concoct a plausible exaggerated argument which is faulty. a careful formalization of the technique is the topic of current research. 
   perhaps the greatest liability of differential qualitative analysis is its incompleteness. although exaggeration is likely to be incomplete as well  early results suggest that it will work in cases when differential analysis fails. a program which uses both techniques could prove exceptionally powerful. 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s 
   this work was greatly influenced by discussions with too many people to list here  but jeff shrager  david mcallester  tomas lozano-perez  ben kuipers  glenn kramer  pat hayes  johan de kleer  and ernie davis were especially helpful. brian williams  mark shirley  jerry roylance  ken forbus  and randy davis provided helpful comments on early drafts. 
