 
we are currently developing an algorithm for knowledge-based correspondence analysis in dynamic stereo images. in this paper we describe the feature selection algorithms and the relational data structure used for matching. we also present a clustering algorithm that is used to group the tokens into sets of similar tokens. the matching algorithm uses this classification information to plan a matching strategy. the least ambiguous image features are matched first and are used as a 'handle' for constraint propagation. we present two algorithms for feature selection in colour images -- a region grower and an interest operator  as well as experimental results for point classification and region classification. 
i introduction 
we are currently implementing a knowledge-based vision system called 
sissy  stereo image sequences system  for 1-d reconstruction from dynamic stereo images using a knowledge-based approach. the input are colour images  since colour provides additional features for matching and also for the classification of boundaries. the system consists of the following modules: 
1. modules to compute a rich structurad image description based on regions  edges  straight lines  vertices  critical points  texture  and optical flow fields 
1. a classification module  dreschler-fiicher trlend1  performing a clustering algorithm on the features and grouping ambiguous features  according to some similarity criteron  into equivalence classes. the correspondence analysis starts with matching classes of features rather than features. classes with only few elements are matched first  since unique features may provide a starting point for constraint propagation. 
1. a matching module for knowledge based correspondence analysis  implemented as a blackboard system with supervisor  scheduler  dispatcher  blackboard  attention list  and a procedural knowledge base for geometric and kinetic reasoning. 
1. the fuzzy temporal geometric scene description reflecting the state of the geometrical reconstruction accomplished so for - object descriptions  observer motion  moving and stationary objects  light sources -¡ö together with information on numerical accuracy and confidence. this paper describes the feature selection part of the sissy-system; for a discussion of the correspondence analysis see dreschler-fucher 
1. 
ii feature selection 
a. region growing 
there are two classical approaches to region growing - region growing via thresholding and region growing via merging  zucker 1   both approaches have advantages as well as drawbacks; region merging  generally  suffers from a lack of global knowledge  whereas thresholding is problematic because of neglecting the local context. therefore  we suggest a region growing algorithm by hierarchical clustering in 1-d feature space  that combines position information with colour features. each pixel is represented by a feature vector consisting of the three colour features rob and the two image coordinates. thus  pixels have to be similar in colour and in position to form a cluster in 1-d space. since the clusters will be flat and of arbitrary shape  we chose a hierarchical clustering based on the minimal spanning tree  mst   which does neither require a functional model of the data  nor a fixed number of classes  zahn 1 . graph-based clustering reveals structure in the data and does not impose structure  like model-based classification. this is important  since we do not want to use scene-specific knowledge. generally  the computation of the mst for a large data set is computationally expensive in storage and computation time requirements. these costs can be reduced considerably by the following observation: 
typically  the nearest neighbor of a pixel in 1-d feature space is one of its 1-connected neighbors in the image. therefore  we restrict the connections in the mst to those between 1-connected pixels. a nice property of this clustering algorithm is that each subtree of the mst directly corresponds to a 1-connected subregion of the image. thus  segmentation is done by simply removing inconsistent edges from the mst. the mst provides global as well as local information to detect such inconsistent edges. since there is no restriction on sise and shape of the regions  the mst-algorithm can detect ebngated  thin regions as well as compact regions. 
burr + chien 1 used a mst-algorithm region grower for black-andwhite images and report similar good results. burr and chiens's algorithm divides the image into a set of elementary regions and fits planes to those regions. the mst is then constructed from these elementary regions. contrary to burr and chien we compute the mst for single pixels  and thus achieve a finer spatial resolution. this is possible  because in colour images each pixel provides three intensity features  and thus we have a feature vector already on pixel level. 
fig. 1 shows the segmentation result for the house scene from fig. 1. 
the image was recorded on a sunny day. the sky is entirely deep blue and the houses are painted in pastell shades  the left one is light brown and the right one is pink. the image has a resolution of 1 pixels. please  note that big compact regions are detected as well as small  ebngated regions. 
b. points of interest 
points of interest are small local image features with significant variation of the image density function in more than one direction. examples of points of interest are small dots  vertices  or endpoints of lines. feature detectors for points of interest are usually called interest operators. points of interest are important for 1-d reconstruction and correspondence analysis  since they provide well defined points for measurement. so far  interest operators have been developed only for black-and-white images. 
our main concern has been to verity the significance of colour information for feature detection and correspondence analysis. therefore  we decided to use the interest operator of moravec 1 for first experiments with colour. moravec's operator is easy to implement and we used this operator previously for motion analysis  dreschler + nagel st . we adapted moravec's operator to colour images by changing the computation of the directional variances. instead of computing squared grey value differences  the squared differences of colour vectors are computed. 
figure 1 shows the results obtained with the interest operator. most of the visually interesting points are detected - see bartsch et al. 1 
	dreschler-flschor and gnutzmann 	1 
for a detailed discussion. these results have comfirmed our assumption that colour is a helpful cue for feature selection. at present we are developing an analytical interest operator for colour images  since analytical interest operators are superior to heuristic operators with respect to the spatial resolution. 
c. classification 
after feature selection the features are grouped into similarity classes according to a similarity function. the classification module performs a clustering algorithm on the features using the same similarity function that is used by the correspondence algorithm. the correspondence analysis starts with matching classes of features rather than features. classes with only few elements are matched first  since unique features may provide a starting point for constraint propagation. the classification module uses a  minimal-spanning-tree -algorithm for clustering  for the same reasons as the region grower. the minimalspanning-tree is segmented by removing all edges longer than a threshold that is computed from the mean edge length and the variance of the edge length in the minimal spanning tree. 
classification of points - fig. 1 shows classification results for the points of interest. the set of all points of interest is indicated by white markers. in each of the figures a and b one class of points is marked by black markers. fig. 1a shows a class of  all points looking like the horisontal end points of cross-bars . fig. 1b shows a class with only two members. there are some classes with points unique in the image and thus  a promising starting point for matching  e.g. the two top corners of the chimney. please note that many points do look alike locally on pixel level  even when they are globally quite different in structure. the similarity function used for classification was the normalised cross-correlation in a 1-by-1 neighborhood. 
classification of regions - the classification of regions is based on a distance function computed from several features: area  mean rgb-values  compactness  and the principle moments of inertia. these features are scaled to sero mean and variance 1 to provide a uniform weight for all features. 
fig.1 shows results of the region classification. there is one big class of dark regions of more or less rectangular shape corresponding to the windows; a smaller class combines the five window regions that are darker than the others 
there are some classes with only one member  e.g. the sky region. 
those unique regions may serve as starting points for the matching algorithm. 
in addition to guiding the matching process we want to exploit the classification as second-order-features. for example  a class of points of interest with many members is a cue to textured regions; classes of parallel lines are helpful to detect separate objets. 
lll implementation and conclusions 
so far  we have implemented the modules for feature extraction from colour images that perform quite satisfactory  region growing  points of interest  edge detection  and a database for easy retrieval of structural image descriptions together with a versatile interactive graphical display facility  sprengel 1   and there are promissing results for the classification of points of interest and regions. all algorithms presented here are programmed in ada. 
acknowledgements - this work has been funded partially by a grant from the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft  dfg . th. bartsch implemented the interest operator  c. schroder implemented the region grower  and rainer sprengel implemented the database. we thank i. heer-muck and h. kruger for keeping the hardware running  and h. faasch  and v. haarslev for their ready help in case of system trouble. 
bartsch et al. 1 : merkmalsdetektion in farbbildern als grundlage zur korrespondenzanalyse in stereo-bildfolgen  thomas bartsch  leonie s. dreschler-fischer  and carsten schroder  proc. 
1. dagm-symposium  paderborn  west germany   september 
1  g. hartmann  hrsg.   informatik fachberichte 1  springer verlag berlin heidelberg new york tokyo 1  pp. 1. 
burr + chien 1 : the minimal spanning tree in visual data segmentation  d.j. burr and r.t. chien  proc. of the 1rd int. joint conf. pattern recognition  coronado  california  u.s.a.  november 1  pp. 1. 
dreschler + nagel 1 : volumetric model and 1d-trajectory of a 
moving car derived from monocular tv frame sequences of a 
street scene  l. dreschler and h.-h. nagel  computer graphics and image processing 1  1  1 . 
dreschler-fischer 1 : a blackboard system for dynamic stereo matching  l.s. dreschler-fischer  proc. 1st int. conf. on autonomous mobile systems  amsterdam  the netherlands  december 1   in press  . 
dreschler-fischer + triendl 1 t the asterix-system: a feature based approach to the correspondence problem  leonie s. dreschler-fischer and ernst e. triendl  proc. darpa-image understanding workshop  new orleans/la  october 1  pp. 1. 
moravec 1 : obstacle avoidance and navigation in the real world by a seeing robot rover  h.-p. moravec  ph.d. thesis dept. comp. science  stanford university  stanford/ca  1  see also: 
report cmu-ri-tr-1 robotics institute  carnegie-mellonuniversity  pittsburgh/pa  september 1  . 
sprengel 1 : desire - entwurf einer datenstruktur zur symbolischen beschreibung von bildern  rainer sprengel  technical note fbi-hh-m1 universitat hamburg  fachbereich informatik  hamburg  west germany  november 1 . 
zahn 1 : graph-theoretical methods for detecting and describing 
gestalt clusters  c.t. zahn  ieee trans  on computers c-1  1-s1  1 . 
zncker 1 : region growing: childhood and adolescence  s.w. zucker  computer graphics and image processing 1  1 1 . 

fig. 1: house scene: segmentation results 

1 	perception 


