determining cylindrical shape 
from 
contour and shading 
minoru asada* 
center for automation research  university of maryland  college park  md 1 

a b s t r a c t 
this paper presents an algorithm for reconstructing the shape of a cylindrical object f r o m contour and shading w i t h o u t knowing the surface albedo of the object or the lighting conditions of the scene. the input image is segmented into spherical  cylindrical  or planar surfaces by analyzing local shading. the cylindrical surface is characterized by the direction of the generating lines  determined f r o m spatial derivatives in the image. the brightest generating line has strong constraints on the shading analysis on the cylindrical surface and leads to a simplification of the equation which represents the relation between the contour shape and the shading. a l t h o u g h there remains one degree of freedom between the surface normal of the base plane and the slant angle of the generating line  we can uniquely recover the cylindrical shape f r o m this solution  up to reflection . experimental results for synthetic image are shown. 
1 . i n t r o d u c t i o n 
　　　recent studies on computer vision have exploited many methods for interpreting a brightness pattern in an image as a shape in 1-d space using physical constraints on the light source  object class  surface properties of the object and multiple views  brady 1  especially  contour and shading in the image have a very important role in recovering surface shape in both computer vision and human perception  marr 1 . shape from shading methods obtain surface properties by exploiting photometric constraints on the image formation process  horn 1  woodham 1  the difficulty in these methods is to characterize the lighting geometry  because most of them cannot recover the surface shape unless the lighting conditions are given. although pentland  pentland 1  has tried to extract information on shape locally without knowing the lighting conditions  his method requires strong assumptions  e.g. that the surface is spherical. interpretation of line drawings has been one focal point of vision work  and there are successful results in the polyhedral world  mackworth 1  huffman 1 and sugihara 1 . outside this world  only qualitative description is obtained  barrow and tenebaum 1  marr 1   such as extremal boundaries and surface discontinuities  or a strong assumption is necessary to recover the surface orientation  e.g. the extremum principle  brady and yuille 1 . the first quantitative approach to recovering surface shape from contour and shading was developed by horn  horn 1 . in his method  the reflectance 
this work was supported by the defense advanced research projects 
agency and the u s army center for night vision and electro-optics under grant daab1-k-f1 
 permanent address department of control engineering  osaka university  
toyonaka  osaka 1  japan 
map is effectively used to infer the surface normals of the planes of a block in gradient space. also ikeuchi and horn  ikeuchi and horn 1  used the occluding boundaries as boundary conditions on their relaxation method to infer the surface structure. both methods  however  assume that the the lighting conditions and the surface albedo are known. 
     in those methods  the surface type is planar  in the polyhedral world  or doubly curved  for shading analysis . between them is the class of objects that have singly curved surfaces. the most representative object in this class is a cylindrical object which can be often seen in daily life. cylindrical models have been popular for describing many kinds of objects in terms of generalized cylinders since binford  binford 1  introduced them as a useful method of volume description for 1-d objects. although several papers have been published which attempt to describe cylindrical shape parameters from range data  nevatia and binford 1  rao and nevatia 1  or which examine geometrical properties of generalized cylinders with shadows and occluding boundaries  shafer 1   there are few papers dealing with the problem of reconstructing cylindrical shapes from images. asada et al.  asada and tsuji 1a b  proposed two approaches to reconstructing a cylindrical shape from the viewpoint of dynamic scene analysis. one approach is to analyze shading information to obtain the normals of surfaces  which are useful for finding the correspondence of base planes between consecutive frames. local shading analysis  pentland 1  is not applicable to estimating the normal at a point on a cylindrical surface unless the lighting conditions are known. with knowledge of the lighting conditions  the motion between frames can be determined by the extended reflectance map method. the other approach is to analyze changes in contour shape between frames. if the base planes of an object are perpendicular to its cylindrical surface  the 1-d geometry of the object can be recovered from two views. the first approach cannot reconstruct the cylindrical shape without knowledge of the lighting conditions; the second approach needs two frames and assumes perpendicularity of the base plane to the cylindrical surface. 
     we consider the image understanding problem of inferring the shape of a cylindrical object from an image such as figure 1. this paper presents a new method which determines the shape of a cylindrical object using the contour of the base plane and the intensities on the cylindrical surface without knowledge about the lighting conditions of the scene or the albedo. local shading analysis enables us to segment the input image into planar  cylindrical and spherical surfaces and tells us the direction of the generating line from which the cylindrical surface is produced. the brightest generating line  like singular points and occluding boundaries which play a important role in shape from shading methods  ikeuchi and horn 1  brooks and horn 1   provides strong constraints on 
	asada 	1 

shading analysis on the cylindrical surface and on the relation between the contour shape of the base and the brightness on the cylindrical surface. 
     the validity of our method is tested using a synthetic image. 
1 . b a s i c a s s u m p t i o n s 
     the computational analyses in this paper are based on the following three assumptions. 
  1  the projection from scene to image is orthographic. 
  1  the object has cylindrical and planar surfaces. here  a cylindrical surface is defined as a surface covered with parallel lines  generating lines  that pass through a closed curve 
  1  the surface is lambertian and has a constant albedo. it is not necessary that both the planar surface and the cylindrical surface have the same albedo. the distribution of illumination is constant  distant point source illumination . 
　　we can segment an image projected from a scene containing unknown shaped objects into spherical  cylindrical  and planar surfaces if  1  is assumed. that is  we can test whether 
 1  is true or not. 
1 . s h a d i n g a n a l y s i s 
1 local shading analysis 
　　　pentland presented a computational analysis of local shading without knowledge of lighting conditions. it gives an estimate of surface orientation for an umbilical point  having equal principal curvatures  on a lambertian surface  and also identifies whether the surface is planar  singly or doubly curved at each point. 
　　　we use this algorithm for segmentation of the image to find each surface and to identify shape as spherical  cylindrical  or planar. figure 1 shows an input image  a 1 by 1bit digital image of a cylindrical object synthesized by computer  and figure 1 is the result of the analysis of figure 1. from this picture we obtain the information that the object has a cylindrical and a planar surface. another important feature of the cylindrical surface  the direction of its generating lines in the image  is also obtained. 
1 brightness on the cylindrical surface 
     for simplicity and without loss of generality  we can choose the viewer-centered coordinate system w  so that the x-axis is parallel to the generating line in the image  the generating line has slant angle a relative to the x-axis in 1-d space  and the z-axis is parallel to the viewing direction. 
first  let us consider the brightness on the cylindrical sur-
face in the cylindrical surface centered coordinate system we whose x-axis is parallel to the generating line in 1-d space and whose y-axis is parallel to that of the viewer centered coordinate system w1. figure 1 shows the relation between these two coordinate systems. the observed intensity e1 at a point in w. is equal to the observed intensity e. at the same point in wt because we assume a lambertian surface. et can be represented by the following equation: 
		 1  
where is the albedo of the cylindrical surface  / is the intensity of the illuminant  denotes the surface orientation on the cylindrical surface and  pk q e  is the light source direction in . since these parameters are defined in wc  the surface orientation on the cylindrical surface has only one parameter 1 at each point as in figure 1  that is  therefore  eqn  1  becomes 

this equation tells us the following important facts about the brightness on the cylindrical surface: 
* rather than knowing the actual lighting conditions  the illuminant / and the direction of light source  we can always assume normalized lighting conditions where the illuminant is /' and the direction of the light source is * the brightest intensity on the cylindrical surface where 
* the ratio of the intensity of a point to that of the brightest point  gives us the cosine of the angle between the surface normal  1  at the point and the normalized light source direction  x . 
* the intensity on the cylindrical surface gives us no informa-tion about the slant angle  o  of the generating line. 
we call this equation the brightness constraint equation on the cylindrical surface. 
1 . c y l i n d r i c a l s h a p e f r o m c o n t o u r a n d s h a d i n g 
1 cylindrical shape f r o m c o n t o u r 
a cylindrical shape is characterized by the shape of a 

cross-section perpendicular to the cylindrical surface  because the normal to the contour of the intersection represents the surface normal on the cylindrical surface  as shown in figure 1. 
1 	perception 



1. experimental results 
