 
   we present a technique for identifying and matching significant features in image pairs. significant features are found by first detecting contours on each image  and then choosing distinctive or significant edge elements along these contours. each contour is treated independently. the feature detection algorithm is iterative and is designed to work on complex scenes significant features are first matched between images by using only local criteria such as curvature and intensities about the features  and we do not initially assume that we know the approximate position of matches in the images. after an initial set of possible matches is found  crosscorrelation is then used only to confirm or reject these matches. feature detection and matching are extended to scale space features are also used to segment contours  and can be used to match contour segments between images the algorithm is appropriate for binocular stereo  motion stereo and object motion. 
i. introduction 
   computer algorithms for stereo vision and motion detection require the matching of features in one image to those in another. this is the correspondence problem. if the relative positions of features change from one image to another either because of motion in the scene or motion of the camera  then these changes can be used to estimate the relative velocities of moving objects in the scene or to partially reconstruct the three-dimensional surfaces 
   we seek a robust method for detecting these changes. to make this reliable  we need to first determine the location of features that are distinctive in the images; easily distinguished between views; and stable with respect to scale of viewing  orientation  and such projective effects as occlusion and perspective distortion. these features should be interesting  in the sense of  moravec 1   and be significantly different from their neighbors. they should be projections into the two-dimensional image of distinctive features in the three dimensional world  such as corners  contours  or surface markings. 
   our main job then is to find significant features in complex images such as those in figs. 1. in dealing 
*present address: boeing military airplane company  ms 1  pob 1  seattle  wa 1  usa. 
with the problem of complex images  we will proceed  n a manner similar to many of the edge-based approaches  fischler and bolles 1    freeman and davis 1    kruse and rao 1  in that we start our analysis with data structured into connected lists of edge-elements or contours. part of our job will be to partition image contours at places where the edge connectivity may be deviating from the corresponding 1-space surface connectivity. these significant features then define our contour segmentation. in general the original contours will notlimit themselves to following the outline of physical objects - rather  they follow level-set contours defined by some function on the underlying intensity surface. 
   we find our significant features by locating significant relative extrema of curvature along contours. interesting features have high spatial gradients in all directions. a contour has a high spatial gradient in the orthogonal direction  and thus we have limited our problem to a search for high gradients in one direction - along the contour. these are extrema of curvature. 
   after finding a set of features in two images  and segmenting positions along the contours   we wish to put as many of these features as possible into correspondence. corner matchers have been presented by  shah and jain 1  and  barnard and thompson 1 . here we wish to match significant features between images by local properties that are defined in terms of the original contour formation. these properties are curvature and the intensities on either side of the contour. we only use area based cross correlation  hannah 1  to verify a candidate match  not to originally locate a match. 
ii. edge and significant feature detection 
in a common approach to edge detection  marr and 
hildreth 1   edge-elements are positioned at the zeros in the result of convolving an intensity image with the laplacian of a gaussian  log . the log is proportional to the difference of two gaussians  dog  with standard deviations s' and s as long as  s' - s  is  small.  
   second derivative operators produce zeros at extrema of intensity changes. zero crossings  edgeelements  can be interpolated in the log to subpixel precision. contours are created by linking the zero crossings into edge lists. in our case the direction of a contour  the ordering of edge-elements in the edge 
	singer 	1 
   
list  is not arbitrary  but is set such that the positive region in the dog is on the left-hand side of the contour  marimont 1 . in addition to the  x y  coordinates of the zero crossings  our edge lists contain resamplings of the original intensity values orthogonal to tne edge on either side. this information will be used later when we match edgeelements across images. 
   we define a significant feature as an edge-element at which the curvature goes through a significant local extremum. significance is measured statistically. we first smooth each contour before computing the curvature k s   where s is the arc length measured along a contour. this will give us both a more global and a more reliable measure of the curvature by increasing the signal-to-noise ratio from our original construction of tne contour  asada and brady 1    medioni and yasumoto 1 . this smoothing is done by applying a gaussian to the edge-elements along the contour. 
   next we calculate the curvature at each point along the contour by noting that we can represent the curvature at each point on the contour by a circle of radius 1/k s  whose center lies along the normal vector at a distance 1/k s  from the curve we then assign the sign to the curvature according to which  side  of the contour our curvature circle lies  fernet frame . 
   we select our significant features as significant local extrema of curvature. a significant feature is relative extremum of curvature more than  no  from the mean  where n is some positive number to be specified later. contours measure an underlying connectivity in the image  and we select features relative to that connectivity. 
   once we have determined  for example  that we have m interesting features  we can segment our contour into m smaller segments  ignoring for now the distinction between open and closed contours . 
¡¡our procedure is iterative. we can run our segmenter over the output of a previous segmentation. we can also change the threshold n for each iteration. this solves the problem of an initial contour with a varied structure. the result of our algorithm is a list of contour segments and significant features. 
figs. 1a b highway overpasses. 
1 	perception 
features and seeing if any of these features disappear  or if many new features suddenly appear. one stability test is that in the familiar scale space  witkin 1    asada and brady 1 . scale can be defined over a range of a's  and we obtain a set of contours smoothed by gaussians with standard deviations from that range. we determine which significant features persist over a large range of o's  or scales. another test of stability requires us to first plot the number of features as a function of the curvature threshold n. this plot will be a non-increasing function of n. if this function is constant over a range of values for n  then the significant features are stable over this region. 
   our significant feature detector is both robust and dynamic. each contour is treated separately and independently  and the criteria for significant features are selected dynamically for each. the algorithm is robust because it can handle both simple and complex contours by taking a long contour  breaking it into smaller sections  and then  by iteration  examining each smaller section individually and independently. 
hi. significant feature matcher 
   we now wish to take the set of significant features found in the image pairs a and b  and see if we can find matches between the two sets the three variables we intend to use first in matching the significant features in images a and b are the curvature  and the left and right intensities on either side of the contour. 
let us now consider a significant feature i in image 
a with a curvature c aj   left intensity l a    and right intensity r a  . consider also a significant feature j in image b with curvature c bj   and left and right intensities l b  and r b . we now define three new curvature and intensity variables as follows: 

the closer each variable is to zero  the closer the match between parameters from images a and b. 
figs 1c d contour segments and matched features. 
   
notice no significant statistical differences between r . and lji. the results are stored in an initial matched point fist. 
   since we know the approximate orientation of the two stereo images  we can now use cross correlation to check these initial matches  hannah 1  by calculating the correlation coefficient r j  hays 1  between two small areas surrounding our significant features. cross-correlation is used only to confirm matches  not  find  matches. 
   if significant features i and j represent the same physical feature as seen in image a and image b  then the variables  then their x- and y- disparities should both form distributions with well defined means and standard deviations. we now eliminate all matched feature pairs whose x- or y- disparities lie outside of the 1% confidence level. we repeat this process until there are no matched feature pairs outside this range. 
   the results can be seen in fig.  1 . figs.  1a  and  1b  are a stereo pair of a highway overpass. figs.  1c  and  1d  are the edge segments and matched features. the matching routine found 1 features that matched  and 
there were no mistakes. 
   we can increase the number of matches by using a large scale space matching first  and using the results of this matching as seeds for our feature matcher. we start by taking the contours and smoothing them with a gaussian with a larger o. we then run our matcher over these features and at the end  calculate the mean and standard deviations of the x- and y- disparities. we then use these disparities as seeds in our original feature matcher. 
   this increases our accuracy because it eliminates a large number of incorrect first guesses based on local curvature and intensity matcning. we now find correct matches using only curvature and local intensity functions. we need not use cross-correlation to verify these matches. we have also increased the number of correct matches  since false matches that are not in the restricted search space will no longer be considered. this restricted search space for matcning is equivalent to the initial assumptions in the matching done in  barnard and thompson 1  and  shah and jain 1 . 
iv. conclusions and summary 
   we have presented a dynamic significant feature detector ana contour segmenter which works on complex images. the significant features found are based on local criteria  and are found independently. we then used significant features as input data for our general feature and segment matcher. 
   the feature matcher presumes that these significant features in the images can be matched on the basis of their local properties. if there are repeated structures in the images  this is not always the case. the solution is to use an edge detector that looks at larger structures in the image. 
   another assumption we use is that the pan and tilt for the relative camera orientations are small. if they are large  then the difference in perspectives between stereo images is large  and matching becomes more difficult. we can distinguish this case from the previous cases by noting the x- and y-disparity standard deviations after our first scale space matchinq. if the standard deviations are large compared to the image dimensions  then the second stage of matching  restricting our matches to small average x- and y-disparities no longer makes sense. 
acknowledgements 
   we wish to thank dr. h. harlyn baker for his many helpful comments and suggestions  and for his critical reading of this manuscript. 
