 
　　　in many disciplines  the scientist uses the shape of an entity to infer processes that have acted upon the entity. we develop inference rules by which the curvature extrema of a shape can be used to infer the precise trajectories of processes that have created the shape. a formal grammar is also elaborated by which  given two views of the same entity at two developmental stages  the scientist can infer the processes that acted in between the two stages. 
i. introduction. 
　　　in many disciplines  such as astrophysics  developmental biology  medicine  geography  meteorology  etc.  the shape of some entity  such as an embryo  tumor  or cloud  is used by the scientist to infer processes that have acted upon the entity. in this paper  we present a set of inference rules by which the curvature extrema of a shape can be used to infer the significant processes that have determined the shape. we also develop a formal grammar by which a scientist  who has two views of an entity at two developmental stages  can infer the processes that produced the second stage from the first. 
1. two basic rules 
　　　we begin by presenting two simple rules by which the curvature extrema of an individual shape can be used to infer significant processes that have acted upon that shape. throughout the paper  we will assume that the input to the rules are shapes represented in the form of smooth planar outlines. however  an equivalent analysis applies to threedimensional input  as shown in leyton  1c . 
　　　the inference  from curvature extrema to processes  will be seen as requiring two stages: 
curvature extrema - symmetry axes - processes 
section eli deals with the first stage  and section ii.1 deals with the second stage. 
il1. curvature extrema - symmetry axes 
　　　as just stated  central to the development of our process inference rules will be the use of a symmetry analysis. 
　　　observe first  however  that  given two segments of a curve  it is rarely the case that a straight axis reflects one segment on to the other. nevertheless  it may be possible to define 

 current mailing address: michael leyton  department of psychology  rutgers university  butch campus  new brunswick  nj 1. the research was supported by nsf grant ist-1 to harvard; and by nsf grant ist-1 and afosr grant f1-c-1 to mit. 
symmetry in a differential sense. consider the two bold curves c  and c1  in fig la. although there is no mirror that reflects one curve onto the other  a mirror along line qo reflects the tangent line  at a  onto the tangent line  at b. it turns out that the existence of such a symmetry is equivalent to the existence of a circle that is tangential at both a and b.  the mirror will contain the circle center o.  
　　　now drag the circle along the two curves  while always maintaining the double-touching property. as in leyton  1b   one can define a differential symmetry axis to be the trajectory of some midpoint associated with the circle. for example  the symmetric axis transform  sat  of blum  1  defines the symmetry axis to be the locus of circle-centers o. this will give some curved axis running between the two curves c 1 and c 1. again  the smooth local symmetry  sls  of brady  1  defines the symmetry axis to be the locus of chord midpoints p.  in the present case  this will produce a slightly different axis from the sat.  alternatively  we shall propose here a new symmetry analysis in which the symmetry axis is the trajectory of the midpoint q of the arc ab  as the circle moves. as shown in leyton  1c   this analysis has remarkably different properties from the other two analyses and these properties make the analysis particularly appropriate for the inference of processes. because of its appropriateness to processinference  the new analysis will be called process inferring symmetry analysis  p1sa  we shall see several examples of applying pisa  later. 
　　　it is now possible to state a result that is crucial to the entire paper. it is a theorem that was proposed and proved in leyton  1b   and it relates the curvature extrema of a smooth planar curve to the curve's symmetry structure: 

fig 1.  a  the definition of differential symmetry  lb  an illustration of the symmetry-curvature duality theorem. 
	leyton 	1 
　　　
     symmetry-curvature duality theorem  leyton  1b : any segment of a smooth planar curve  bounded by two consecutive curvature extrema of the same type  either both maxima or both minima  has a unique differential symmetry axis  under sat  sls  or pisa  and this axis terminates at the curvature extremum of the opposite type  minimum or maximum  respectively . 
　　　fig lb illustrates the theorem. the two points labeled m  are two consecutive extrema of the same type  ie. they bend in the same direction relative to the curve . the theorem states that  under any of the alternative differential symmetry analyses  there is one and only one symmetry axis. furthermore  this axis terminates at the extremum m : of the opposite type  this extremum bends in the opposite direction . 
　　　the theorem will be our first inference rule: it assigns  to each extremum  a unique symmetry axis that terminates at that extremum. 
	ll1. 	symmetry axes - processes 
　　　the value  to our argument  of identifying symmetry axes  is given by the following crucial principle which was proposed and extensively corroborated in ley ton  1  1  1a  1b  1c  1a  
     interaction principle  leyton  1 : the symmetry axes of a perceptual organization are interpreted as the principal directions along which processes are most likely to act or have acted. 
the basis for this proposal is as follows: it was argued in leyton  1b  that if a transformation  acting on an organization is one in which symmetry axes become invariant lines  eigenspaces  under the transformation  then the transformation will tend to preserve the symmetries; i.e. be structure-preserving on the organization. two further stages of argument are then needed to obtain the above principle:  l  invariant lines are interpreted as principal directions of action  and  1  transforma tions that are most structure-preserving tend to be understood as most likely. the above principle has been psychologically vali dated on simple and complex shape  as well as motion perception  leyton  1  1b  1c  1a . 
　　　the interaction principle can be regarded as an inference rule. it claims that a symmetry axis is interpreted as the principal direction of a hypothesized process. in fact  since we are concerned  in the present paper  with the inference of processes that have already taken place  the principle implies that a symmetry 
axis is interpreted as a record of a process. 
n.1. curvature extrema -  processes 
　　　putting together the two inference rules given thus far  we obtain this conclusion: 
each curvature extremum implies a process whose trace is the unique symmetry axis 
associated w i t h   and terminating at  that extremum 
　　　to see that our two inference rules yield highly appropriate process-analyses  let us consider all possible shapes that have eight extrema or less. drawings of all such shapes have been provided by richards  koenderink & hoffman  1 . in fig 1. we have taken all these drawings and applied our two inference 
t1 	perception 
rules. the lines with arrows represent the process-records inferred by our rules. that is  the lines are the directions of growth  indentation  squashing  etc  along which the deformations are supposed to have happened. as can readily be seen  these process-records correspond strongly with one's intuition as to how the shapes were formed. 
three comments are in order 
　　　 1  the letters on each shape denote the curvature extrema. as follows: let m and m denote a local maximum and local minimum respectively  and + and - denote positive and negative curvature repectively. thus there are four types of extrema: m : m   m : and m . 
　　　 1  the symmetry analysis  used in fig 1  was pisa  the new analysis introduced in section ii.l. this is because  as shown in leyton  1c   the sat and sls cannot correctly infer squashing and indentation  whereas pisa can. 
　　　 1  fig 1 is stratified into levels according to number of extrema. the only three levels that can exist  with up to eight extrema  are: level 1  shapes with 1 extrema; level ii  shapes with 1 extrema; level iii  shapes with 1 extrema. 
	lll. 	the process grammar 
　　　the above analysis presented inference rules by which a single shape can be given a process-description. however  in many observational situations  the scientist has two views of an object at two developmental stages. the scientist attempts to infer the processes that produced the second stage from the first. it is this problem that we now attempt to formalize and solve. 
we shall develop a process-grammar such that  given two shapes  one shape is expressed as the extrapolation of processes inferred in the other by the above inference rules. 
　　　the operations of the grammar are specified purely in terms of modifications at extrema  but such that these modifications correspond to process-extrapolations. physically natural extrapolations have two forms  continuations and bifur cations  which we now consider in turn. 
continuations. 
　　　the continuation of a process at a m or m extremum does not change the extremum type  as can be seen by looking at any of the m and m extrema in fig 1. however  continuation at a m or m does change the type  as we shall now see: 
　　　 1  continuation at m  labeled c m   yields m  as is illustrated by continuing the upward m+ process at the bottom of shape pi  fig 1  and thus obtaining shape p1. this form of extrapolation is fully specified by the following rewrite rule expressed purely in terms of the curvature extrema along the bottoms of the respective shapes: 
	cm':m 	- o m 	o 
 where each 1 represents a curvature zero  indicated by a dot on the curve in p1 . 
　　　 1  continuation at m  labeled cm   yields m   as is illustrated by continuing the upward m process in shape t1  fig 1  and thus obtaining the top protruding m1 process in t1. the rule is specified as: 
	cm 	:m~ 	*om*1 
bifurcations: 
     a bifurcation has the effect of taking an extremum  maximum or minimum  and pulling it apart into two copies of itself. between the copies  an extremum of the opposite type  minimum or maximum  respectively  is unavoidably introduced. in the smallest such non-trivial change  the introduced extremum has the same sign as the splitting extremum. logically  there are four such primitive bifurcations  as follows. all other bifurcations are derivable from these together with the above two continuation operations. 
      1  bifurcation at m'  labeled bm*  must be given by the re-write rule 

      1  bifurcation at m  labeled bm~  must be given by the re-write rule 
bm   : m   - m ~m ~m  
an illustration is the following. consider the indenting process at the top of t1  in fig 1 . if the process bifurcates  one branch goes to the left and the other to the right. the resulting shape is 1  in fig 1 . 
      1  bifurcation at m*  labeled bm*  must be given by the re-write rule 

　　　
an illustration is the following. consider the protruding process at the top of t1  in fig 1 . if the process bifurcates  one branch goes to the left and the other to the right the resulting shape has been drawn on its side as q1 in fig 1. 
level i 
and is simply the introduction of a protrusion. an illustration is the transition from pi to tl  in fig 1   i.e. a protrusion has been introduced at the top of tl. 
　　　

	leyton 	1 

　　　 1  bifurcation at m  labeled bm   must be given by the re-write rule 
　　　
 1  one particular process turns out to be crucial to the entire development. it is the internal process represented by the bold upward arrow in the first shape of fig 1  the arrow terminating at m  . 
 1  this continues upward and creates the protrusion in the second shape of fig 1. 
 1  this same process then bifurcates  creating the lobe in the third shape of fig 1  where a downward squashing process has also been introduced from above. 
 1  the new squashing process continues  creating the top indentation shown in the fourth shape of fig 1. 
as the reader can see  the grammar  although derived formally  provides an intuitively powerful process explanation. 
　　　

and is simply the introduction of an indentation. an illustration is the transition from t1 to q1  in fig 1   i*. an extra indentation has been introduced in the bottom of the lagoon in q1. 
iv. the power of the grammar 
　　　the first remarkable thing to emerge from the above analysis is that a grammar of only six operations generates all process extrapolations; and  furthermore  that the grammar successfully encodes extrapolations purely in terms of re-write rules on extrema. 
　　　let us illustrate also the intuitive power of the grammar to yield process-explanations. let us choose two arbitrary shapes  for example  the pair shown in fig 1. the assumption is that the two shapes are two stages in the development of the same object; e.g. a tumor  cloud  island  embryo  etc. we now show that the process-grammar gives a compelling account of the intervening development. 
　　　using a blurring heuristic  described in ley ton  1c   one can identify the intervening succession of shape-outlines. let us suppose that the succession is t1 -  t1 - q1 -  q1  as shown in fig 1. however  a succession of outlines is not a processexplanation. one requires the grammar to provide the intervening process-history. the grammar does this by the successive transformation of process-diagrams. in particular  for fig 1  the grammar generates the successive process-structures by the sequence of operations  cm   bm +   cm   the operationsequence is the process explanation for the intervening development the explanation can be expressed as follows: 

