induct iue inference on the base of fixed point theory 
t. 1ergely and zs. szrbo 
applied logic laboratory 
p.o.b.1.budapest 1.hungary 1. 

astract 
　　inductive reasoning is an important way to generate knowledge from the propositions reflecting facts or directly from data we intend to extract new knowledge in the form of definitions given as fixed point equations. an appropriate fixed point theory is outlined in favour of our aim. this theory suggests the so called generative fixed point equation system as the form of hypothesis that we are looking for. the defining formulas in these equations use only bounded quantifiers but the relation to be defined may also negatively occur. an inductive inference method is presented as to find the hypothetical equation system from the increasing set of experimentel data such that its solutions would fit all the 
information 
1.introduction 
     inductive reasoning is an important way to generate knowledge from the propositions reflecting fects e.g. propositions describing experimental results. the knowledge to be extracted from factual propositions or date is to provide e general characterization of these factual data. this characterization may be a law or a regularity which describes some basic interrelation among factual data  cf  finn and gergely 1    gergely and szabo 1  . the process of discovering this regulerlty is but e leerning process which aims to acquisit new declarative knowledge  cf. cerbonell  michalski and mitchell 1  . this new declarative knowledge may be also in the form of a general rule generated from examples that correspond to factual data  cf. ang1uin and smith 1   therefore the subject of this paper 1s connected with the field of machine learning and inductive inference which belong to the mainstream of al research as it is known  e.g. from  angluin and smith 1   the majority of inductive methods defines the regularity in question as e recursive function from the point of view of logic this means that these methods use the standard model of arithmetics as to model the reality and data obtained about the letter and they select one recursive function and identify the regularity with this function however this approach is not the best if we eim to derive new knowledge. therefore we think ebout such on approach which approximate the regularity step by step without the preconception of recurslvlty. the selected recursive function 1s a new one within the standard model of arithmetics. to have it as a part of our knowledge it should be defined by the use of a formal language  i.e. the regularity should be defined by axioms obtained during the inductive procedure. these axioms already extend our knowledge supposed also to be axiomatical 1y given. 
   a definition is of the form 	where r is the new symbol to be defined and 	is the defining formula  if  doesn't 
1 	reasoning 
contein the new symbol r then the definition is seid to be explicit  otherwise it is implicit. the implicite definitions are the so called fixed point equations depending on the form of the defining formula there exists en effective procedure to unfold the defined symbol it provides the latter with a fixed point of the equation which is but a new descriptive knowledge obtained from factual data we aim to 
develop an inductive method which builds up the implicit definition of the regularity or of the general rule in question in the form of a 
fixed point equation of course  we do not expect to design a method which provides the searched fixed point equation at once  but we are looking for a procedure which approaches the definition of regularity step by step by discovering its different properties 
     this agrees with the fact that all fixed points  solutions  of a fixed point equation are of the same properties  e.g. they are symmetric the fixed point equation r x y r y x  is such an example that the solutions are but the symmetric relations if such data arrive which don't fit the definition of the property established earlier then the description is either to be modified or rejected thus  step by step  we may find the constituent properties that the required fixed point equation can be built up from we aim to develop a method which reaches the required fixed point equation from the increasing set of factual data considered as elements of some fixed point and by combining the equations corresponding to these properties into the final equation. we require from the final equation that it fits all factual data even those which may appear sometimes in the future. if it is so then the hypothesis can be falsified. note that the definition  which describes the regularity  is obtained in a certein moment of time on the base of the data arrived up to this moment. however the new data arrived after that moment may not fit the hypothesis  i.e. the letter will be falsified. of course  we cannot expect a hypothesis in the definition form to be verified by using only experimental data. verification is possible only w.r t. some knowledge. since we are interested in the hypothesis generated on the base of pure experimental data we require felsiflcablllty. these formulas are just the universally quantified formulas. they can be transformed into a special kind of fixed point equation systems on the right hand side of which the defining formula may use only existential quantifiers beyond bounded quantifiers. so we are looking for the hypothesis in the form of implicit definition expressed as such a type of fixed point equation. having a fixed point equation on effective way is required to find its solutions. 
　　it is known that if the defining formula contains the definable symbol only positively  i.e. not in the scope of negation  and it has only existential quantifiers then there is an effective method to obtain the least solution of the equation  see  oergely and ury 1  . however  the restriction on the positive occurence of the definable relation symbol is too strict for us since negative statements ere also informative in inductive inferences. i.e. if e 

relation doesn't hold in a given situation then even this has 
information content for us. therefore we need a fixed point theory 
which allows to work also with negation 
　　we develop such a theory in the next section. the inductive inference method of building up appropriate fixed point equation 
system as hypothesis is given in section 1. the defining formules in this equation system will use only bounded quantifiers. note that this is a subcase of the exlstentlally closed defining formulas. taking into account the framework of recursive function theory we note thet oil primitive recursive relations can be defined by the formulas of the considered case. see 1ergely and szab1   for the majority of problems with practical interest the relations to be found can be defined by such a hypothetical implicit definition an example is given in section 1. 
gergely and szabo 1 


1 	reasoning 

1.ihductiue inference rlcobithm 
   let us consider noe the theory of inductive i n f erence  espec i a 1 y hov we d i scover properties from observations  we generate hypotheses in the fori of natural generative quasi equation systeis corresponding to the given set of observations. for simplicity's sake we give a ＊ethod for the recognition of only one observed relation not. it can be generalized for lore easily. 
	gergely and szabo 	1 


1 	reasoning 


	gergely and szabo 	1 
conclusiionl 
   we have given an inductive inference method which builds up the implicit definition of the regularity or of the general rule in question in the form of natural generative fixed point equation system with bounded quantifiers. it defines the regularity to be recognized as the solution of the hypothetical quasi equation system which can match in time the increasing set of experimental data the sequence of hypotheses generated by the developed inductive inference method will converge on a large class to the rule that 1s to be recognized. the so far described procedure can discover each primitive recursive relation provided the basic functions are ackermann functions  cf. gergely and szabo 1  . therefore the proposed inductive inference procedure is sufficient fx practical purposes.ours is an asymptotic enumeration strategy end therefore it eppears to be better than the original enumeration strategies for being more stable. it is able to recognize even certain non-recursive relations in asymptotic sense  cf. szabo 1  . 
1 	reasoning 
