a robust algorithm for determining the translation 
of a rigidly moving surface without correspondence  for robotics applications. 
anup basu 
john  yiannis  aloimonos 
computer vision laboratory  center for automation research university of maryland  college park  md 1 
     
a b s t r a c t 
a method is presented for the recovery of the threedimensional translation of a rigidly translating object. the novelty of the method consists of the fact that four cameras are used in order to avoid point correspondences. the method is immune to low levels of noise and has good behavior when the noise increases. 
1. introduction 
     the potential of motion estimation in such applications as image coding  tracking and robot vision has long been appreciated and demonstrated. up to now there have been three approaches to the solution of this problem: 
 1  the first method assumes the dynamic image to be a three dimensional function of two spatial arguments and a temporal argument. then  if this function is locally well behaved and its spatiotemporal gradients are computable  the image velocity or optical flow may be computed  l . 
 1  the second method considers the cases where the motion is  large  and the previous technique is not applicable. in these instances the measurement technique relies upon isolating and tracking highlights or feature points in the image through time  
 1  in the third method  the three-dimensional motion parameters are directly computed from the spatial and temporal derivatives of the image intensity function. in other words  if / is the intensity function and  u v  the optic flow at a point  then the equation  holds approximately  1 . 
as the problem has been formulated over the years one camera is used  and so the three-dimensional motion parameters that have to be and can be computed are five in number  two for the direction of translation and three for the rotation . in our approach  four cameras are used to recover the three translation parameters  instead of only the direction of translation. 
1. motivation and previous work 
     the basic motivation for this research is the fact that optical flow  or discrete displacements  fields produced from real images by existing techniques are corrupted by noise and are partially incorrect . most of the algorithms in the literature that use the retinal motion field to recover three-dimensional motion fail when the input  retinal motion  is noisy. 
     some researchers have developed sets of nonlinear equations with the three dimensional motion parameters as unknowns  which are solved by iteration and initial guessing. these methods are very sensitive to noise. others  developed linear equations  but the sensitivity did not improve. 
     several other authors use the optic flow field and its first and second spatial derivatives at corresponding points to obtain the motion parameters. but these derivatives seem to be unreliable in the presence of noise  and there is no known algorithm that can determine them reliably in real images. 
     even if we had some way however to compute retinal motion in a reasonable fashion  with at most an error of 1% for example  all the algorithms proposed to date that use retinal motion as input  and one camera  would still produce non-robust results. 
     so  a natural question arises: is it possible to recover three dimensional motion from images without having to go through the very difficult correspondence problem  and if such a thing is possible  how immune to noise will the algorithm be  in this paper  as in  1  1  we prove that if we combine stereo and motion in a certain way and we avoid any static or dynamic correspondence by using four cameras  then we can compute the three dimensional translation of a moving object. 

	basu and aloimonos 	1 
     

     

     
proposition 1: a sufficient condition for critical illconditioning not occuring in our model under discretization error is 

1. tsai  r.y. and huang  t.s.   uniqueness and estimation of three dimensional motion parameters of rigid objects   in s. ullman and w. richards  eds.   image understanding 1  new jersey: ablex publishing co.  1. 
     
figure 1  
1 	perception 
