exploiting 1d topology in labeling polyhedral images 
van-due nguyen 
general electric corporate research and development center schenectady  ny 1 

abftract: a polyhedral image is a segmentation of the image plane into connected regions  called faces  joined by vertices and edges. the segmentation is represented by a planar network of nodes  vertices  edges  faces  linked by adjacency links. the labeling constraints at a node are all local labelings of the node consistent with itself and all its adjacent neighbors. the local labelings are represented by junctions  junction-pairs  and junction-loops respectively for the vertices  edges  and face boundaries of the image. 
constraint satisfaction and propagation is done uniformly over all nodes in the image  from each node to its adjacent neighbors. the result is local consistency or inconsistency at all the nodes in the planar network. we show that globally consistent labelings of the image exist  if and only if all the nodes in the network have locally consistent labelings. the planar network of nodes  with labels and local labelings attached to each node  represents all locally/globally consistent labelings of the polyhedral image. 
1. a labeling example 
figure 1 traces the parallel labeling of two blocks  one on top of the other. the parallel labeling starts with the input image and default labels     for all the nodes  i.e.  vertices  edges  and faces  in the image. then  it finds all local labeling constraints at all vertices  edges  and face boundaries of the image  described respectively by junctions  junction-pairs  and junctionloops  frames 1 to 1. attached to each node is the number of local labelings. constraint satisfaction and propagation  csp  is done uniformly at all nodes in the image  from every node to its neighbors  through vertex-edge  edge-face  and face-vertex links. note the decrease in the number of local labelings at each node  frames 1 to 1. 
the face surrounding the two blocks has 1 local labelings  corresponding to the blocks floating in air  or resting against some imaginary surface at some of its bounding edges. the two interpretations correspond to the face labeled as image background  b  or as polyhedral face  f . note that the blocks sitting on top of a horizontal surface can be thought as the blocks floating in air  and infinitesimally touching the surface. the surrounding face is a touchable background  and so is labeled by 1  and has only 1 junction-loop. the detection of the background face surrounding the blocks further restricts the labeling of the blocks  frames 1 and 1 show the final labels at the edges and faces. 

figure 1: parallel labeling of the blocks. 
1. image topology 
just as the vertices  edges  and faces of a 1d polyhedron join 1d blocks  markowsky and wesley 1   the vertices and edges of an image join connected regions of the image  called faces. 
definitions 1  topology in a polyhedral image  
  a vertex is not only an intersection of distinct edges  but also a junction of distinct faces of the image. 
  an edge is not only an intersection of distinct faces  but also a segment connecting distinct vertices. 
  a face is a connected region of the image plane locally bounded either by chains/cycles of distinct edges  or by open/closed paths going through distinct vertices. 
	nguyen 	1 


the topology of the image as junction/connection/boundary of subsets does not hold only at the image boundary 1  and so  must be excluded from labeling. nguyen  1  proved that: 
t h e o r e m 1 the image of a 1d polyhedral scene is always a segmentation of the open subset inside the image boundary into faces  joined by edges and vertices. 
1 . 	e n u m e r a t i o n o f a l l l o c a l l a b e l i n g s 
figures 1 show the label hierarchies for the vertices  edges  and faces. just as object edges and faces can be represented in terms of object vertices  local labelings around image edges and faces are naturally represented as n-tuples of labelings at image vertices. figures 1 describe the local labelings around a 
vertex  an edge  and a face. the junctions for occlusion and trihedral vertices  huffman 1  clowes 1  are precomputed and stored in a dictionary. junctions and vertex-labels are related by a c relation  which is implicit in the dictionary representation. the junctions for multihedral vertices with zero or one hidden face can be enumerated depth-first from the fundamental junction equation relating the orientation of the edges  the ordering of the faces  and their respective gradient points around a vertex  malik 1 . 
the junction-loops of a face f are found by a depth-first search for all consistent labelings around the face boundary . con-
sistency means that the junctions of any two consecutive vertices must have the same edge-label for the edge connecting these two vertices. each junction-loop found from depth-first search must be checked to see if the edge-labels of the boundary edges are all consistent with some face-label of f. this later is node-consistency enforced by the  relation  relating junctionloops and face-labels. similarly  junction-pairs describe local labelings for edges  and are found by an exhaustive but local search. 
1 perception 
the maximum number of edge-labels in the edge hierarchy  me  is constant and equal to five for polyhedral images. the maximum number of junctions  resp. junction-pairs  at any vertex  resp. edge  of the image  mj  resp. mp   is exponential in the complexity of the image  described by the three parameters 
 max  

1 . c o n s t r a i n t s a t i s f a c t i o n a n d p r o p a g a t i o n 
constraints at all nodes in the planar network should be propagated uniformly over all vertex-edge  edge-face  and face-vertex links. the local labeling constraints are the junctions  junction pairs  and junction-loops. let's describe the complete csv over vertex-edge-face links  after all the local constraints are found and enumerated. 
a l g o r i t h m 1  parallel csp over vertex-edge-face links  initialise vertex-fifo  edge-fifo  and face-fifo respectively with all vertices  edges  and faces in the image 
loop until  and  emptyp vertex-fifo   ernptyp edge-fifo   emptyp 
face-fifo   do 
1. loop until  emptyp vertex-fifo  do let v :=  pop vertex-fifo . 
a. loop for all edge in edges v  do 
restrict junction-pairs of et with junctions of v 
if the set of junction-pairs of edge e1 has been restricted then  insert  edge-fifo . 
b. loop for all face f% in faces v  do 
restrict junction-loops of with junctions of v if the set of junction-loops of face f1 has been restricted then  insert f  face-fifo . 
1 loop until  emptyp edge-fifo  do let e  pop edge-fifo . 
a. loop for all face f1 in faces e  do 
restrict junction-loops of f  with junction-pairs of e. if the set of junction-loorjs of face f  has been restricted then  insert f% face-fifo . 
b. loop for all vertex    in vertices e  do 
restrict junctions of  with junction-pairs of e. 
if the set of junctions of vertex vj has been restricted then  insert 
1. loop until  emptyp face-fifo  do let f :=  pop face-fifo . 
a. loop for all vertex in vertices f  do 
restrict junctions of v  with junction-loops of f. if the set of junctions of vertex vi has been restricted then  insert vt vertex-fifo . 
b. loop for all edge et in edges f  do 
restrict junction-pairs of et with junction-loops of f. if the set of junction-pairs of edge e  has been restricted then  insert et edge-fifo . 


figure 1: junctions  junction-pairs  and junction-loops are respectively local labelings around a vertex  an edge  and a face. 
i 
1. global consistency 
local consistency are nothing but 1  node consistency between local labelings and labels for all nodes  and 1  arc consistency between two adjacent nodes for all arcs. node consistency is enforced by  relation when we enumerate the local labelings at a node. arc consistency is enforced both ways by the loops in algorithm 1. global consistency from local node and arc consistencies at all vertices  edges  and faces of the image can be proved by labeling inductively from one face to its neighboring faces  covering the whole image. for proof  the reader is referred to  nguyen 1 . 
let's compare the parallel labeling algorithm with more general results from topology  hocking and young 1  henle 1  and from consistency of networks of constraints  waltz 1  montanari 1  mackworth 1  freuder 1 . recall that image labeling used to be called line labeling  because the core problem is to label all the lines or edges in the image. the network of edges with links between intersecting edges is not planar. by introducing vertices as new nodes and links between adjacent vertices and edges  the resulting network of edges and vertices is planar. similarly  we add faces as nodes  and links between faces and their adjacent vertices and edges. the adjacency links describe the boundary relationship d between topological nodes. the planar topology of the image guarantees that the network of vertices  edges  and faces is planar. 
junctions are used to capture the n-ary constraints among edges intersecting at a common vertex. they are exhaustively enumerated by looking at a 1d corner from different viewpoints. a vertex-node is needed to store these junctions. the n-ary constraints among intersecting edges become binary constraints between these edges and the common vertex. similarly  by creating higher level k-nodes and enumerating all the locally consistent labelings for these k-nodes  one can synthesize more extended -ary constraints  covering finally all the edges in thek image  freuder 1 . 
labeling an image can be seen as putting together a puzzle where the pieces are the vertices  edges  and faces of the image. the pieces are required to have matched labelings at their interfaces. a vertex has junctions as labelings. an edge must have junction-pairs as labelings because it interfaces with its two ending vertices and its two adjacent faces through vertices. similarly  a face must have junction-loops as local labelings. the segmentation of the image into vertices  edges  and faces guarrantees that labeling over the whole image is equivalent to enumerating the local labelings at all the pieces  such that they satisfy their respective unary constraints  and doing arc consistency between adjacent pieces  such that they have matched labelings at their interfaces. from another perspective  the 1d topology allows us to enumerate all the implicit local n-ary constraints  or find the minimal equivalent networks  montanari 1   without doing a global search. 
acknowledgments 
the work reported here is partially funded by general electric aerospace business group. i would like to thank joseph mundy  deepak kapur  and david cyrluk for many discussions  and tomas lozano-perez for pointing me to papers on network consistency. 
bibliography 
clowes  m.b.  1   on seeing things   artificial intelligence  vol. 1  no. l pp. 1. 
freuder  e.c.  1   synthesizing constraint expressions   communications of the acm  vol. 1  no. 1. 
henle  m.  1  a combinatorial introduction to topology  freeman and co.  san francisco. 
hocking  j.g.  g.s. young  1  topology  addison-wesley co.  reading. 
huffman  d.a.  1   impossible objects as nonsense sentences   machine intelligence  vol. 1  pp. 1. mackworth  a.k.  1   consistency in networks of relations   artificial intelligence  vol. 1  pp. 1. 
mackworth  a.k.  e.c. freuder  1   the complexity of some polynomial network consistency algorithms for constraint satisfaction problems   artificial intelligence  vol. 1  pp. 1. malik  j.  1   interpreting line drawings of curved objects   phd thesis  stanford university. 
markowsky  	g.  	m.a. 	wesley  1   fleshing out wire 
frames   ibm journal of research and development  vol. 1  no. 
1. 
montanari  v.  1   network of constraints: fundamental properties and applications to picture processing   information science  vol. 1  pp. 1. 
nguyen  v.  1   a parallel algorithm for labeling polyhedral images   submitted for publication in artificial intelligence. 
walts  d.l.  1   understanding line drawings of scenes with 
shadows   the psychology of computer vision  p.h. winston  ed   mcgraw-hill  new york  pp. 1. 
	nguyen 	1 
