complete inference rules for the cancellation laws 
- e x t e n d e d a b s t r a c t - 
	jieh hsiang 	m i c h a e l r u s i n o w i t c h 	k o s a k a i 
	department of computer science 	crin 	icot 
	suny at stony brook 	b.p. 1 	mita kokusai bldg  1if 
	stony brook  ny 1 	1 vandoeuvre-les-nancy 	1-1 mita  minato-ku 

u.s.a. 
1 . 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
     in many cases  specialiied inference rules which incorporate certain axioms into the inference mechanism can produce fewer redundant consequences and more efficient proofs. the most notable example is paramodulation. 
inference rules for inequalities  partial orerings  special binary relations have also been found   bih1    s1    maw1  . recently there has also been considerable interests in inference rules for the cancellation law. stickel   sti1j  used it  with the knuth-bendix method  to prove that implies xy =yx in ring theory.  w1  introduced an inference rule called negative paramodulation to find useful consequences resulting from cancellation. however  these methods provide only ad hoc treatments of cancellation. these inference rules are not complete and cannot eliminate the cancellation axiom from the input set of clauses. in this paper we present some complete sets of inference rules  which can replace the cancellation axioms. due to space limitation  we only outline the inference rules and state the main theorem without proofs. only simple examples are given to illustrate how the rules are used. the proof and more examples will be given in the full paper. 
1. inference rules for cancellation l a w s 
     we present inference rules for three types of cancellation laws  the basic cancellation  cancellation with identity  and cancellation except the null element. 
1 . 1 . 	r i g h t cancellation 
     a function / is right cancellable if it satisfies the right cancellation law  for convenience we only consider right cancellation. left cancellation is handled symmetrically. although cancellation has only one axiom  it may lead to many resolvents and paramodulants in a resolution based theorem prover if simply treated as a clause. replacing it with inference rules ensures that only those  relevant  ones are generated and kept. in the following we give a  rough-cut  version of the inference rules. a more efficient version involving simplification france 	1 tokyo  japan 

     the soundness of the rules is quite immediate. these two inference rules  with resolution and paramodulation  form a complete theorem proving strategy for first order predicate calculus with equality when some operators are right cancellable. the only extra axiom needed is reflexivity  
  
  
1 
1 
1. 	c a n c e l l a t i o n w i t h i d e n t i t y 
     similar inference rules can be designed for other types of cancellation laws. for example  in an algebraic theory with an identity t for an operator /  there is the cancellation law with identity:  although this law is a consequence of right cancellation and left identity  it may also be given as an independent axiom without the other two. 
the operator + in ring theory satisfies this law  and stickel 
  sti1j  has demonstrated the power of incorporating this axiom intoinference rules. 
with this axiom  we modify rule cl into: 

it is interesting to note that this inference rule alone suffices to secure completeness  i.e.  resolution and paramodulation  with cil for each operator satisfying this axiom  form a complete strategy for first order logic with equality when 

some operators are right cancellable with identity. 
the rule c1 can also be modified into a rule 
1 	reasoning 

although the reduction rule is similar to demodulation   wrc1|   there are some subtle differences. reductions are based on a well-founded ordering  while demodulation may not be. each reduction step reduces a clause to a  smaller  one. reductions can be applied whenever applicable  as much as possible  without the risk of falling into an infinite loop. 
     paramodulation can utilize this ordering on terms and be improved to the oriented paramodulation inference rule: 

1. 	inference 	rules 	w i t h 	g r o u n d - l i n e a r 
simplification orderings 
     the inference rules introduced in the above section can be improved substantially  with completeness preserved  and with more powerful equational inference rules such as oriented paramodulatton and demodulation  if a notion of simplification orderings   der1   on the term structure is introduced. 
     let t f   x   be the set of terms and .  be the set of atoms in the language. also let t  f   be the set of ground terms  herbrand universe  and i the 
herbrand base. we also consider s - t and t - s as the same atom. an ordering  is a simplification ordering if it is a partial ordering which preserves the substitution property  is monotonic  if t  s t h  d has the subterm property  any superterm of a term is larger than the term itself . a simplification ordering is a ground-linear simplification ordering if it is also total on  the most 
important property of these orderings is that they are wellfounded. 
variations of simplification orderings have appeared in 
 der1    pla1    pet1   a comprehensive discussion is in  der1 . a more detailed description of the version presented 

where r is a non-variable subterm of d . oriented paramodulation is different from paramodulation in the restriction of  is not smaller than any other literal in c. this eliminates many potential paramodulants. 
     using the ground-linear simplification ordering to compare literals within a clause also restricts the cancellation inference rules to be performed only on the literals among the largest in a clause. the rules c 1 and c 1 become: 

it is interesting to note that if a pre dic ate-first type groundlinear simplification ordering is used on the term structure  that is  atoms are compared lexicographically first by their 
	hsiang  rusinowitch  and sakai 	1 

predicate symbols  with = as the smallest predicate  then no cancellation inference need be performed on any clause which contains a non-equality literal  since all equality literals are smaller than any literal with non-equality predicate. 
     even the resolution inference rule can be restricted by the ordering  into oriented resolution . for simplicity we give the binary resolution version here. 

oriented resolution is different from ordered resolution or ordered predicate resolution  see  chl1   in that the ordering on literals are given in a natural way. for example  there is no oriented resolvents between clauses 
because 	in 	any 	ground-linear 	simplification ordering. 
these inference rules yield a complete strategy: 
theorem given a set of clauses  s is unsatisfiable with respect to the equational axioms and the right cancellation law if and only if contradiction can be obtained from with the 
inference rules   and fac-
toring. the proof of completeness  which 	involves a notion of transfinite 	semantic 	trees   hsr1j   	and 	a 	notion of inductively defined c -interpretations which incorporate the equality axioms and the cancellation law  is given in the full paper. the proof technique introduced in  hsr1  also enables us to eliminate the functional reflexive axioms. 
     the inference rules for the other cancellation axioms can be modified according to the ordering in a similar way. the completeness theorems are also similar. 
1. 	discussion 
     we presented several complete sets of inference rules which incorporated the cancellation laws into the inference mechanism. the major advantage of these specialized inference rules is that they may produce fewer redundant consequences and more direct proofs. we have also described ground-linear simplification orderings and how they can be use to improve inference rules in general. 
     the cancellation inference rules can also be used to speed up the completion process in knuth-bendix procedure   sti1  . in a prototype implementation these inference rules enable us to find the canonical set for groups after generating 1 critical pairs rather than the usual 1. 
     in  knb1j another way of dealing with the basic cancellation axioms  by adding a new function symbol for each cancellable operator  is given. this method can be extended easily to first order theory. the completeness of their method is an easy corollary of our completeness theorem. however  their approach seems to produce more redundant consequences and does not seem to be efficient. 
1 	reasoning 
      wom1  introduced negative paramodulation for handling cancellation. this inference rule cannot completely eliminate the cancellation axiom. a simple counterexample is the unsatisfiable set is right cancellable. neither negative paramodulation nor paramodulation/resolution is applicable to any of the clauses. however  negative paramodulation is compatible with the cancellation inference rules introduced here  and it provides for backward chaining. the inclusion of such an inference rule should further improve the efficiency of a refutational proving system involving the cancellation axioms. 
1. 	