 
   we present matrix proof systems for both constant- and varying-domain versions of the first-order modal logics k  k1  d  d1  t  1 and 1 based on modal versions of herbrand's 
theorem specifically formulated to support efficient automated proof search. the systems treat the mil modal language  no normal-forming  and admit straightforward structure sharing implementations. a key fsature of our approach is the use of a specialised unification algorithm to reflect the conditions on the accessibility relation for a given logic. the matrix system for one logic differs from the matrix eystem for another only in the nature of this unification algorithm. in addition  proof search may be interpreted as constructing generalised proof trees in an appropriate tableau- or sequent-based proof system. this facilitates the use of the matrix systems within interactive environments. 
1 	introduction. 
modal logics are widely used in various branches of artificial intelligence and computer science as logics of knowledge and belief  eg.   moo1 hm1 kon1    logics of programs  eg.   pne1    and for specifying distributed and concurrent systems  eg.   hm1 sti1b . as a consequence  the need arises for proof systems for these logics which facilitate efficient automated proof search. 
   traditional proof systems for modal logics  such as tableau- or sequent-based systems are readily available  eg.   kan1 nis1 fit1  . while these systems are to some extent human-oriented  the proof rules form an inadequate basis for automated proof search since they generate search spaces that contain considerable redundancies. the redundancies arise mainly from the characteristic emphasis on connectives and the proof rules for modal operators and quantifiers. 
the matrix methods for first-order classical logic  pioneered by 
prawits  pra1   and further developed by andrews  and1j and bibel  bib1l   have been demonstrated to be less redundant than the most efficient of the resolution based methods for that logic  bib1b|. the methods combine an emphasis on connections  drawn from the resolution methods  with an intensions! notion of a path. 
   in this paper we present matrix proof systems for the modal logics k  k1  d  d1  t  1 and 1  based on modal versions of bibel's  computationally improved* herbrand theorem for first-order classical logic  bib1cj. we consider both constant- and varying-domain versions of the first-order modal logics. 
   the major features of our approach may be summarised as follows. validity within a logic is characterised by the existence of a set of connections  pairs of atomic formula occurrences: one positive  one negative  within the formula  with the property that every so-called atomic path through the formula contains  as a subpath  a connection from the set  뫫 1 . such a set of connections is said to span the formula. for classical propositions! logic this condition suffices  and1 bib1l|. for first-order logic a substitution  of parameters or terms for variables  must be found under which the  then propositional  connections in the spanning set are simultaneously complementary. conditions are placed on the substitution that ensure amongst 
this work was supported in pert by 1erc grant gr/d/1 
other things that a proof within a particular tableau- or sequent-based proof system is constructable from the connections and the substitution  bib1c  wal1 . this basically amounts to ensuring that the restrictions found on the traditional quantifier rules can be met. 
   for the propositions! modal logics we keep the basic matrix framework but define a notion of complementarity for atomic formulae that ensures the existence of a proof in one of fitting's prefixed tableau systems  fit1 fit1|. this amounts to ensuring that  semantically: the two atomic formulae of a connection can be interpreted as inhabiting the same  possible world   and proof-theoretically: that they can be given the same prefix  | 1.1 . the key observation is that this can be established by noting the position of the atoms relative to the modal operators in the original formula and utilising a specialised unification algorithm operating over representations of these positions. clearly  this notion of complementarity is logic-dependent  a dependence which is reflected in the choice of unification algorithm. lifting these results to first-order constant-domain modal logics is simply a matter of combining this modal notion of complementarity with the first-order notion  뫫 1.1 . 
   for the varying-domain versions we index individual variables with the prefix of their quantifier. the substitution of one variable for another is permitted provided their prefixes can be unified  $ 1.1 . 
   checking a formula for validity within a modal logic is therefore reduced to a process of path checking and complementarity tests performed by a specialised unification algorithm  1 . during this process extra copies may need to be considered of universally quantified formulae and/or formulae dominated by a modal operator of  necessary''  q  force. the duplication in both cases is managed by an extension of bibel's indexing technique or multiplicity  bib1a  which supports the implementation of the matrix systems using structure-sharing techniques  bm1 . the notions of multiplicity  substitution and spanning sets of connections form the basis of the relationship with herbrand's theorem. 
   a number of authors have attempted to adapt computationally oriented proof systems for first-order logic to the modal logics considered here  eg.   far1 am1a kon1  . we compare our approach favourably to theirs in section 1. 
1 the modal matrix system*. 
1 	preliminaries. 

walton 
as an additional axiom. our purpose here is not to choose between these possibilities but to develop matrix proof systems for each of the variants. 
   if we restrict r to satisfy the conditions outlined in table 1  we say that  g  r  p  is an 뫩-frame over d  where l is the logic associated with the conditions. the  idealisation  condition is that for every element ' there is some element again our purpose is not to choose between these logics but to develop matrix proof systems for each. 
모an l-model over d is a pair an l -frame over d and |f- is a relation between elements of g and 
satisfaction in a model and validity are defined as usual. 
a stgned formula is a pair  at n  where a is a formula and 
{ 1}. we let at  y range over signed formulae. informally  the signs   1   and  1  should be interpreted as the qualifiers  is true  and  is false  respectively. for ease of exposition we use a uniform notation due to smullyan and fitting that classifies signed formulae according to their sign and major connective/operator as shown in table 1. 
1 	formula occurrences. 
a formula tree for a signed formula is a variant of its formation tree containing additional information as to the polarity of its subformula occurrences  i.e.  whether an occurrence of a subformula is negative or positive within the formula . it is best explained by example. a formula tree for the signed formula 




모suitable mappings can be computed using variants on a stringunification algorithm. in all cases the set of most general unifiers is finite but not necessarily a singleton  sie1j. for s1 the standard unification algorithm suffices. the admissibility check is an check for acyclicity if  q is interpreted as a directed graph. 
   the extra condition for the k-logics is a translation into the current setting of fitting's notion of a used prefix. basically  since these logics are not id e aliz able we must ensure that each prefix  under crm  of a vo-type position  formula  has been introduced by the reduction of a 
1r-type position  formula  beforehand  pj we have proved the following theorem: 
theorem 1.1 a propositional modal formula a is c-valid iff there is a modal multiplicity pm  an l-admissible modal substitution om and a set of a m -complementary connections that spans the indexed formula 

   the proof involves showing that starting from a tableau with {a} 1  at its root we can construct an atomic ally closed prefixed tableau by following the reduction ordering induced by the substitution  and prefixing each subformula with the image under the substitution of the prefix of its root position. the multiplicity indicates the number of times a given z/-type formula is reduced to form the tableau. completeness involves showing that a suitable modal multiplicity pu can be constructed to form a modal hintikka set from the set associated with any non-complementary atomic path  i.e.  unclosed branch  through 

   although we have used tableau systems to motivate the definition of the matrix systems  no tableau construction is actually performed in the use of such methods. the theorem above is utilised directly. 
 see section 1.  
1.1 fir it-order modal systems. 
extending the propositional matrix systems presented above to firstorder modal logics is straightforward. we consider both constant- and varying-domain versions. 
   for constant-domains  a pair of atomic formulae labelling the positions of a connection can be interpreted as complementary if we can find a first-order substitution oq of parameters for individual variables that render the two atoms identical. 
   for varying-domains  the modalities and quantifiers interact. universally quantified variables only range over those individuals that 'exist  in the world denoted by the prefix of their quantifiers. existential quantifiers express the existence of individuals only in the world denoted by their prefixes. consequently  our first-order substitution oq must respect the modal substitution om. 
모a combined substitution is a pair consisting of a modal substitution and a first-order substitution. a combined substitution 
1. 
1. 1. 
모for constant-domains the appropriate notion of complementarity is as follows  for an indexed formula be an i!-admissible combined substitution for x . a connection -complementary 
iff 

note the addition of the third clause by which the modal and firstorder substitution interact. 
   remark. we have blurred the distinction between an individual variable and the position that represents it in order to state the second condition  
consequently we have: 
theorem 1.1 a  first-order  modal formula valid iff there is a multiplicity u  an l-admissible combined substitution a and a set of a-complementary connections that spans the indexed formula   once again we utilise tableau techniques to prove this theorem. 
1 	proof search in the matrix systems. 
the matrix systems presented above reduce the task of checking a modal formula for validity to one of path checking and complementarity tests. the path checking is performed by adding connections 



