             panels the commercialization of a.l  

pirt 1: 	the user viewpoint 
moderator; 
bruce b. johnson 
	arthur andersen & 	company 
panelists: 
	dennis 	o'connor 
	digital 	equipment 	corporation 
sa hi no di monte 
	la 	servitheque 
tom bell chevron 
paul r. hessinger 
	computer task group. 	inc. 
artificial intelligence is being used world-wide to perform a variety of functions in business and industry. this panel will present actual user experiences with ai systems in use today  and will describe problems  expected and unexpected  that arose during the development  delivery  and maintenance of these systems. solutions for actual problems  when they could be found  will be recounted by the panelists. did ai techniques meet their expectations for solving these problems  if not  what should vendors of ai technology offer to better meet user needs  
panels and invited talks part 1: 	the vendor viewpoint 
moderator: 
	harry 	remstem 
	awn 	corporation 
panelists: 
	tom 	kehler 
intellicorp 
	herbert 	schoor 
	ibm 	corporation 
robert n. goldman 
	artificial 	intelligence 
corporation 
	carl 	wolf 
	gold 	hill 	computers 
this panel will present vendors' experiences in their attempts to offer users various products and services based on ai technologies. what do the vendors perceive to be the commercial value of different ai techniques in the marketplace  what are the primary challenges they face in gaining user acceptance  has the marketplace for ai products changed significantly in the past few years  if so  how  is user education still a problem  or are today's users more sophisticated in their knowledge of ai  are vendors successfully integrating their products into existing business environments  what are the greatest obstacles still to be overcome  

panels: the commercialization of a i 
continued 
part 1: the technology challenge 
moderator: 
jan aikins 
awn corporation 
panelists: 
mike williams 
intellicorp 
mark fox 
carnegie group  inc. 
jay m. tenenbaum schlumberger 
palo alto research 
danny bobrow 
xerox corporation 
this panel combines suppliers of ai technology from universities  research 
centers  and vendors  with current users of ai technology in a discussion of challenges that remain to be solved. can we identify the primary problem areas where researchers should devote their attention and vendors should offer new products or services  are new knowledge representations required  new control structures  better user interfaces  or perhaps even more sophisticated logics  should we study more carefully the marriage of ai with other emerging technologies  e.g.  computer-aided software 
engineering  in order to offer a more complete solution to the user's problems  what needs to be done to make the ai technology user more productive and more successful  these and other questions will be discussed as this panel attemps to tie together issues from the user and vendor panels in a discussion of technology challenges. 
	johnson  reinstein  and alkins 	1 
