 
   qualitative simulation of behavior from structure is a valuable method for reasoning about partially known physical systems. unfortunately  in many realistic situations  a qualitative description of structure is consistent with an intractibly large number of behavioral predictions. we present two complementary methods  representing different trade-offs between generality and power  for taming an important case of intractible branching. the first method applies to the most general case of the problem. it changes the level of the behavioral description to aggregate an exponentially exploding tree of behaviors into a few distinct possibilities the second method draws on additional mathematical knowledge  and assumptions about the smoothness of partially known functional relationships  to derive a correspondingly stronger result. higher-order derivative constraints are automatically derived by manipulating the structural constraint model algebraically  and applied to eliminate impossible branches these methods have been implemented as extensions to qsim and tested on a substantial number of examples they move us significantly closer to the goal of reasoning qualitatively about complex physical systems 

 a  
1 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
qualitative simulation is a promising method for reasoning about the behavior of physical systems  starting from incomplete knowledge of the structure and initial state  kuipers  1  1; de kleer and brown  1; de kleer and bobrow  1; forbus  1; williams 1a  1 . incompletely known values may be described qualitatively in terms of their relations with a discrete set of landmark values. incompletely known functional relations may be 
described qualitatively as monotonically increasing or decreasing  and passing through certain corresponding landmark values. methods of qualitative simulation have demonstrated promising results on a variety of small and moderate-sized examples  kuipers  1  1  1  1; forbus 1  1; de kleer  1; de kleer and brown  1; williams  1a  1 . 
　in attempting to extend these techniques to simulate the continuous behavior of larger and more tightly interacting systems  however  certain problems have been encountered  resulting in a proliferation of predicted behaviors. under the different representations for qualitative behavior  this proliferation is manifest in different ways. 
 b  

 this research was suported in part by the national science foundation 

 a  a tree of behaviors for the cascaded tank system produced by qsim. 
 b  a transition graph for damped spring system from  de kleer and brown  1 . 
figure 1: intractible branching in tree and transition graph rep-

through grants mcs-1  dcr-1  and dcr-1. 	resentations. 
	kuipers and chiu 	1 
  qsim  kuipers  1  1  produces a tree of possible behav-
the underlying problem  illustrated here in terms of qsim 
iors  where each path down the tree is a sequence of qualbehaviors  is that when two distinct processes produce qualita-
itative states. 	proliferation is manifest as an intractibly tive parameters that are changing in the same direction  their 
branching behavior tree.  figure la  
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　difference is unconstrained  except by continuity. figure 1 shows one such behavior  representing a qualitative phenomenon we   representations that do not create new landmark values  de 

kleer and brown  1; de kleer and bobrow  1; forbus  1; williams  1a  1  are able to enumerate all possible qualitative states in advance  and thus produce a total envisionmenty or transition graph on the qualitative states. prolif-
eration is exhibited in the transition graph as branches and loops  making an infinite set of possible paths through the graph.  figure lb  
　　an important class of proliferation problems arises with coupled systems such as two tank problems  figure 1 .  these problems represent general classes of important applications problems 
 e.g.  sachs  et al.  1   etc. .  
call  chatter . here the parameter net flow b chatters  while the other parameters move without changing direction. figure 1a shows the transition graph representation of a single unconstrained parameter. for the examples shown here  the chattering behaviors consist of unconstrained wandering among the qualitative states  + inc    + std   and  + dec 1 the problem is that  with no information about the actual shapes of functioral relationships such as out flow a = m+ pressure a   all of the predicted behaviors are real possibilities. but an exponentially growing set of behaviors so obscures the actual qualitative properties of the system as to eliminate the value of qualitative simulation. 
　　we have developed two distinct methods for solving this problem. one method applies to the general problem  and produces a slightly weaker qualitative description that collapses unimportantly distinct branches into a single history. the other method takes advantage of additional knowledge or assumptions about the system  and produces a correspondingly stronger result. 


1 	reasoning 

1 	ignoring irrelevant distinctions 
consider the general case of the two cascaded tanks  figure 1a . if we are filling the system from an initially empty state by providing a fixed input to the up-stream tank  the flow from tank a to tank b will increase monotonically with time. however  since the relation out flow a=m  amounta  is incompletely known  outflowa can  wiggle  considerably while increasing. depending on how this interacts with the behavior of out flow b  which is monotonically related to amountb  the variable netflowb t  chatters  rising and falling arbitrarily until finally returning to zero. this gives a large set of behaviors  distinguished only by the behaviors of net flow b t . 
　suppose  for a particular application  we are not concerned about the detailed behavior of netflowb t   but only its sign. we would like to modify the qsim algorithm to simulate the mechanism using only the qualitative magnitude of netflowb  and ignoring its direction of change. we can do this by adding a new term  ign  as a possible description of a direction of change. we then create a new set of qualitative state transitions  corresponding to the transitions in figure 1b. the effect of these transitions is that all the behaviors wandering among the qualitative states   are collapsed into a single behavior with the qualitative state its eventual transition to  1 ign  brings the system to quiescence and ends the behavior. 
　　unfortunately  this is not sufficient. the transitions in figure 1b fail to capture the constraint that the derivative of a changing parameter must change continuously. for example  the transition 

should be excluded in case the only possible complete value for the second state is  1 inc . therefore  we apply a global satisfiability filter after each step of the prediction when an ign value 
is used. the satisfiability filter checks: 
1. whether a consistent state exists with all ign values replaced by one of {inc std dec}. this is accomplished by treating ign as unknown  and propagating to determine whether there is one or more complete states  consistent with the other known values. 
1. if so  whether there is a consistent successor of the previous state. this is done by checking  for each parameter  whether its pair of qualitative values is consistent with a transition. 
net flow b  though it still does so for the other parameters. 
　this method eliminates intractible branching by changing the level of qualitative description of behavior  collapsing the descriptions of the different real possibilities. however  this multitude of real possibilities only arises in case of pathological interactions between the  wiggles  of different partially known m+ relations. if we know that the relations are reasonably well-behaved  we would like to be able to take advantage of this knowledge to eliminate the chattering behaviors as impossible  and produce a stronger description of the real possible behaviors. our second method gives us this power. 

 b  　　the result of qualitative simulation of the cascaded tanks  ignoring direction of change for netflowb  is two distinct behaviors  figure 1 . in one case both tanks reach equilibrium at the same time  while in the other  tank a reaches equilibrium before tank b.1 naturally  since direction of change is ignored  qsim does not detect critical points or create new landmark values for 

   a  the full qualitative transition graph is adequate to cap-ture continuity constraints  but permits  chattering  behaviors. 
   b  the collapsed transition graph  ignoring direction of change  eliminates chatter  but fails to detect discontinuous change. 
figure 1: transition graphs for a single unconstrained qualitative parameter. 
   1strictly speaking  there is only one real behavior  with both tanks reaching equilibrium at  qsim normally treats exponential approach to a limit like any other move-to-limit  and considers the possibility of reaching the limit in finite time  which corresponds to the physical perception of such a process. qsim can be restricted to produce only the single mathematically correct prediction. 
	kulpers and chili 	1 

 a  the two tanks reach equilibrium at the same time. 
 b  tank a reaches equilibrium before tank b. 

1 	applying higher-order derivatives 
by examining the detailed structure of a branch point in the arbitrarily chattering behavior of the parameter netflowb  we can obtain a clearer picture of the nature of the proliferation problem. the typical branch is a three-way branch from a point where netflowb has a critical point  i.e. its derivative is zero. the standard qsim transition table  kuipers  1  provides three possibilities after such a point the parameter can increase  remain steady  or decrease. figure 1a  
　　in a system sufficiently well-understood and well-behaved to be described by a linear ordinary differential equation  the unique behavior is determined at a critical point by the first non-zero higher-order derivative at that point. for these coupled tank systems  this is the second derivative  or curvature  of the parameter in question  figure 1b . the usual qualitative value for a parameter consists of a qualitative description of its magnitude and its direction of change. its curvature is not made explicit  so the spurious possibilities cannot be filtered out and a proliferation of behaviors results. 
　　the value of higher-order derivative information has been recognized previously. williams  1a  1b  showed that higherorder derivative information could disambiguate certain branching behaviors. de kleer and bobrow  then presented methods for explicitly deriving qualitative descriptions of higher-order derivatives from the original confluences for a mechanism. our approach starts from these correct observations  but overcomes two limitations of the methods presented in previous papers.1 
  the paper  de kleer and bobrow  1  gives very little guidance on when to apply higher-order derivative information  and how to derive it for a general constraint model when it is needed. 
  the straight-forward approach extends the constraint model to include terms for the higher-order derivatives and constraints linking them to the previous terms. unfortunately  this simply pushes the problem into the higher-order terms  while adding parameters whose distinctions may cause new qualitative branches in the behavior tree. 
figure 1: three-way and one-way branch 

figure 1: two ign behaviors of the cascaded tanks. 
1 	rea1ning 

　　de kleer and bobrow hive independently identified and corrected certain errors in their paper  j. de kleer  personal communication . 

1 	o u r a p p r o a c h 	1 	d e r i v i n g t h e c u r v a t u r e expression 

our approach permits automatic identification of the problem  and automatic derivation of the appropriate constraints  which we call curvature constraints.1 we focus our attention on the parameter describing the highest order derivative  hod  in the system. as we shall see  it is possible for a system to have more than one hod. 
in outline  the algorithm consists of two steps: 
1. identify the highest-order derivative s   in the system. 
  this method is necessary and applicable in case there is intractible branching from points where 
1. for each hod  algebraically derive an expression  valid where  in terms of the other parameters of the system. 
  use this expression to determine the sign of at critical points  and generate only transitions consistent with this curvature. 
1 	i d e n t i f y i n g t h e h o d 
we can identify all the hods in a general constraint model by viewing constraints as paths linking parameters. we are looking for the maximal points on chains of derivative and other twoargument constraints. we use the qsim notation  kuipers 1  
1  for constraint models  though our techniques apply generally. 
  the derivative constraint leads upward from a parameter to its derivative. 
t the two-argument constraints  m +   m~  and minus  connect parameters horizontally. 
  the three-argument constraints  add and mult  terminate a chain and block passage. in order to avoid unnecessary blockage  it may be necessary to apply algebraic simplification rules such as those in  kuipers  1  appendix d   e.g. 

  starting from each derivative constraint  move upward or horizontally until no further progress is possible. the maximal derivatives are the hods. 
  if the chain forms a closed loop  e.g. the frictionless spring  the analysis is unnecessary and may be terminated  since the loop already encodes the desired curvature constraint. 
　since this process may yield several maximum points  there may be multiple hods  possibly of different orders. both the cascaded tanks and the coupled tanks have two distinct hods: netflowa and netflowb. however  in the coupled tanks both hods exhibit chatter  while in the cascaded tanks system only netflowb does. 
    there can certainly be cues where both hod' and hod  vaniah  and the cc-nitraint mu.t be stated in terms of even higher-order derivatives. however  for many modela  including the damped-ipring caae diacuaaed in  de kleer and bobrow  1   applying the second derivative is sufficient  to we confine our attention to that caae. extenaion to the higher-order caae is straight-forward. 
1.1 	the smoothness assumption 
in order to derive an expression for the sign of the curvature  hod   while still using incompletely known and possibly nonlinear monotonic function constraints  we need to assume that the system is reasonably well-behaved in any local neighborhood. 
	suppose 	this means that there is a monotoni-
cally increasing function m such that for all t  the relationship between the first derivatives of x and y is 

where m' is the derivative of the monotonic function m. this tells us only that must have the same sign  since all we know about at is that it is positive. since m  is unconstrained  the relationship between second derivatives is even weaker: 

the smoothness assumption says that in any local neighborhood  
m x  is approximately a linear function. in practice  as we evaluate the curvature constraints  we assume that the m  term is sufficiently small that we may regard y  t  and x  t  as having the same sign. 
1.1 	rules for curvature 
we can derive a set of rules for reasoning about the sign of the curvature of a particular parameter after applying the smoothness approximation. by treating arithmetic relations as qualitative relations on signs and allowing multiple solutions  we may write sign  
for brevity of notation  we define: 

for a parameter x  sd x  is just its direction of change  and so is explicitly represented by qsim at each time-point.   is its curvature  so the curvature expression solves for curvature in terms of explicitly available information. 
　　the rules for deriving the explicit curvature expression are the following: 
1. start with the expression sd1 hod . 
1. apply the following rules for qualitative curvature in depth-first order wherever they are applicable  to propagate sd1 terms through all possible constraints. 

the first rule depends on the smoothness assumption. the others are straight-forward consequences of the theorems of differential calculus. this process terminates when ev-
ery explicit parameter is either an exogenous variable  or explicitly linked to its derivative. 
kulpers and chiu 1 

1. apply the final transformations: 	1 	conclusions 


and simplify the result. 
　　the result is an expression for sd1 h1d  in terms of explicitly available information. it is used as a constraint  applied only at critical points of the hod  to select among branches such as that in figure 1. 
1 	the coupled tanks example 
let us follow the derivation of the curvature expression on the coupled tanks  figure 1b . 
　　the parameters netflowa and net flowb are both hods in this system  and both exhibit the chattering behavior. we will explicitly derive an expression for the sign of the curvature of netflowb  sd1 net flowb   valid at critical points  i.e. where 

　　the resulting constraint  sd1 netflowb  = sd netflowa   tells us that the sign of the curvature of netflowb at a critical point is the same as the sign of the slope of netflowa at the same point in time. a similar derivation gives us the constraint sd1 netflowa  = sd netflowb   applying at critical points of netflowa. applying these two constraints  we get the following single behavior for the scenario of filling the coupled tank system from empty  figure 1 . 
　　we predict an unambiguous behavior: amount a and amountb increase monotonically from zero to their equilibrium values; netflowa decreases monotonically to zero; and net flowb increases monotonically from zero to some maximum value  then decreases back to zero. this description is stronger than that produced by our first method  in that all parameters now have complete qualitative descriptions. in the method of ignoring irrelevant distinctions the hods  and certain other closely related parameters exhibiting chatter  would be described in terms of magnitude only. 
although the class of qualitative simulation problems we treat here has considerable importance in its own right  the methods we have developed have a more general significance. a fundamental decision in the modeling of a system is selection of the level of detail for the model. both methods explicitly manipulate that level of description. 
  the method of ignoring irrelevant distinctions  by ignor-ing direction of change for certain parameters  represents a change in the level of detail of the model. in its current form  it is a knowledge engineering method  to be applied explicitly as a model is being developed and debugged. we expect that  using techniques similar to our second method  it can be extended to recognize  chattering  situations automatically  and decide when to ignore which distinctions. 
  the higher-order derivative method  by applying the smooth ness assumption and a more powerful inference about the algebraic structure of the constraint model  allows the simulation to produce a complete qualitative description of all the parameters  including the highest-order derivatives. it also preserves qsim's ability to create new landmark values. 
　　chiu and kuipers  present the details of our methods for automatically deriving and applying the curvature constraint. while these methods handle important cases of coupled systems  there are additional cases of intractible branching in the more general second-order system. lee  chiu  and kuipers  extend this work by applying the curvature method and two additional constraints to handle an important case of the damped spring system. 


figure 1: single hod behavior of the coupled tanks. 
1 	reasoning 

　　thus  our two methods are able to solve the  chattering  problem for coupled systems  in the most general case by ignoring certain distinctions  and  when more knowledge is available  by applying more powerful inferences to produce a stronger result. these methods provide important mathematical and computational tools for qualitative simulation  and move us toward our goal of reasoning qualitatively about complex physical systems. 
1 	