 	: 	most mobile robots are subject to plane. 	this restriction leads us to consider 	the kinematic constraints  non-holonomic joints   i.e.  application of the results to the case of a the number of degrees of freedom is less than the circular robot. 	note that the method presented is number of configuration parameters. such robots can applicable 	to more general 	environments 	than navigate 	in very constrained space  	but at the polygonal ones  
expense of backing up maneuvers  laumond 1 . 	in this paper we study the original problem of finding 

1 smooth trajectories : 	definitions  	property of 

collision-free smooth trajectories  i.e. with never 	existence. 

backing up  for a circular mobile robot whose the turning radius is lower bounded. 
1 introduction 
this paper is part of the research work currently done on the mobile robot hilare  giralt 1   chatila 1   with respect to automatic path planning in a constrained space  taking into account the vehicle's kinematic constraints. 
if the study of navigation in a constrained space leads to considering the problem in terras of pathfinding in the configuration space  lozano-perez 1   the well-known  piano mover  problem   some possible kinematic constraints of a mobile robot do not guarantee the feasibility of the trajectories generated by classical methods. indeed  the number of degrees of freedom is less than the dimension of the configuration space. taking into account these constraints increases the complexity of the pathfinding problem  lozano-perez 1 . 
in a recent paper  laumond 1  we studied this original problem. it was demonstrated that the existence of a trajectory for a mobile robot with two degrees of freedom is characterized by the robot of the same shape but with three degrees of freedom. it appears that the passing through highly constrained spaces can lead to a large number of backing up maneuvers. 
the aim of this paper is to present a study of smooth trajectory planning for a mobile robot whose kinematics is that of a car. this study relies on two properties. the first one characterizes the existence of smooth trajectories by the existence of trajectories consisting of line segments  circle arcs of fixed radius  or contact arcs. the other one determines  from the shortest path  the minimal angular variations that any trajectory belonging to the same class of homotopic mapping  will execute. the association of these two properties allows us to transform the path planning problem into one of polygonal line finding in a dual space of the configuration space  i.e. the space of centers of curvature. 
this second property is established in an euclidean 
1 	robotics 
we consider a mobile robot mr evolving in a planar world  whose kinematics is that of a car. a configuration is defined by a triplet  x y 1  of r1*s' where  x y  are the coordinates of the rear axle middle point and   the vehicle's orientation expressed in s1  the oriented unit circle. such a vehicle is subject to a non-holonomic joint  vhittaker 1  dy - dx.tg1 * 1  1  and has two degrees of freedom. this kinematics is analogous to that of a robot with two separate driving wheels as hilare  although in the case of the car  the turning radius is lower bounded. 
in the following  we consider that the mobile robot  mr  is circular  of radius r  subject to the joint  1  and that its turning radius is lower bounded by a constant r1. let m be the center of mr. in this context  the admissible configuration space is characterized by its projection on r1  noted acsp. acsp is very simply obtained by an isotropic growth of the obstacles by the radius r 
 see figure 1a . 	in the sequel  we suppose that acsp is bounded by generalized polygonal 	lines 
 i.e. consisting of line segments and arcs of circle  laumond 1   
from the non-holonomic joint  1  it is deduced that 
1 s arctg dy/dx . thus there is a one to one correspondance between the set of trajectories of m in r1*s1 and that of the trajectories of m in r1. 
let t be a feasible trajectory of m  and f  respectively g  be a characteristic representation of t in the plane  resp. r1#s1 . f is a continuous mapping of  1  on r1  piecewise of class c1  i.e. there exists a finite sequence  t 1   t such that the restriction of f to  t 1   t 1 + 1   is differentiable twice and its second derivative is continuous; moreover  at each point of f  t l  t i + 1    the curvature is less than 1/r1. if  in addition  f is of class c1  t is said to be smooth  or  without backing up maneuver ; in  laumond 1  we said  without maneuver  . t is said to perform an angular gap   c  1'  included in s1  if there exists an interval   t 1 t j   included in  1  such that  1'  is included in the projection of g  t l f ti   on s1. a turn refers to a trajectory arc whose direction of curvature is constant. 
property 1 : a feasible smooth trajectory exists between two configurations of mr if and only if there exists a smooth trajectory consisting of line segments  circle arcs of radius r1 or contact arcs 
whose curvature at any point is less than 1/r1. 
demonstration : let t be a smooth trajectory feasible by mr and f be a representation of t in r1; f being piecewise of class c1  there exists a partition of  1  into intervals  t l t t 1 + 1   such 
that the curvature of f between f t1  and f t l + 1  has a constant siqn. refine  into intervals  according to whether or not 
f	t	t
   i j ' i i + i   is a part of the contact 	trajectory. the contact arcs have a curvature less than 	l/r1. 
consider the intervals   t 1 j t 1 j + 1   corresponding to parts of the contact-free trajectory     t 1   t n     
 t 1  t j 1   in figure 1 . construct the shortest path l  between f t t j  and f   t i j o   in acsp  so that the tangents in the extremities are preserved. l is a curve of class c1  a generalized polygonal line  whose curvature has the same sign as that of t  see  hershberger and guibas 1  and  laumond 1  for algorithmical aspects . all the arcs of l  except possibly those at the ends  are contact arcs. if all these arcs have a radius of curvature greater than r1  l has the property searched for  for example as is the case between f t i 1   and f t 1   . in the opposite case  let tjk =  tji + t1j+1 /1 and iterate the process on the intervals   t 1 j   t l k   and  t1k  t1j+1   so that the radius of curvature at t l k is r1. this process converges since f is contactfree. so  a trajectory satisfying the property searched for is progressively constructed. the converse follows obviously  i 

figure 1 : at the first iteration on  t1 t1   l  in dashed lines  does not have the property searched for  since the arc   has a curvature greater than l/r 1  . at the second iteration l' and l  have the property searched for. 
thus  to prove the existence of a smooth trajectory feasible by mr  it suffices to prove the existence of a smooth trajectory whose arcs which are not contact arcs are circle arcs of fixed radius. this type of trajectory is characterized only by the different centers of curvature. indeed  consider a generalized polygonal line l consisting of circle arcs of the same radius r and tangent segments  such a line is noted g.p.l.r . this line is associated with the polygonal line l* linking the arc centers of same curvature. to each change in the curvature of l corresponds a new connected component of l   some of these components can be isolated points. l and l* are said to be duals  see figure 1 . 

figure 1 : a g.p.l.r l with its dual l  ; here l* has three connected components  one of which is reduced to a point. 
thus the algorithm consisting of searching for the centers of curvature becomes clearer. the following property will enable us to state more accurately in which domains this search has to be carried out. 
1  canonicity  of the shortest path. 
consider the shortest path between two points in acsp. all parts of this path which are not in contact are line segments. it appears that this path which is optimal in distance is equally optimal in terms of angular variations in its homotopy class. we only consider the trajectories of class c1. the shortest path will be referred to as the canonical trajectory of its class. 
property 1 : let t be a canonical trajectory and l a homotopic trajectory in acsp. let a be a contact arc between two consecutive line segments s1 and s1 of t  and let  and g1 be the respective directions of s  and s1. l performs the angular gap  1  in the concave domain d bounded by a and the half-lines supporting sy and s1  see figure 1 . more precisely  if pe is the half-plane bounded by the tangent in a whose direction is 1 and which do not contain the obstacle  then : 

demonstration  sketch  : with the above hypotheses and notations  t being the shortest path  any homotopic trajectory l have to pass through pe. thus  if l is smooth  it has a point in pe whose tangent direction is e. so l performs  in d. 1 
in other words  the shortest trajectory performs the minimum angular gap. the advantage of this property lies in that it enables us to determine in which domains the arcs have to be searched for  and then in which domains their centers have to be searched for  since the arcs have a fixed and known radius  property 1 . 
1 space of centers of curvature. 
this space is defined for each homotopy class. for each turn  performed by the canonical trajectory t  we define the domain d* containing the duals of all the g.p.l.r1's homotopic with t and performing the angular gap  in the domain d defined in property 1. with the notations of the property 1  let p*e * t pe   where t is the 
translation of vector  r1cos1  -r1sin1 . d* is included in u e     e     e 1  p  e  to compute d* requires that the obstacles located in d are taken into account. this is easily achieved by means of an isotropic growth of radius r1  of the boundaries of acsp contained in d  see figure 1 . the space of curvature centers is the set of all the domains associated with the canonical trajectory turns. 
let a be the arc of t executing the turn and l the 
	laumond 	1 


	figure 	1 : 	a domain d  	the domains d* and 	k d*  associated. 1 linking of turns. 

1 sketch of algorithm. 
the algorithm concerning the search for smooth trajectories consists of four steps. ve assume the environment to be made up of generalized polygons. 
1 	robotics 
step 1 : in the f i r s t step  we find the shortest canonical trajectory t. to do this  we use a path planning prooedure in the generalized v i s i b i l i t y graph of acsp   i . e . the set of positions reachable by m   hershberger and ouibas 1   laumond 1 . if r r 1   ac1p is bounded by generalized polygons whose radius of ourvature is  at any point  greater than or equal to r  henoe to r1. t is smooth and feasible; the algorithm stops here. otherwise : 
step 	1 : 	let a p . . .   a n be the sequence 	of 	turns 
 contact arcs  executed by t. for each ai compute the domain d1* of the possible centers of curvature as well as kernels k d t   . if one of these kernels is empty  the corresponding turn cannot be negociated without backing up maneuver. if none of these domains is empty  the linking of different turns must then be envisaged. 
step 1 : let   1 and tn+1 be the i n i t i a l and final centers of curvature of t. generally they correspond to contact-free arcs of radius r1  see figure 1b . with function f we successively propagate  t 1   onto k d1    k dn*  and { t n + 1 } . if f n * 1  {t o }  1 there is no smooth trajectory. let 
j be the greatest integer such that f j   { t o }   # 1   it is necessary to perform maneuvers to link turns a. and a ¡ö j * i - if not 
1tep 1 : in each domain dj   search for a polygonal line satisfying the three conditions ci  c1 and c1. this is by far the most d i f f i c u l t step to implement. indeed  the search for the polygonal lines must be continued as long as a solution has not been found  in each connected component of each d1* domain. this may prove a very costly search since the non-existence of a solution in the current step leads to a backtracking on the previously and partially explored domains. 
figures 1 give an example of solution. 
1 complexity. 
at this stage of the development of the algorithm  the overall complexity cannot be precisely evaluated yet. on the whole  it is governed by step 1. indeed  the complexity of step 1 is 1 n 1    n standing for the number of primitives  segments or arcs  of the environment. the oomputation of the 
different domains and of their kernels  which may attain a quadratic complexity in the worst case  may be linear when the environment complexity is locally bounded   i . e .   if there is an environment 
paving such that the  number of primitives in each of the pavements is bounded by a oonstant . at worst  the oomputation of the propagation function reaches a oubio complexity   i . e .   when the number of domains is in 1 n  and when eaoh domain kernel is in 1 n    but this complexity is less in praotios  see the example presented . the 

complexity of step 1- depends on the number of the conneoted components of the domains d*. paradoxically the algorithm w i l l be a l l the more effioient as the spaoe is highly s 
indeed in a highly constrained spaoe  the spaoe of solutions is much reduced and this is most of the time reflected by a 1onneotivity of the envisaged ourvature domains. 
1 directions for use and extensions. 
in a highly constrained space  it is not realistic to envisage an off-line planning of oollision-free trajectories  laumond 1 . the algorithm presented must be used to define strategies in order to negociate a particular turn. these strategies are instantiated on-line with the informations provided 
by the sensors. 
we have presented here only a sketch algorithm. step 1 requires more technical developments which are in progress. the extension of our approach to the case of a non-circular robot  except for an approximation approach which may prove highly efficient in practice  poses theoritical problems : how can a metric  defined in the configuration space r1#s1  and not in its projection on r1  - and supporting the notion of shortest path - retain the euclidean metric when projected onto real space   the extension to the nd case poses non-trivial acknowledgments the original problem  a mobile robot is not a piano t  was set by 1. oiralt and discussed with him. i am grateful to the anonymous referees for their helpful suggestions. 
