 
we discuss the problem of implementing an expert  knowledge-based system. in particular  we consider which predicates in an expert  knowledge-based system should be actually stored and which should be derived on demand. we present two solutions for unconstrained applications. when realistic constraints are present it is shown that the problem is np-complete. a sub-optimal algorithm is given which operates in polynomial time when the application is not heavily constrained. 
1. introduction 

¡¡¡¡many early expert systems have proved to be difficult to maintain  steels  1   as a result there is a growing interest in rigorous design techniques for expert systems  addis  1    martin  1    debenham  1 . the use of rigorous design techniques should mean that large expert systems can be constructed and maintained effectively. our interest in the design of large  expert  knowledge-based systems was first reported in  debenham and mcgrath  1; a substantial development of that early work is reported in  debenham  1a . the effective construction and maintenance of large expert systems entails the solution to design problems which arc not significant when dealing with smaller systems. one such design problem is considered here. 
debenham 	1 ¡¡¡¡for the purpose of this discussion  we think of the knowledge in an expert  knowledge-based system as consisting of a collection of  rules   where a rule states how to deduce all that there is to know about one  predicate  from the information in other predicates. for example  the rule  customers with steady income and regular expenditure are good credit risks otherwise they are poor credit risks  could be represented as a group of horn clauses  hogger  1: 

¡¡¡¡a dependency diagram for a rule shows that all the information in one predicate can be derived  using the rule  from the information in other predicates. the dependency diagram shown in figure 1 is for a rule expressed in horn clauses. it should be clear that a dependency diagram can be constructed for rules expressed in any  if...then  formalism; thus the relevance of what follows is not restricted to systems expressed in logic. note that a dependency diagram consists of one  thick arc  and one or more  thin arcs . the  thick arc  is connected to the head node which represents the predicate for which the information may be derived by the rule. the  thin arcs  are connected to the body nodes which represent the remaining predicates in the rule. 
¡¡¡¡an expert  knowledge-based system will contain a collection of rules which enables the information in the  query predicates  to be deduced from the information in the  update predicates ; where the update predicates arc the predicates which are directly associated with the  input  information  and the query predicates are the predicates which are directly associated with the identified query types of the expert system. 
¡¡¡¡we assume that the collection of rules in an expert system is minimal in the sense that none of the rules can be disposed of. see  debenham  1b  for a discussion on the selection of an optimal  minimal set of rules. thus the rules in an expert system can be represented using a combined diagram which shows  on one diagram  the dependency diagrams for all of the rules. for example  figure 1 shows a combined diagram for an expert system with eight rules  three query predicates which are shown on 


1 	real-time and high performance 

are not in the storage allocation represent predicates which will be calculated when required. in the example shown in figure 1  four different storage allocations show that the query predicate a may be deduced from any of the sets {b c d}  {d e c}  {e b c} and {c e}. 
¡¡¡¡an irredundant storage allocation is a storage allocation with the property that if a node is removed from the storage allocation then the resulting set ceases to be a storage allocation. an irredundant storage allocation can be visualized as a minimal set of nodes which divides the graph into two portions. if a storage allocation is not irredundant  it is called a redundant storage allocation. in the example shown in figure 1  two of the storage allocations quoted above are irredundant storage allocations; they are 
{b  c  d  and {c  e . note that for the storage allocation {b  c  d  the values of the update relation e cannot be recovered from {b  c  d  unless suitable  additional rules are available. in this case  if the values of e might be subsequently required then they would have to be retained in auxiliary storage. 
¡¡¡¡a storage allocation is a division if it contains no two nodes which depend on each other. as we assume that the collection of rules in an expert system is minimal  if a selection of nodes from a combined diagram is a  division  then that selection will cease to be a storage allocation if any node is removed from the storage allocation; in other words  all divisions are irredundant storage allocations. 
¡¡¡¡it is important to understand the difference between an irredundant storage allocation and a division. in the combined diagram shown in figure 1 the storage allocation { c  d  f } is an irredundant storage allocation because if any one of these three nodes were removed it would cease to be a storage allocation; but  { c  d  f } is not a division because d depends on c. on the other hand  the storage allocation { b  d  f } is a division. 

figure 1 
¡¡¡¡non-division storage allocations are often desirable. however  divisions are of great practical significance because if a storage allocation contains one node that depends on another then the updates to the second node will also have to be reflected in the first. 
¡¡¡¡we now mark costs on the combined diagram. these costs are intended to represent the cost of storing each predicate  and are written beside the node which represents the predicate to which the costs apply. for example  if the cost of storing predicate b was 1 and the cost of storing predicate c was 1  and b and c were in a dependency diagram with head predicate a then this would be denoted as shown on the diagram in figure 1. 
¡¡¡¡a storage allocation is called a minimal storage allocation if its cost is no greater than any other storage allocation. it is easy to show that minimal storage allocations are irredundant storage allocations but are not necessarily divisions. for example  consider the combined diagram as shown in figure 1  the minimal storage allocation is the set { c  d  f   which is irredundant but is not a division. we will now consider the calculation of both the division with least cost and the minimal storage allocation. 

this problem can be solved by applying the 
 polynomial time  minimum cut algorithm to a modified version of the combined diagram. this modification is performed in two steps. first  all of the  thick  arcs in the combined diagram are  collapsed  to a point. second  replace each node with a  pseudo-arc  marked with the node cost  and replace each  thin  arc with a  pseudo-node . the resulting diagram is called the division-dual diagram. the solution to problem 1 may be found by applying the minimum cut algorithm to the division dual diagram. when the minimum cut has been calculated  the pseudo-arcs which lie on the minimum cut will correspond to the nodes in the division with least cost. see  even  1   or any good book on algorithmic graph theory  for a description of the minimum cut algorithm. 
¡¡¡¡for example consider the combined diagram shown in figure 1; its division-dual diagram is as shown in figure 1. 
from which we readily see that the division of least cost is 
{ c  e  f } or { b  d  f } with a total cost of 1. note that an arc in the division-dual diagram corresponds to a node in the original diagram  and vice versa. 

	debenham 	1 

¡¡¡¡we now consider the calculation of the minimal storage allocation. 
problem 1. 
to calculate the irredundant storage allocation with least cost; this is the minimal storage allocation. 
this problem can be solved by applying the 
 polynomial time  minimum cut algorithm to a modified version of the combined diagram which is similar to that considered in the solution to problem 1. this modification is performed in two steps. first  all of the  thick  arcs in the combined diagram are  collapsed  to a point. second  replace each remaining  thin  arc with a  pseudo-node  and replace each node with a  pseudo-polygon  as follows: 
  a node which is directly connected to one or two other nodes is represented by a pseudo-arc as in the solution to problem 1. this pseudo-arc is marked with the node cost 
  a node which is directly connected to n other nodes  where n   1   is represented by an n-sided pseudopolygon with one corner of the polygon connected to the arc which is connected to each of the n nodes; the sides of the polygon are marked with the original node cost divided by two. 
the resulting diagram is called the dual diagram. the solution to problem 1 may be found by applying the minimum cut algorithm to this dual diagram. when the minimum cut has been calculated  the pseudo-polygons which lie on the cut will correspond to the nodes in the minimal storage allocation. 
¡¡¡¡for example  the combined diagram shown in figure 1 will generate the dual diagram shown in figure 1. from which we see that the minimal storage allocation is { b c e } with a cost of 1. 

¡¡¡¡also for example  consider the combined diagram shown in figure 1; its dual diagram is as shown in figure 
1. from which we readily see that the minimum cut is { c  d  f } with a total cost of 1. 

figure 1 
1. complexity 	of the 	expert systems 
implementation problem 
¡¡¡¡the operational constraints and optimality criterion noted in the definition of the expert systems implementation problem together comprise a complex set of conflicting constraints. 

1 	real-time and high performance 

theorem. 
the expert systems implementation problem is npcomplete. 
proof. 
we will restrict and transform the expert systems implementation problem  and will show that this restriction and transformation is equivalent to the  minimum cut into bounded sets  problem which is known to be np-complete  garey et a/.  1 . 
¡¡¡¡first assume that there is only one query type  q  and one update type  u. then the expert systems implementation problem now reads:- given a combined diagram  given constants t q   t u  and c  to choose a set of predicates r to be the storage allocation such that: 
t q    t q  t u    t u  
¡Ær r  c 
r€r 
are satisfied and 
¡¡¡¡ t q *f q   +  t u xf u   is minimized. 
¡¡¡¡second  adopt the following trivial measure for t  this measure defines t q  to be the number of rules involved in servicing the query type q  and t u  is just the number of 

rules involved in servicing the update type u. in other words  t q  is the number of rules required to deduce the values of q from the values stored in r  t u  is the number of rules required to deduce the values in r from the values in u. in addition we further restrict the problem to the special case when t q  = t u  = t. then the expert systems implementation problem may be stated as:- given a combined diagram  given constants t and c  to choose a set of predicates r to be the storage allocation such that:the number of rules needed to deduce the values of q from the values in r is less than or equal to t 
the number of rules needed to deduce the values of r from the values in u is less than or equal to t 

   we now transform the representation of this restriction of the expert systems implementation problem into the division dual diagram representation as discussed in the previous section. we will ignore the expression to be minimized  that is  we will just state the operational constraints. recall that on the division dual diagram  predicates are denoted by arcs and rules are denoted by nodes. the expert systems implementation problem as restricted so far now reads:- given a division dual diagram  constants t and c  to choose a partition of the set of nodes in the diagram  v  into two disjoint sets v1 and v1 such that the single query type q is directly connected to a node in v1 and the single update type u is directly connected to a node in v1 such that: where ivi means  the number of elements in the set v   and r is the set of arcs with one node in v1 and the other in v1. 
¡¡¡¡this final restriction and transformation of the expert systems implementation problem is precisely the  minimum cut into bounded sets  problem. this completes the proof. 
¡¡¡¡we note from the proof of the theorem that what has actually been demonstrated is that the problem of finding a solution to the expert systems implementation problem is np-complete  never mind the problem of finding an optimal solution. thus we have: 
corollary. 
given a combined diagram  the problem of finding a solution which satisfies the operational constraints  but which is not necessarily optimal  to the expert systems implementation problem is np-complcte. 
¡¡¡¡the  minimum cut into bounded sets  problem remains np-complete even if    and if 
 thus we note that the following restriction of the expert systems implementation problem is also npcomplete. given a dual diagram and constant c  to choose a partition of the nodes of the diagram into two disjoint sets v1 and v1 such that the single query node q is connected to a node in v1 and the single update node u is connected to a 
node in v1 such that: 

¡¡¡¡in the special case when t = ivi it is clear that the problem of finding an admissible  but not necessarily optimal  solution to the expert systems implementation problem reduces to satisfying the single constraint 

which can be solved in polynomial time by the minimum cut algorithm. 
1- sub-optimal storage allocation 
¡¡¡¡in the previous section we have seen that the expert systems implementation problem is np-complete. however this does not imply that identifiable classes of sub-problems encountered in practice need necessarily be np-complete. for example  the costs on the arcs in the combined diagram are often related to each other. perhaps investigation of this observation  and others like it  might lead to some simplification. 
¡¡¡¡we conclude our discussion with a sub-optimal algorithm for calculating the  hopefully  minimal storage allocation which satisfies query and update response constraints. this algorithm yields acceptable results in practice when the application is not heavily constrained. if the application has heavy query and update constraints then the algorithm may not find a solution. 
¡¡¡¡the algorithm begins with the unconstrained minimal storage allocation as calculated in problem 1. this minimal storage allocation is then  modified  to form other storage allocations which are all constrained to be irredundant. 
¡¡¡¡in the statement of the following algorithm we will use the following notation. if  in a combined diagram  s is an irredundant storage allocation and n is a node not in s  then s t {n} denotes the set of nodes obtained by adding n to s and removing from s any other nodes which  as a result of n being added  prevent su n  from being irredundant. 
algorithm. 
find the minimal storage allocation. this may be done by employing our method given in problem 1 on the dual diagram. if there is more than one such storage allocation then choose the storage allocation which violates fewest operational  i.e. query or update  constraints.  recall that a storage allocation consists of a set of predicates; on the dual diagram this set will be represented by a set of polygons.  represent this minimal storage allocation as a  cut  on the combined diagram. then :-
	debenham 	1 


1 	real-time and high performance 
