 
the satisfiability problem for a syllogistic embracing 1  e  boolean set operations  the kuratowski topological closure operation ~~  and continuous and closed maps between topological spaces  along with the operations of point evaluation  set image  and inverse set image  is solved for formulae that meet a particular syntactic non-circularity property. the unquantified interpreted language 뫩1 to be considered has infinitely many sorts of variables  each corresponding to a different topological space. three kinds of variables are available  namely  individual  set  and map variables. individual variables of a given sort are supposed to range over the universe of that sort  whereas set variables range over the subsets of the appropriate universe. finally  each map variable ranges over the collection of continuous or closed maps between two appropriate topological spaces. 
1 	introduction 
once a decision algorithm has been found for a formalized mathematical theory t  it is rewarding to discover that the validity problem for some other theory t*  possibly related to a different branch of mathematics  reduces to the validity problem of t  which one is already able to solve. 
모instances of this are common in the literature. we are therefore motivated in undertaking a quest for new problems whose solution is amenable to 'computable set theory'  i.e. to the thick cluster of recently attained methods regarding various portions of classical set theory  see  cantone  1  for an extensive bibliography on this subject . some indications in this direction have been given in  cantone et a/.  1   where the satisfiability problems of two theories dealing with monotone functions on totally and partially ordered sets have been translated into mls  or  multi-level syllogistic   cf.  ferro et a/.  1    a well-k nown decidable theory. 
    work supported by eni and enidata within the axl project. 
* subject area: b1. automated deduction. 
eugenio g. omodeo 
enidata-bologna 
viale aldo moro  1 
1 bologna  italy 
specifically  it was shown there how to reduce to mls the satisfiability problem for propositional combinations of atoms of type 

where / stands for a monotone function. 
모in the same paper a decision test was provided for the satisfiability problem of an unqualified 'extended tarsia' theory of reals with variables designating continuous real-valued functions  based on tarski's celebrated result on the real field  see  tarski  1  . such theory allows real addition and subtraction  multiplication and division  and comparison between variables representing real numbers; also  addition and subtraction of  continuous  functions  function evaluation  positivity  monotonicity and convexity predicates are allowed. more precisely  a decision test was provided for propositional combinations of atoms of the types 
 . 
where x y z are real variables and f g h are function variables  and where convex /  x  y   resp. concave /  x  y   is true if and only if the function / is convex  resp. concave  in the real interval  x y . 
모additionally  an extension of tarski's theory with multi-variate continuous functions has been considered in the same paper  see  bledsoe  1  bledsoe  1  rabin  1  for other approaches on related problems . 
모in this note we give a further application of decision tests for set theory to theories involving elementary topological constructs. more specifically  we extend two-level syllogistic  ferro and omodeo  1  with the kuratowski topological closure operation   and with continuous or closed maps between topological spaces  along with the operations of point evaluation  set image  and inverse set image  cf.  kelley  1  . 
모we will assume that formulae satisfy a syntactic noncircularity property  to be specified below . 
모the language 뫩1 뫢뫢 of our topological two-level syllogistic has countably infinitely many different sorts of 
	cantone and omodeo 	1 


1 	automated deduction 

	cantone and omodeo 	1 


1 	automated deduction 


cantone and omodeo 	1  cantone et al  1  d. cantone  a. ferro  and e.g. omodeo. computable set theory. oxford university press  to appear. 
 ferro and omodeo  1  a. ferro and e.g. omodeo. an efficient validity test for formulae in extensional two-level syllogistic  he matematiche  catania  italy   1-1  1. 
 ferro et al  1  a. ferro  e.g. omodeo  and j.t. schwartz. decision procedures for elementary sublanguages of set theory. i. multi-level syllogistic and some extensions. comm. pure app. math.  xxxiii:1  1. 
 kelley  1  john l. kelley. general topology. springer-verlag  new york  reprint of the 1 ed. published by van nostrand edition  1. 
 kuratowski  1  k. kuratowski. sur 1'operation a de i'analysis situs. fund. math.  1-1  1. 
 rabin  1  m.o. rabin. decidability of second order theories and automata on infinite trees. trans. am. math. soc  1-1  1. 
 tarski  1  a. tarski. a decision method for elementary algebra and geometry. univ. of california press  
                                                                 berkeley  1nd rev. edition  1. slight modifications of the elimination procedure allow one to add the map predicates injective and surjective  without disrupting the decidability of the satisfia-
bility problem for acyclic formulae. 
   facing slightly harder technicalities  one could also allow in the language c1 뫢뫢 the predicate 
     ''x is an accumulation point of x   and the operator der x   where der x  stands for the set of all accumulation points of x  i.e. the derived set of x  without undermining decidability. 
모an interesting open problem is if one could relax the requirement of acyclicity  without losing decidability. 
acknowledgements 
   we are indebted with m. breban  yeshiva university   who first treated  in 1  two-level syllogistic with the kuratowski topological closure operator. also  we wish to thank an anonymous referee for his/her comments. 
