 
　　in this paper we discuss a heuristically controlled approach to combining reasoning with cases and reasoning with rules. our task is interpretation of under-defined terms that occur in legal statutes  like the internal revenue code  where certain terms must be applied to particular cases even though their meanings are not defined by the statute and the statutory rules are unclear as to scope and meaning. we describe this problem  known as statutory interpretation  provide examples of it  describe the need for melding case-based and rule-based reasoning  and discuss heuristics used in guiding reasoning on such problems. we conclude with a discussion of our on-going work to model this mode of expert reasoning. 
1 	introduction 
 statutory interpretation  is the process of trying to determine the meaning of a legal rule by analyzing its terms and then applying it to a particular set of facts. the difficulty presented to adjudicators  advocates and administrators by this exercise is that critical terms are typically not defined completely  or at all  by a statute. further  a rule taken as a whole may have unspoken qualifications and exceptions. thus one must look outside a statute to other sources of knowledge for clues to its meaning and the meaning of its constituent elements. in particular  one tries to resolve interpretation problems by considering past applications of the rules and terms in question: by examining precedent cases  comparing and contrasting these with the instant case  and arguing why a previous interpretation can  or cannot  be applied to the new case l  levi  1; llewellyn  1; twining and 
   *this work was supported in part by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense  monitored by the office of naval research under contract no. n1-k-1  the office of naval research under a university research initiative grant  contract no. n1k-1  and a grant from gte laboratories  inc.  waltham  mass. 
     1 note  in the fullest sense  interpretation also requires consideration of whether a term or rule  should  be applied. in 
1 	cognitive models 
miers  1 . the intepretation problem demands that one combine reasoning with cases and reasoning with rules  statutes . while the need to mix case-based reasoning   cbr   and rule-based reasoning   rbr   is a prototypical feature of statutory legal reasoning  other domains also require it. we believe our approach can be applied beyond the realm of law; in particular  to extend traditional expert system approaches to  soft  domains that lack a strong domain model. 
   for examples of underdefined terms in a legal rule  consider a section of the statute that governs the assessment of federal income tax  the internal revenue code  sometimes called just the  code  . in stating the requirements for taking a home office deduction  section 1a c  l  of the code employs such terms as  principal place of business    convenience of the employer  and use on a  regular basis .1 nowhere are these elements defined in the statute; yet some scope must be afforded them in order to apply the statute to particular cases. while the meaning of such phrases is sometimes elucidated by official regulations issued thereunder by the internal revenue service  a clear-cut definition  which does not itself use undefined terms  is almost never to be found. often  the reach of the meaning of such phrases is fundamentally unclear  varies greatly according to the factual context in which they are used  and defeats precise definition by rules. for clues to their scope  practitioners rely on previously litigated tax cases that have construed these terms. 
1 t h e interpretation problem in the law 
in statutory interpretation  ambiguous terms often 
this discussion  we leave aside these important normative aspects  which involve reasoning about legislative intent  policy and ethics fuller  1; hart  1 . 
1
　　′1a c  l  states that a deduction may be taken for  any item to the extent such item is allocable to a portion of the dwelling unit which is exclusively used on a regular basis -  a   as  the principal place of business for any trade or business of the taxpayer   b  as a place of business which is used by patients  clients  or customers in meeting or dealing with the taxpayer in the normal course of his trade or business  or  c  in the case of a separate structure which is not attached to the dwelling unit  in connection with the taxpayer's trade or business. in the case of an employee  the preceding sentence shall apply only if the exclusive use referred to in the preceding sentence is for the convenience of the employer.  

arise from  open-textured  concepts  and these concepts are often the focus of case-based attack. by  opentextured  concept we mean a concept that cannot be defined by necessary and sufficient conditions: one whose boundary is not sharp. such concepts have been much discussed in jurisprudence  hart  1; dworkin  1  and also in philosophical discussions of  natural kind  classes  wittgenstein  1; putnam  1 . gardner's recent work  gardner  1   for example  discussed how such legal open-textured concepts give rise to what are known as  hard  cases  that is  cases over whose resolution experts  judges  scholars  etc.  disagree. many concepts in domains like the law are open-textured and sometimes even familiar terms reveal a surprising opentextured lining  such as  contract  or  income . concepts like  due care   which are used deliberately to indicate a variable standard of behavior  are clearly of this sort. so are  meeting or dealing  and  exclusive use  from the home office deduction rule. their interpretation is the subject of numerous cases. 1 
　the need to do statutory interpretation is not necessarily the result of poor legal drafting. rather it is a persistent problem that resists a legislature's best good-faith efforts at drafting tight statutes. most generally  the persistence is due to the nature of the law and its relation to society; more particularly  to factual circumstances unanticipated at the time of drafting and a changing legal context  levi  1; sunstein  1 . this was one of the points of one classic discussion of the problem of statutory interpretation known as the  hart-fuller debate   between h.l.a. hart and lon fuller in a harvard law review dialogue  hart  1; fuller  1 . there they discussed  among other things  such deep jurisprudential issues as the nature and status of rules and the role of  ought   normative considerations  in statutory interpretation. 1 
1
　　for instance  a case involving max frankel  the new york times managing editor  max and tobia frankel v. commissioner  1 ustc 1  filed february 1  1   addressed the former. mr. frankel maintained an office at his home in the bronx  which he used for reading the morning papers  writing memoranda  clipping materials  and speaking by telephone to his employees  prominent politicians and community leaders. the tax court denied that mr. frankel met any of the three disjunctive requirements of the statute   a    b   or  c . in particular  the use of the telephone to conduct business was held not to satisfy the meeting or dealing predicate  which was construed to require the physical 
presence of business contacts. 
1
　　two famous hypothetical statutory rules from this debate nicely illustrate the problems:  1   no vehicles are allowed in the public park.  and  1   it shall be a misdemeanor ... to sleep in any railway station.  hart and fuller were concerned with applying such rules to  hard  cases  where the puzzle is to interpret open-textured concepts  like  sleeping  or  vehicle   in light of a statute's purposes. for instance  does a tank which is part of a war veterans memorial statue count as a vehicle  what about a motorized baby carriage or wheelchair  what about a fire engine requiring access to a fire via the park  as for  sleeping   what should we decide about a bum who has obviously bedded down for the night but still has his eyes open  should the result be any different as to a well-dressed commuter who has clearly dozed off  
1 the interpretation problem outside the law 
　although law is the focus of this discussion of mixed cbr/rbr paradigm reasoning  lawyers are by no means the only ones to combine these two different modes of reasoning. mathematicians regularly combine reasoning deductively and reasoning with examples. although sometimes overshadowed by formal definitions and theorems and their proofs  examples  that is  cases  constitute a powerful aspect of expertise  rissland  1 . polya  polya  1  speaks of the importance of interleaving these two modes of reasoning in the  alternating process  in which one switches to cbr  to find a counterexample  when deductive reasoning stalls and vice versa. the  dialectical  process discussed by lakatos  lakatos  1  depends critically on use of exemplar cases as much as it does on proof analysis. and in ai discovery systems  such as lenat's am  examples are a powerful source of control and focus of attention  lenat  1 . 
　even in medicine  where heuristic rules have formed the core of the current generation of medical expert systems  e.g.  rules of diagnosis as in mycin   there is a rich body of specific cases of a phenomenon  e.g.  particular cases in a particular practice such as  mrs. jones  the woman whose problem turned out to be borderline hypertension   which an expert might use  especially in cases requiring judgment calls. equally important  even though one traditionally treats concepts like  hypertension  as well-defined in expert systems  such terms really are not so clear-cut as all that - for a large part of their meaning lies in how they were used in past cases. 
1 	the legalistic child: an example of interpretation 
as an example of the need for statutory interpretation  consider the case of the  legalistic child  from the book by the british legal scholars twining and miers  twining and miers  1  
 johnny  aged 1  is an only child. in recent months his mother has been mildly worried because he has developed a craving for sweet things and this has affected his appetite at meal times...then one afternoon she finds that johnny has gone into the larder and helped himself to half a pot of strawberry jam...she does not punish johnny but instead says  'that's naughty. in the future you are never to enter the larder without my permission/ 
'what does enter mean  mummy ' asks johnny. 
l
to go into'  says his mother. 'o.k.' says johnny  relieved that he has got off so lightly. several incidents then follow. first  johnny gets a broom and hooks the pot of jam from the larder and helps himself. 'i didn't enter the larder'  he says. next the cat enters the larder and attacks the salmon which mother has bought for a special occasion. mother  upstairs  hears johnny hooting with laughter. she comes down to see him standing outside the larder door watching the cat eating the fish. 'i may not go into the larder ' he says.  
clearly one of the conflicts between johnny and his mother concerns the meaning of enter  another is the 
	rissland and skalak 	1 
scope of the rule itself  e.g.  is there an unspoken exception that allows entry in dire circumstances much like that enabling fire trucks to run red lights  . we shall return to this example to demonstrate our computational approach to interpretation. 
1 synopsis of cbr and mixed paradigm approaches 
case-based reasoning   cbr   has grown rapidly in the last few years  kolodner  1; rissland and king  1 . within cbr there are two major classes of cbr that can be identified: problem-solving cbr  hammond  1; kolodner  1; sycara  1  and precedent-based cbr  ashley  1; ashley and rissland  1 . precedentbased cbr is distinguished by its focus on the use of past cases   precedents   to justify a solution and explain its rationale 1. anglo-american common law with its doctrine of the binding nature of precedent is a paradigm of precedent-based cbr. on the other hand  in problemsolving cbr  the typical focus is on using past cases to find a a detailed problem solution  e.g.  a plan  a course of action   where the new solution is generated by adapting a previous solution. industrial design and planning are paradigmatic examples of problem-solving cbr  barletta and mark  1 . 
   both types of cbr follow similar steps. once a new case has been accepted for analysis  cbr proceeds by  1  analysing it  e.g.  by computing features  relations and indices  to retrieve a set of relevant cases from case memory;  1  from these selecting a subset of best cases from which to craft a solution or interpretation for the problem case;  1  derivation of a solution or intepretation complete with supporting arguments in the case of precedent-based cbr and with implementation details in the case of problem-solving cbr;  1  testing of the the interpretation  e.g.  with hypothetical  or solution  e.g.  with simulations  with an eye to assessing its correctness  strengths  weaknesses  generality  etc.; and  1  storing the newly solved or interpreted case into case memory and appropriately adjusting indices and other cbr mechanisms such as similarity metrics. 
   note  in assessing relevancy in step 1  and all the other steps of cbr as well  one must view cases from the point of view of the case and task at hand. so  for instance  just because a known case was a landmark case does not necessarily make it important for the present case since the two might not share any relevant similarities. furthermore  in statutory interpretation the cbr must address the requirements of the statute. it is not enough simply to argue about the meaning of legal concepts; one must tie the arguments to the statute. this latter remark shows why our past work on hypo is insufficient 
1
　　as in previous precedent-based systems of our group  hypo and tax-hypo  the key idea is to reason from cases similar to the current case in order to argue for a particular decision in the current case and to justify the reasoning in terms of the past cases. a large part of the effort is on selecting and arguing about the relevancy of cases: showing similarity with supporting cases and distinguishing contrary cases. 
s1 	cognitive models 
in itself for modelling statutory interpretation  rissland and skalak  1 . 
　at this point  researchers have only recently begun to write about the integration of cbr with other reasoning paradigms  goel and chandrasekaran  1; koton  1a; koton  1b; marques et a/.  1; walker et a/.  1 . we feel that such mixed-paradigm approaches 
are natural and shed light on both the cognitive skills involved in such reasoning and on questions of architecture and control of their computational models. 
1 	heuristics for mixed paradigm reasoning 
in our study of statutory interpretation  we have gathered a collection of 1 or so heuristics that we believe experts use for controlling and interleaving reasoning with rules and reasoning with cases. these heuristics can be divided into a number of categories: 1 
1. ways to begin reasoning 
1. rule-based near miss 
1. rule-based near hit 
1. ways to broaden a rule 
1. ways to discredit a rule 
1. ways to confirm a hit 
1. ways to confirm a miss 
1. ways 	to 	confirm 	reasoning: 	''sanity 
checks  
1. ways to deal with results opposite from that desired 
1. ways to deal with failure of reasoning to yield a definite conclusion 
1. ways to focus the reasoners 
1. open-textured 	elements 
some of our heuristics  like those in groups 1 and 1  are very similar to those employed by gardner  gardner  1 . 
　we are currently exploring the use of these heuristics in controlling a mixed paradigm system  combining case-based and rule-based reasoning  called cabaret 
 case-based reasoning tool . 	the main features of cabaret's architecture are  figure 1 : 
  there are two co-reasoners  cbr and rbr  . t each co-reasoner is capable of running in a standalone manner. 
  each co-reasoner has a dedicated reporter pro-cess that reports the end results of a reasoner and certain aspects of its intermediate processing. 
  a controlling process uses reporters' observa-tions and its library of control heuristics to decide how the system as a whole and the individual reasoning processes are to proceed. 
  the ultimate goal for which the system is working  an argument for a given side or a neutral explanation  is specified by the user  as part of the intitial input to cabaret. 
1
　　a hit refers to the establishment of the antecedent of a rule  on the rule-based side  or the presence of all the prerequisites of a dimension  index   on the case-based side. a miss is the opposite of a  hit . near miss and near hit are discussed below. 

typical 
knowledge base. 

   c a b a r e t uses an agenda-based controller in which the heuristic control rules direct and interleave the two modes of reasoning by posting and prioritizing tasks for each to do. the control rules are written in c a b a r e t ' s control description language      c d l       which provides a vocabulary with which to express  i  higher level control descriptors that describe at a fairly high level the state or result of the case-based reasoner and the rulebased reasoner  and  ii  tasks for the controller to suggest for each reasoner. for instance  since what an expert  or c a b a r e t   does in a particular situation may depend on what side is being argued for  the c d l has a descriptor for point-of-view. depending on whether the user wants the consequent of a rule to be established  point-of-view may be pro  for  or con the rule. 1 changing the point of view enables exploration of a situation from various argumentative vantage points. four groups  # 1 above  of c a b a r e t ' s heuristics concern such ar-
t
in tax law  for instance  the commissioner of internal 
revenue may argue against a statute that gives a taxpayer a deduction from his gross income  with the taxpayer arguing for it. 
group are: 
  if you have all but one conjunct of the antecedent of a rule  and you want the rule to fire  broaden the rule. 
  if you have all but one conjunct of a rule  and you want the rule to fail  confirm the miss. 
c a b a r e t   in turn  knows a number of ways to  broaden  a rule  for example: 
  use cbr to find cases where the rule did not fire  but the consequent of the rule still held.  that is  show that the missing conjunct is not necessary to fire the rule.  t use cbr to find cases where the rule did fire  and point out the similarities between those cases and the present case.   show that effectively you have the missing conjunct.  
  use cbr to find similar cases where the rule did not fire  but the ultimate disposition of the case was consistent with the user's point of view.  show 
1
　　a cdl  near hit  has analogous meanings for cbr and rbr. the term generally applies when there are many possible ways to establish a result  and all but one of them have failed. 
	rissland and skalak 	1 

that the rule firing is not necessary for the ultimate result the user wants.  
  expand the scope of any open-textured predi-cates in the missing conjunct. 
1 a detailed example of mixed paradigm reasoning 
to illustrate the above control heuristics in action  consider a further incident involving our legalistic child johnny: 
johnny is home with his rapidly aging grandmother. his parents are out at the royal shakespeare company's performance of  a midsummer night's dream . grandmother forgets about dinner. johnny is hungry. it's 1 minutes past the usual dinner hour. he asks his grandmother for permission to enter the larder. she turns and smiles at him. she is off in another world. johnny goes to the larder and feasts on bread and jam. his parents return. what result  
1 t h e case knowledge base 
   let us assume that johnny has been involved in several incidents of entering the larder in addition to the  broom pole  and  salmon  cases  which he lost. thus  assume case knowledge base contains: 
  the broom pole case: johnny used a broom pole to hook a pot of jam. he stood outside the larder. he was punished.   the salmon case: johnny did not enter the larder but watched the household cat ravage the salmon. he was scolded. 
  the babysitter case: johnny's parents were out and johnny was watched by his usually iron-willed babysitter  
maggie. johnny's parents forgot to tell maggie anything about dinner. supper was late and johnny was hungry. johnny asked permission from the babysitter to enter the larder. she said ok. johnny feasted on scones and jam. when his parents returned  they said it was understood that 
maggie  in lieu of mother  could give permission to enter the larder. 
  willful disobedience case: johnny  who was peeved with his parents  went into the larder. he ate all the jam in the larder. he was not permitted to watch dr. who for month. 
  weasevs case: johnny convinced his pal  weasel  to enter the larder. they ate. mother sent weasel home and johnny to his room. 
  case of the glasgow cousins: johnny's poor cousins from glasgow passed through. johnny was the only one home. they asked for a bite before they went on their way. johnny said ok. he asked them to hand him the jam. they did. johnny was rewarded for his generosity to his poor relations when his mother returned. 
1 the rule base 
　a simple rule base - with several representative types of rules - suffices for our current illustration. the first rule is the background prohibitory rule; the second provides a  reasonable man  standard often seen in angloamerican tort and criminal law; the third provides a more detailed statute with a number of open-textured elements  some deliberately so; and the last rule is a 
1 	cognitive models 
bright-line sufficient condition for the statutory element  substantially late.  
  may-not-enter-rule: johnny may not enter the larder. 
  reasonable-rule: johnny may reasonably enter the larder. 
  late-supper-rule: if supper is substantially late  and johnny is hungry  and johnny receives permission his mother  then johnny may enter the larder.   when-is-late-rule: supper is substantially late if it is more than 1 minutes late. 
1 m i x e d paradigm scenarios 
   how rule-based and case-based processing might proceed depends on the point of view of the user  so posit that johnny and his mother are at odds for this purpose: he wants to enter the larder; she wants to keep him out. cabaret is being designed to leave processing traces like the following. 1 for convenience  we bracket the rule and italicize its category. 
reasoning f r o m johnny's point of view 
  the controller begins processing on the rbr side   ways to begin processing - begin with rbr  backward chaining    rbr begins with reasonable-rule  as it would yield a conclusion with johnny's point of view.  
  controller uses  deliberate open textured predicate use cbr  to find relevant cases construing  reasonably . 
  cbr finds no close relevant cases. 
  controller uses   ways to deal with failure of processing to yield a definite conclusion - toggle  to switch back to rbr. t rbr backchains on late-supper-rule. 
  rbr establishes conjunct  supper is substantially late  by application of when-is-late-rule. 
  rbr establishes the conjunct  johnny is hungry  by ref-erence to the facts of the case. 
  rbr's reporter reports that it cannot establish the con-junct  johnny receives permission from mother  but it has established the other two. 
t controller uses  rule-based near-miss - show that you effectively have the missing conjunct  to suggest cbr on cases where the late-supper-rule fired and the permission conjunct was effectively established. 
  cbr finds the babysitter permission case as a most on point case and points out similarities between it and the current case. also cites glasgow cousins case as being relevant.   controller reports that a conclusion has been reached: it can be argued that johnny may enter the larder  using the late- supper- rule  modulo using the babysitter case to show satisfaction of permission predicate. 
reasoning f r o m johnny's mother's point of view 
t the controller applies  ways to begin processing - begin with rbr  backward chaining . 
  rbr looks for rules with mother's point of view  and seizes on may-not-enter-rule. 
  rbr reports success on may-not-enter-rule  there are no 
1
　　for simplicity  assume here that the prioritizing mechanism for the agenda is the default one: that the agenda is a stack  and the most recently posted control task is the first one to run. 
prerequisites to satisfy . 
  controller posts  ways to confirm processing: sanity check - use cbr to confirm rbr satisfaction of top levelgoal  to the agenda. 
  cbr searches for cases where  the may-not-enter-rule was fired and  johnny was not permitted to enter the larder. 
  cbr reports that the willful-disobedience case is a rel-evant case  involving a straightforward application of maynot-enter-rule  with mother's point of view  but that on the other hand the babysitter and glasgow cousins cases are also on-point and are cases against her position.   controller reports that a conclusion can be reached with may-not-enter-rule and willful-disobedience case as a supporting case but that the conclusion is suspect because of existing contra cases. 
   there are several alternative ways this scenario could have proceeded. the controller could have suggested  try to establish an argument for mother's point of view by showing the failure of all rules establishing johnny's point of view.  or  noting that c a b a r e t gives the user the option to choose the initial reasoner  the user may have started off with c b r . so  different conclusions and ways of reaching them can be unearthed  even with the same rules  case base  and control heuristics. 
1 	conclusions 
in the law and other domains  governing rules often have words or phrases that cannot be defined precisely. in order to apply such rules one must reason with past cases in order to clarify ambiguous rule terms. we have developed a heuristic approach to combining reasoning with rules and reasoning with cases in order to solve this kind of interpretation problem. our approach is grounded in a set of control heuristics that determines what reasoning tasks to perform  given the states of the co-reasoners. these heuristics are applied by the controller module of c a b a r e t   an architecture we are constructing to experiment with heuristic approaches to the interpretation problem and to performing mixed-paradigm reasoning in general. 
