 
a largely unrealized goal of ai has been to design systems that can tailor descriptions of knowledge base objects to suit alternative points of view and contexts. this problem is examined here with respect to case based argu merits  arguments in which past cases are cited as justifications for a decision. we define the features of a case that are salient in describing it from various viewpoints and in a variety of argument contexts employed in hypo  an adversarial case based reasoning program. we demonstrate hypo's ability to slant case descriptions from opposing viewpoints and to tailor the descriptions to fit contextual roles in an argument  including filing the case  distinguishing it  posing it as a counterexample or as the target of a hypothetical. 
1 	introduction 
a recurring theme of a i has been to design systems that can tailor descriptions of knowledge base objects to suit alternative points of view and contexts. in 1  for example  minsk}' proposed frame representation schemes  in part  as a way of efficiently handling changes in viewpoint  either an observers physical perspective on a room or his metaphorical perspective in a nonvisual domain  minsk v 1f  . by 1  researchers on the  knoe sphere  project speculated that their comprehensive  interactive encyclopedia would be able  at the reader's choice  to describe the same basic reference information from a variety of stylized viewpoints such as  fmpha sizetheory    nomath   or  ideology   penat 1 . 
　as this perennial theme illustrates  one hallmark of intelligence is knowing what aspects of an object are salient 
   'currently  the author is a visiting scientist at the ibm thomas .1. watson research center  p.o. pox 1  york town heights  new york 1. formerly  the author was a postdoctoral researcher and graduate student at the department of computer and information science  university of massachusetts  amherst  massachusetts 1. this work was supported in part by: the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense  monitored by the of fice of naval research under contract no. n1 k 1; the university research initiative  award no. n1m 1 k 1; and an ibm graduate student fellowship. 
from a particular viewpoint. salience means strikingness or emphasis. as viewpoints change  different features of an object stand out. 
   i lie goal has been to design systems in which the context guides selecting which features to emphasize while  at the same time  minimizing the computational complexity of the selection process. some progress has been made. research in explanation has focused on slanting descriptive explanations to reflect the questioner's goals as evidenced by the question's perspective  mckeown 1 . ordering objects in a scene according to  visual  salience has been explored as a guide to planning natural language descriptions of the scene  mcdonald 1 . 
   determining salience is especially important in making arguments. given the reality that most positions have weaknesses as well as strengths  a debater must know what facts help the argument or hurt it  what facts should be emphasized  mentioned or simply ignored. attorneys are notoriously adept at describing  some- might say twisting  the same facts from opposing vantage points to support their clients' position. for example  a city commissioner hires the daughter of the judge who presides over the commissioner's lover's divorce. the prosecutor calls it a bribe; defense counsel calls it a coincidence. beside characterizing the facts differently  the attorneys must decide which facts to emphasize  e.g.  did the daughter have relevant employment experience or had she never before been able to hold down a job.  
　a number of ai researchers have approached the problem ot salience in arguments by identifying various structures to elucidate support and attack relations and guide inference   e.g.  argument graphs and  molecules   birnbaum 1   argument trees  cohen 1   and conversational moves  reichmanadar 1 .  in general  the techniques have not been computationally powerful enough to generate realistic domain arguments. 
　case-based reasoning techniques allow salience decisions to be made in the context of a more limited kind of argument  case based arguments  arguments in which prior cases are cited as justifications for deciding a problem situation. salience has special significance in casebased reasoning where cases are used either as models for problem solving  examples for explanation  or argument justifications. for instance  kolodner and simpson 
	ashley 	1 
demonstrated how prior cases can focus a problem solver on those features of the problem situation that are salient for its solution  kolodner 1 . 
　interestingly  the reverse is also true: when a past case is to be used in an argument about how to decide a problem  the features of the case that are salient depend on the particular facts of the problem situation  the view-
point of the arguer and the argument context in which it is used. 
　a case-based reasoning program  hypo  describes objects in a case knowledge base  ''ckb   in a contextual way so that differing views of a case are supported and reasoned with and decisions about salience are made without complex inference. hypo is an adversarial case-based reasoning program described in detail in  ashley 1a . it makes arguments how to decide a problem by citing relevantly similar past cases as justifications. in the past we have described the ways in which hypo selects the most relevant cases and employs them in arguments  ashley 1b ashley 1 .   = sccrcts-disclosed-outsiders  helps defendant  1  to extent that plaintiff has disclosed secrets to 
outsiders  
f1 = outsider-disclosures-restricted  helps plaintiff  pie  if all disclosures to outsiders are confidential  
f1 = disclosure-in-negotiations  helps defendant  1  if plaintiff disclosed secrets to defendant in negotiations  
figure 1: three sample factors 
adopts the view of the opponent  the defendant  and asserts that the differences between the problem and the cited case are so great that the defendant should win. in this context  hypo emphasizes the relevant factual differences between the problem and the cited case  which we will refer to as the distin-f1
guished case. 
	here we focus on the narrower issue ot how hypofmakes determinations of salience  that is  how it deter-1. counterexample to a cited case: 	another way mines what to say about a case that it cites in an argument. since hypo draws factual analogies between a cited case and the problem  one aspect of salience is determining what factual similarities  or differences  are relevant to the analogy. another aspect of salience  how ever  is determining which of the relevant similarities and differences to emphasize in a given context and how to characterize them to convey that emphasis. 
1 	views and contexts 
in hypo  determining salience of features depends on the viewpoint and context of the description of the case. 
   hypo supports two points of view in an argument corresponding to the two warring sides in a lawsuit: the plaintiff and the defendant. the plaintiff complains that the defendant's actions are illegal and caused injuries to the plaintiff for which it seeks relief from the court. hypo deals with lawsuits involving trade secrets claims in which the plaintiff complains that the defendant has gained an unfair competitive advantage by obtaining il legally plaintiff's commercial sec rets. 
　hypo describes cases in four basic contexts common to case-based arguments in law  political decision making  evaluating property and ordinary discourse  see dis cussion in  ashley 1a .  here we describe the contexts in terms of legal arguments: 
j. cited case to make a point in a legal argument: hypo makes an argument that a side should win the lawsuit described in the problem situation by citing a past case  the cited case  as an authority. in other words  hypo adopts the viewpoint of  let us say  the plaintiff  argues that the plaintiff should win because the problem is similar to the cited case where a plaintiff won and emphasizes the relevant factual similarities. 
1. distinguished case in response to a point in a legal argument: hypo contests the argument point by distinguishing the cited case. that is  hypo 
1 	cognitive models 
that hypo contests an argument point is by citing a past case as a counterexample to the cited case. that is  taking the view of the defendant  hypo cites as a counterexample a case won by a defendant. hypo emphasizes the features of the counterexample that counteract the force of the plaintiffs argument based on the cited case. as described below  there are four kinds of counterexamples. 
1. target case that motivates a hypothetical modi fixation: hypo suggests how to strengthen a side's argument by suggesting hypothetical variations of the problem. taking the view of either plaintift or defendant  hypo suggests how to bolster the argu ment by focusing on new features that would make the problem more similar to a past case  the target case  which could then be cited in support of that side. 
   i he program computes the most salient features to emphasize in describing a case from the ckb when it is used in any of the above contexts as a cited case  distinguished case  counterexample or target case. the features that are salient in any of these contexts can be described in succinct computational terms. in order to present those definitions  we define relevant similarities and introduce a bit of formalism. 
1 	defining relevant similarities 
in hypo  the features of a case that matter are defined in terms of factors. a factor is a general collection of facts that tends to favor or hurt the plaintiff's argument in a particular kind of lawsuit. factors have magnitudes  that is  a particular case may be a more or less extreme example of a factor. factors are represented in hypo with dimensions  ashley 1a . each dimension has a set of prerequisites used to test if the factor applies to a case and a range of values over which the magnitude of the factor in a particular case may vary. figure i shows examples of three factors in the trade secrets domain. 

　cases in the database are represented in hypo cs sentially as historical collections of factors  each with a particular magnitude  to which some authoritative de cision maker  i.e.  the judge  has assigned an outcome  either for the plain tiff or the defendant. figure 1 shows examples of four cases. fach case is described abstractly in terms of an outcome  a set of applicable factors  and the magnitudes of certain of those factors.1 
　relevant similarities among cases are defined computationally in terms of sets of shared factors. the set of relevant similarities  1ci c1.  between two cases     and c1  is the intersection of the sets of factors that apply to each case. in symbols: 

presented similar strengths and weaknesses from plaintiff's viewpoint. 
　relevant differences are defined computationally in terms of factors not shared and differences in magnitudes of shared factors. assume that the outcome of c1 was in favor of plaintiff. the set of relevant differences between c1 and c1  dc1 c1  is the union of three sets  the pro-defendant factors that apply only to c1  the pro-plain tiff factors that apply only to c1 and the shared factors which favor plaintiff more strongly in c1 than in c . in symbols: 

intuitively  the relevant differences are reasons why the two cases should be decided differently. all of these relevant differences make c.1 a weaker case for plaintiff than c1. as a result  c1 is a weaker justification in a legal argument that plaintiff should win in c . 
1 	selecting most relevant cases 
in h y p o   a case is analogous or  on point  to a problem if it shares some relevant similarities to the problem  
p    one case  c1  is  more on point  than another case  ck  relative to a problem if the set of relevant similarities between the problem and ci  is a superset of the set of relevant similarities between the problem and  the set of on point cases that are most relevantly similar to the problem  that is  the set of  most on point  cases  mop  is defined as the set of all cases  ci  such that for each c   there is no case that is more on point than c . to put that another way  mop is the set of all cases  c   such that c  is 
on point and for all other on point cases ck  either ci and ck have no similarities in common with the problem situation or ci  is as or more on point than ck  or neither is more on point than the other. 
   intuitively  mop contains the cases that are candidates for the best cases to cite for either side in an argument how to decide the problem. of all the cases in the c k b   they are closest in that they share with the problem the greatest overlap of factual strengths and weaknesses as represented by factors. for a given problem situation  having identified the factors that apply to it  h y p o computes mop using the usual set operations. 1 defining salience within contexts 
with these concepts  one may succintly describe the features of a case that are salient when it is used in any of the four argument contexts. to illustrate how the salience expressions work  figure 1 presents hypo's descriptions of a single case  the data general case of figure 1  used in all four contexts  as a cited case  distinguished case  counterexample and target. 
　cited case: the salient features of a cited case  cc  are its relevant similarities to the problem situation. more specifically  the set of relevant similarities 
	ashley 	1 
1. as case cited by plaintiff: 
where: even though: plaintiff disclosed its product information to outsiders  plaintiff should win a claim for trade secrets misappropriation. cite: data general 
1. as case distinguished by defendant: 
data general is distinguishable because: in crown industries  plaintiff disclosed its product information in negotiations with defendant. not so in data general. in data general  plaintiff's disclosures to outsiders were restricted. not so in crown indus tries. 
1. as counterexamples cited by plaintiff: 
trumping: 
data general is more on point  than midland ross  and held for plaintiff where it was also the case that: plaintiffs disclosures to outsiders were restricted. 
boundary: 
data general held for plaintiff even though in data general plaintiff disclosed its product information to more outsiders than in midland ross. 
a. as target case for plaintiff: 
plaintiff's response would he strengthened if: plaintiff's disclosures to outsiders were restricted. cf. data general. 
figure 1: 	descriptions of data general case in four 
argument contexts 

the plaintiff had taken substantial precautions to secure its secrets  hypo would have stated them first. that is  hypo would say   where: plaintiff took substantial security precautions  fventhough: plaintiff disclosed its product information to outsiders  plaintiff should win 
　distinguished case: the salient features in distinguishing a case are the relevant differences between the problem and the distinguished case  dp dc. as figure 1  no. 1 shows  when hypo describes the data general case as distinguished case  de   where the problem situation  p  again is the crown case  it focuses on factors that data general docs not share with crown  j1 involving restrictions on disclosures and f1 involving disclosures in negotiation.  making the substitutions in definition  1  of relevant differences  the three terms are: 

hypo argues that these differences not only account for the outcome in data general but also show that the crown case need not have the same result. 
　note that the analysis allows hypo to select those dif fere rices in factor magnitudes that are salient in a given 

1 	cognitive models 

context. although the magnitudes of data general and crown along f1 are different  hypo sensibly does not call attention to this difference. the difference does not help  indeed it hurts  the defendant's argument. crown is much stronger for plaintiff than data general in terms of the numbers of disclosures to outsiders. 
　the analysis also allows hypo to point out those factors that are salient in a context because they do not apply to a case  for example  in the context of distin guishing data general  f 1 is significant because it does not apply to data general. the importance of this  nonfeature  becomes apparent only in light of the process of distinguishing data general from crown. 
　counterexample: hypo supports four kinds of counterexamples  each with a somewhat different definition of the features of a case that are salient when citing it as a counterexample. each kind of counterexample involves a case that is  contrary  to the cited case in the sense that it had the opposite outcome  focuses on different salient features  and can be used to disparage the impact of the salient features of the cited case. the four kinds of counterexamples and the associated salient features are discussed below: 
　 1  t r u m p i n g : a contrary case that has more  in the sense of a superset of  relevant similarities to the problem than the cited case. this kind of counterexample 



of the case  sometimes focusing on similarities  sometimes differences  sometimes factor magnitudes  sometimes factors significant because they do not apply. each of hypo's thirteen implemented factors has an associated  canned  phrase for describing it. hypo composes the phrases corresponding to the salient factors into the brief case summaries. in this way  hypo tailors descriptions of the thirty cases in its ckb to fit the argument contexts  viewpoints and problem situations. the descriptions compare favorably with those found in court opinions citing the same cases. sec  ashley 1a . although hypo's text generation scheme is primitive  the salience information could be used as inputs to a so phisticated natural language generator for planning more elaborately tailored case descriptions. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  the problem of designing a system that can tailor descriptions of knowledge base objects to suit alternative viewpoints and contexts has been examined for a limited kind of discourse: case-based arguments. determining the features of a past case that are salient when the case is cited as an argument justification depends on the particular facts of the problem and of the other cases in the knowledge base  the viewpoint of the arguer and the contextual role of the case in the argu ment. 
   hypo  an adversarial case-based reasoning program  tailors its descriptions of a case to emphasize those features  specifically factors  that arc salient depending on viewpoint and context. hypo describes cases in arguments from two conflicting viewpoints  that of plaintiff or defendant  and in four contextual roles  as cited case  distinguished case  counterexample or target case. hypo makes further decisions about salience depending on the kind of counterexample a case is used as: trumping  partial  boundary  or potential trump. for each of the contexts  we have defined the salient features and illustrated how the definitions apply to a past case described in each context. 
