 theorem proving * 
　
fausto giunchiglia 
mechanised reasoning group 
irst 
povo  i 1 trento 
　　　italy fausto irst.uucp 
abstract 
informally  abstraction can be described as the process of mapping a representation of a problem into a new representation. the aim of the paper is to propose a theory of abstraction. the generality of the framework is tested by formalizing and analyzing some work done in the past; its efficacy by giving a procedure which solves the '' false proof problem by avoiding the use of inconsistent abstract spaces. 
1 introduction 
abstraction has been suggested as a very powerful technique for constraining search in automated reasoning. informally  abstraction can be described as the process of mapping a representation of a problem  also called the  ground  representation  into a new representation  also called the  abstract  representation  which preserves certain desirable properties and is simpler to handle. the  desirable properties  amount to requiring that the abstract solution be of help in solving the problem in the original search space. the notion of  simplicity* depends on the application  it may mean decidability or lower complexity. 
　as far as we know  no comprehensive theory of abstraction has been given. the only work in this direction  plaisted  1  is concerned with one form of abstraction and is limited to the area of resolution theorem proving. this has caused the lack of a satisfactory characterization and general understanding of abstraction. 
　the aim of the work  partially  described in this paper is to provide a theory of abstraction and use it to:  1  understand what  to abstract  means and how it can be formalized;  1  classify the various forms of abstraction;  1  investigate their formal properties and the operations which can be defined on them;  1  analyze and classify past work;  1  define ways of building  useful 
   *this work was begun when the first author was working at the department of artificial intelligence at edinburgh university supported by serc grant gr/e/1. the second author is supported by a serc studentship. the research described in this paper owes a lot to the openess and sharing of ideas which exists in the mathematical reasoning group. the authors thank alan bundy  enrico giunchiglia  alex simpson and richard weyhrauch for the many discussions on the topic. alan bundy is also thanked for reading early versions of the paper. 
1 	automated deduction 
toby walsh 
department of artificial intelligence 
university of edinburgh 
1 south bridge  edinburgh scotland 
toby walsh uk.ac.edinburgh 
abstractions  and  1  study how the proof in the abstract space can be used to aid the proof in the ground space. 
　in this paper  for lack of space  only some issues are discussed and proofs are only outlined and the simplest not given  for a more complete treatment see  giunchiglia and walsh  forthcoming 1  . only topics  1    1    1  and  1  are  partially  dealt with. the following of the paper can be structured in three main parts. 
　in the first p a r t  section 1   the formal framework is presented and some of the underlying motivations are discussed  topics  1  and  1  . abstraction is first defined as a mapping between formal systems and then classes of abstraction are identified depending on how certain properties  ie. provability  inconsistency  are preserved by the mapping. 
　in the second part  section 1   some examples/ case studies of previous work in abstraction are presented 
 sacerdoti  1  plaisted  1  hobbs  1   topic  1  . the goal here is to motivate the formal framework by showing how it can be used to capture and formalise most of the relevant previous work in various areas of ai 1. this allows us to get an unified view of work which  on the surface  seems very different. for instance it is proven that the theory of granularity presented by hobbs in  hobbs  1  and described in example 1 can be formalised as a particular case of the weak and ordinary abstractions defined by plaisted in  plaisted  1  and described in example 1. 
　in the t h i r d and last part  section 1   it is then shown how the framework can be actually used to understand the properties of abstraction mappings and to find solutions to existing problems  topic  1j . in particular the ''false proof problem is investigated. intuitively stated  the false proof problem is as follows. in order to build an abstract space  simpler  than the ground one  the trick is to forget some  irrelevant  details 1. this  plaisted noticed  plaisted  1   may cause problems. in particular the abstract space may be inconsistent even if the ground space is not. it is proven that this problem cannot be avoided as it is always possible to find a set of 
1
　　this case study analysis is performed in much more depth in  giunchiglia and walsh  forthcoming 1 ; in  giunchiglia and walsh  1  it is shown how the framework can be effectively used to build global strategies for the unfolding of definitions. 1  where  irrelevant  should be read as  irrelevant according to same theorem proving strategy . 
　


1 	automated deduction 
　


1 	automated deduction 


　

　

　

　
	giunchiglia and walsh 	1 
　
	giunchiglia and walsh 	1 
　

　
	giunchiglia and walsh 	1 
　
	giunchiglia and walsh 	1 
　
