 
   most work in distributed ai has dealt with agents that cooperate to achieve common high level goals. the assumption of cooperative behavior allows agents to use static models of one another to predict their future actions in order to promote coherent system behavior. our research extends the domain of problems to include noncooperative  multi-agent interactions where cooperation cannot be assumed but needs to be dynamically induced during problem solving. this necessitates the development of mechanisms to purposefully modify the plans  goals and behavior of other agents to increase agent cooperativeness in order to bring about convergence to a global solution. we advocate persuasive argumentation as such a mechanism for cohering the group problem solving of non fully cooperative agents. we present a model of persuasive argumentation that has been implemented as part of the persuader  a multi-agent computer program that operates in the domain of labor negotiations. 
1. introduction 
   most work in distributed ai has dealt with groups of agents pursuing common goals  e.g.   durfee 1  lesser 1 cammarata 1  . agents in such systems work as a team. their interactions arc guided by cooperation strategies meant to improve their common performance. in networks of cooperative agents  agent interactions take the form of communicating plans and goals at an appropriate level of abstraction. these communications enable the receiving agents to form expectations of the future behavior of the sending agent  thus improving agent predictability and network coherence  durfee 1 . a consequence of the coopcrativeness assumption is that the recipient agent will use the information in the plan to adjust its own local plan-
     l this research has been sponsored in part by the army research office under contract no. daag 1-k1 and in part by nsf grant no. 
ist-1. ning appropriately  so that the common planning goals  and planning effectiveness criteria  will be met. no attempt needs to be made to change the intentions or actions of other agents. although the abstracted communicated information forms a basis for common representational regimes  in complex domains  such as scheduling and resource allocation  goal conflicts might still occur since the communicated information needs to be locally interpreted by the agents. different interpretation of global goals  for example  can lead to conflict or competition among the agents. thus  simply communicating planning information  even in cooperative situations  cannot deal with  a  disparate expertise   b  inconsistent beliefs  and  c  goals conflicts. 
   in environments where each agent is pursuing his own goals  e.g.  design experts responsible for different parts of a complex artifact  different departments in an organization   cooperative behavior cannot be taken for granted. it has to be planned for by each agent and has to emerge as a result of the agent interactions. the planning process for coordinating non fully cooperative agents is negotiation. in contrast to other work  davis 1  that has not dealt with belief modification  in our work  negotiation is an iterative process that involves identifying potential interactions either through communication or by reasoning about the current stales and intentions of oilier agents in the system and modifying the intentions of these agents so as to avoid harmful interactions or create cooperative situations. 
in order to negotiate effectively  agents need the ability to 
 a  represent and maintain belief models   b  reason about other agents* beliefs  and  c  influence other agents' beliefs and behavior. since an agent cannot be sure of the full coopcrativeness of another  the planning information communicated cannot simply be his own high level plans. it needs to take into consideration explicitly the model and plans of the recipient agent. the information communicated is intended to  convince  the recipient agent to cooperate  thus reducing conflict and promoting global coherence. to perform this task  an agent reasons about another agent using is own model of that other agent  finds as many ways as the model will allow to affect the other agent's outcomes  behavior   and uses them selectively to influence the other agent. this is the process of persuasive argumentation. 
sycara 
　persuasive argumentation is advocated as a general mechanism to promote coherence of non fully cooperative agents. persuasive arguments are used by a persuader as a means to dynamically change the utilities associated with various plans and outcomes of another agent  the persuadee  so as to increase the willingness of the persuadee to cooperate. this  in turn  improves the efficiency of convergence to a global solution. by observing reactions to the arguments  the sending agent can update and correct its model of the recipient agent  thus refining its planning and argumentation knowledge. persuasive argument generation is based on integration of goal graph search  use of multiattribute utilities  and availability of a case memory of experiences with similar persuadees  sycara 1 . 
　in contrast to work  appelt 1  konolige 1  cohen 1  halpern 1 . that has primarily dealt with the development of formalisms for the representation of beliefs  belief deduction  or update of the belief base  our work concentrates on heuristic mechanisms  persuasive arguments  to bring about changes in other agents' beliefs and behavior. while others have worked on argumentation  none so far has worked on persuasive arguments. the work of flowers  et al.  rowers 1 was concerned with adversary arguments where no attempt is made to change the beliefs of the interlocutor  and ashley and rissland  rissland 1  have examined the use of hypotheticals to test the strengths and weaknesses of case-based legal arguments. 
　we present a general theory of persuasive argumentation that we illustrate in the domain of labor mediation. our argumentation model is part of a general multi-agent  multiissue negotiation model  sycara 1  sycara 1a   that has been implemented in a computer program  the persuader. negotiation in the persuader is performed through integration of case-based reasoning  kolodner et al. 1  sycara 1  and use of multi-attribute utilities  sycara 1b . the persuader system involves three agents: a company  its union and the mediator whose task is to help the other two agents reach an acceptable compromise. the mediator is engaged in parallel negotiations with the union and company agents. the persuader's input is the set of conflicting goals of a company and union and the dispute context. the final output is either a single plan in the form of an agreed upon settlement  contract  or an indication of failure if the parties to the dispute did not reach agreement within a particular number of proposals  to simulate the inability of parties in the real world to reach agreement before a strike deadline . a contract that is proposed by one agent to another is a plan that the proposing agent will follow  contingent on the second agent's agreement. proposed contracts in the persuader are subject to negotiation and 
possible modification  unlike bids in the contract net  davis 1 . the negotiation process consists of iteration of three main tasks: generation of a proposal  generation of a counterproposal based on feedback from a dissenting party  and persuasive argumentation. the mediator generates an initial compromise proposal and presents it to both the union and company who evaluate the proposal from their perspectives and give the mediator their reaction. if both accept the proposal  then it is the final compromise. if one of the agents rejects it  the mediator makes a decision whether to change the proposal or attempt to change the disagreeing party's position. 
　belief and belief modification in the persuader is based on the conjunctive goals of the agents and their interactions. a belief in the persuader involves the correspondence between a state  a possible settlement  and the other agents' actions. group knowledge  genesereth 1  in the persuader focuses on the facts of the case: proposals  counterproposals  negotiation context etc. if agreement on a compromise were obtainable by inference from these facts  negotiation would be unnecessary. such is not the case  however  since the goals  plans and utilities of the agents are largely unknown and the evaluation function is distributed. the negotiation process itself is a search of a dynamic problem space where an agent's beliefs about other agents' beliefs and hence feasible solutions continuously changes the space being searched. what was not an acceptable solution at one point becomes a solution at a later point. 
1  this occurs as a consequence of the agents' realization of the inevitability of partial goal satisfaction through acceptance of a compromise. the persuader attempts to influence the process toward solution convergence by constructing arguments to bring about belief states of the agents that are necessary in achieving compromise states  global system solutions . 
1. representation of other agents' models in the persuader 
　the persuader integrates two representational vehicles to model agents: graphs and multi-attribute utilities. both of these are representations at a high level of abstraction that reduces the overhead of constructing and updating agent models. as opposed to game theoretic approaches  rosenschein 1  that assume common knowledge of the payoff matrix  an unrealistic assumption if the agents are not fully cooperative   models of agents based on approximation of the agents' utilities are more appropriate for negotiation  since they do not assume common knowledge of payoffs  incorporate reasoning about tradeoffs  and allow flexibility in combining individual utilities. 
　the main factor determining the effectiveness of arguments of persuasion is the attitudes and beliefs of the persuadee  abelson 1 . a persuadee's belief structure in the persuader involves his goals  the importance he attaches to them and relations between them. different arguments change different parts of the belief structure. a persuadce's beliefs arc represented in a directed acyclic graph  which is searched during argument generation and 
negotiations. 
1 	cognitive models    in a labor negotiation  for example  it is unlikely that either party would accept their eventual compromise  if it were presented at the inception of 
updated according to the persuadec's reaction to an argument. the nodes represent goals with the associated importance  perceived feasibility on the part of the persuadee of achieving the goal  desired direction of change  increase  or decrease   and the amount by which the quantity should be changed. the arcs represent the contribution of a goal to the achievement of its parent goal. a negative contribution value has the interpretation that the subgoal not only does not contribute to the higher level goal but it is detrimental to it. for example  a negative public image would have a detrimental effect on a company's sales. a positive value means that the subgoal supports the achievement of the higher level goal. a contribution value of zero means that the subgoal is irrelevant to the achievement of the higher level goal. in terms of the graph  this is equivalent to removing the edge between the subgoal and the goal. 
　figure 1 presents a partial view of a company's belief structure. in order not to clutter the figure  we arc showing the graph as a tree depicting only the goals and the desired direction of change. 
　a path x to y in a belief structure constitutes a causal chain that provides an explanation of the change in y in terms of the change in x  assuming no other change has occurred in the rest of the tree. the path wages -  to production-cost -  in the company's goal tree can be interpreted as follows:  other things being equal  diminishing the cost of wages results in decreasing the cost of the economic concessions  which causes a decrease in labor costs  leading to a decrease in production costs . 
　in addition to an agent's beliefs  the representation includes an estimation of his utilities. 
the concept of utility is the basis for selecting among future alternatives and for evaluating past actions. each alternative is evaluated in terms of a number of attributes that a decision maker considers important. utilities express the 
preference structure of an agent. the utilities of the individual attributes arc combined to give the overall utility  payofq of an alternative. being able to compare different alternatives enables a decision maker to choose the alternative that affords him maximal payoff. in labor negotiations  the pertinent attributes are the issues under discussion and different contract proposals are the alternative decisions. utilities express the tradeoffs that a decision maker is willing to make among various attribute values. the payoff is expressed as a linear combination of the utilities associated with the issues. 
　when a persuader is faced with an unknown persuadee  he needs a way to infer the belief and preference structure of that agent. one way is by using case-based reasoning to access previously encountered and  similar  persuadees and transfer relevant characteristics  sycara 1 . the information transfer could be influenced by the problem solving context. in the persuader  this context is primarily economic. for example  in recession  a union's job security goal has higher importance than in boom. when competition is stiff in an industry  a company's automation goal assumes greater importance  and also has a greater contribution towards the goal of reducing production costs. 
1. connecting belief change to behavior change through utilities 
the argumentation model that an agent/persuader in the 
persuader system uses  makes provisions both for selecting and adapting previously used arguments through 
sycara 
case-based reasoning  and for constructing arguments from scratch. regardless of which method a persuader uses for argument generation  its reasoning is guided by argumentation goals and strategies. argumentation goals are associated with the ways that a persuadee*s beliefs and behavior can be affected by an argument. argumentation strategies are used to achieve the argumentation goals. the application of an argumentation strategy may generate more than one argument. to be effective  a persuader must select the most convincing argument for the situation at hand. the strength of an argument's justification  support  is used as the selection criterion. 
　we claim that a party's satisfaction with a proposition expresses his willingness to accept the proposition. hence  if a persuader could manipulate a party's utilities  resulting in manipulation of the party's payoff   he would be able to affect the behavior  outcomes  of the persuadee. convincing a persuadee to change his evaluation and increase his cooperativeness regarding a proposition is modeled as producing an argument to increase the payoff of the proposition. hence  the task of a persuader can be viewed as finding the most effective argument that will increase a persuadee's payoff. since a persuadee's payoff can be approximated by a linear combination of his utilities  the payoff can be increased by  1  changing the importance  coefficient  the persuadee attaches to an issue  and  1  changing the utility value of an issue. these constitute a persuader's argumentation goals. 
　changing the coefficient of an issue in the payoff function translates into changing the corresponding goal's importance in the belief structure. the change in value at a point on an individual utility curve for an issue can be interpreted as a change of a party's assessment of the value of that issue. this corresponds to changing the  amount  parameter a in a persuadee's belief structure. consider  for instance the situation where a company assesses an increase of 1 cents an hour in wages as  too high . in the utility theory formulation  this can be translated as  payoff 1  is low    i.e.  the company's payoff if it were to give a wage increase of 1 cents per hour would be some low value . in the company's belief structure  this assessment is represented as wages +  a   1   i.e. the company's goal is to give a wage increase of at most some amount less than 1 cents . convincing the company that this increase is not so high changes its wage goal to wages -f  a=1 . correspondingly  this change results in raising the company's payoff  payoff 1  greater than low . 
　two argumentation strategics can be used to change the importance that a persuadee attaches to a proposition: 
　 a  indicate a change  increase or decrease  in the contribution of the present goal to a higher level goal of the persuadee 
　 b  indicate a change in the feasibility  effectiveness  of the proposed goal 
　the argument  a new three-level job structure will be established for the technical support forces at at&t information systems. this structure will be more like that of 
1 	cognitive models 
competitors 1  is intended to increase the feasibility of establishing the new job structure by pointing out that such an arrangement has worked for competitors. 
　the second argumentation goal that a persuader might select is to change the persuadee's assessment of the proposed value of an issue. this second goal can be effected using the following strategies: 
　 c  recall a  counterexample  from the persuadee's past behavior 
　 d  recall examples of similar peers that have accepted the same value for the issue. 
　to illustrate strategy  c   suppose an international union maintains during contract negotiations with company x that it never signs a managements rights clause. a persuader could remind the union of its contract with company y where such a clause was indeed present. to illustrate the last strategy  consider a union's rejection of an increase of 1 cents per worker per hour in health benefits as unacceptably low. a persuader could present contracts signed by the same or similar local unions that incorporate an equal or lower increase. this argument is effective because perception of  low  or  high  values is determined by prevailing 
practice  namely what settlements peers of the persuadee 
have agreed to. 
1  generating arguments 
　the persuader generates a variety of arguments based on different argumentation goals and strategies. the argument generating process may result in producing multiple potential arguments. the most effective of the arguments produced must be chosen. the persuader uses the strategy of presenting the  weakest   less convincing  argument first  presenting  strong  arguments only when the weak ones have been rejected. we have developed a hierarchy of argument types according to their convincing power. in general  the position of an argument type in this hierarchy is domain dependent. for the labor domain  the hierarchy  from weakest to strongest  is:  1  appeal to universal principle   1  appeal to a theme   1  appeal to authority   1  appeal to  status quo    1  appeal to  minor standards    1  appeal to  prevailing practice    1  appeal to precedents as counterexamples   1  appeal to self-interest   1  threats. 
　in the rest of the paper  we will present mechanisms used in the persuader to generate arguments that change the importance of an issue  arguments to change an issue's perceived value  and threatening arguments. 
1. generating arguments to change the importance of an issue 
　in this section  we concentrate on arguments meant to change the contribution of a goal to a higher level goal of a 
　
persuadce  strategy  a   section 1 . consider the following example: 
wages will increase 1 percent over a three-year period 
1. three percent the first year  three percent the second year  and two percent the third year. however  no cost of living adjustment  cola  is included in the contract. as you may know  the rate of inflation is currently running at less than one percent per year. obviously  guaranteed increases arc more meaningful. 
　the above argument illustrates the situation where a persuader's argumentation goal is to decrease the importance of an issue by showing decreased contribution of this issue towards a higher level goal. the union's higher level goal is wages + . subgoals to this goal arc tola clause  and  straight percent increase . at&t's argument is intended to show that the contribution of the  cola clause  subgoal is less than the union had thought. moreover  the contribution of the  straight percent increase  goal is more than the union had thought. as a consequence of the argument  the importance to the union of a cola clause diminishes  whereas a straight wage increase becomes more important. to generate the cola argument  a persuader needs to know what a cola is useful for  namely that it is there to safeguard workers' income during future periods of high inflation. 
　after examining a great number of arguments in the labor domain  we observed that very often the reasons for the existence of a goal  denoted by g  could be cast in the following general form: a contingency c threatens a high level goal g; a subgoal g is created to protect g from c. in the cola example c is high inflation and g is a worker's income. a persuader can infer the high level goal toward which a goal g contributes from knowing what g is useful for. to decrease the contribution that g makes toward the achievement of the higher level goal g  a persuader simply denies the contingency c. the strategy is as follows: 
　to decrease the contribution of a goal to a higher level goal  assert the negation  in a qualified or unqualified manner  of the contingency c. 
　if the negation is unqualified  then the contribulion value goes to zero. the above is a very simple  and simplistic  technique and it will produce crude arguments. surprisingly enough  a lot of arguments in the real world  as illustrated by the at&t message arc crude and simplistic too. the negation of the contingency c acts as a justification for asserting the decreased contribution of g towards g. it is  however  a very weak justification. a persuader can strengthen the convincing power of his argument by justifying his justification. 
　in section 1  we have presented nine argument types that use various sources of justification  e.g.  universal principle  status quo  authority . which justification a persuader will choose for each situation is governed in our work by a set of heuristics that are linked to the semantics of the issues/goals at hand. an example of such a heuristic is: 
if the negated contingency c deals with a possible change of a state to a future state sf  
then 
 a  if the state's present value is not sf   then use  appeal to status quo  as justification 
 b  if the state's present value is already sf  then use  appeal to authority  as justification 
the above heuristic has been used by at&t in the 
cola argument. it justifies its assertion that high inflation will not happen because the current inflation is low. if  on the other hand  current inflation were high  at&t could have appealed to authority and said  noted economists are forecasting that  though the inflation is high at present  it will be drastically reduced for the next three years .  not such an uncommon argument  either . 
　persuasive arguments that increase the importance of the issue under discussion can be generated in the same framework as the ones to decrease the issue's importance. in this case  the persuader asserts rather than negates the contingency c. as an example  consider an argument to increase the importance of a cola clause by the cwa union.  a cola clause is important because inflation will increase in the next three years . the union can further justify its argument by appealing to authority. 
1. generating arguments to change a persuadee's perception of an issue's value 
　when the argumentation goal of a persuader is to change the persuadee's perception of an issue's value  two argumentation strategics can be used. one is to find a counterexample from the persuadee's past behavior. the second is to find evidence from the behavior of the persuadee's peers regarding the value of the issue. for both strategies  the argument generation algorithm involves search of the case memory for past experiences  cases  that the persuader might have had with the persuadce or his peers. for example  if a company rejects a proposed increase in wages as  too high   then a persuader can produce evidence showing that the company's competitors have given even higher wage increases. the justification for this type of argument is  appeal to prevailing practice . a persuader in the above example  could use the first argumentation strategy  if evidence can be found that in the past the company has always given big wage increases. as a matter of fact  this type of argument is used very frequently by unions seeking higher wages during negotiations. the justification is  appeal to counterexample . 
　the heuristic that is used to generate a persuasive argument using the first strategy is: 
retrieve past experiences of the behavior of the persuadce with respect to the present issue. 
if a past experience is found with the persuadee's behavior 
sycara 
　
　contrary to his present claim of the issue's value  then point out this discrepancy 
else use the second argumentation strategy 
　the heuristic that is used to generate a persuasive argument using the second strategy is: 
1. retrieve past experiences of similar persuadees with respect to the same issue. 
1. collect the ones whose value for the issue is appropriate 
1. present them to the persuadee 
	the 	second 	step 	needs 	some 	clarification. 	by 
 appropriate  we mean having a greater  lesser  or same value in case the objection was  too much    too little  . 
1. generating threatening arguments 
　a threatening argument is one where goal abandonment on the part of the persuadee is sought. in the utility theory framework  goal abandonment corresponds to the coefficient  importance  of a goal becoming zero. the strategy used to produce a threatening argument is: discover an action that endangers a goal of the persuadee that is more important than the goal targeted for abandonment and point out to the persuadee that this action will be carried out if the targeted goal is not abandoned. 
　consider a negotiation between a company and its union  where the persuader has suggested a compromise. the company has agreed saying that the increase in fringe benefits  fringes  is the highest it can afford. the union wants a higher increase. the persuader's argumentation goal becomes to convince the union to accept the proposed increase thus abandoning the goal of higher increases. by examining the company's goal graph  depicted in figure 1  one observes that since an increase in fringes contributes to an increase in economic concessions  labor costs and production costs  and a decrease in company profits  one of the company's goals is to decrease fringes. the subgoal of decreasing employment contributes to a decrease in economic concessions  labor costs and production costs. decreasing employment violates the goal of a union of increased employment. this can be checked by examining a union's belief structure. the argument  addressed to a union that has refused a proposed increase in fringes   if the company is forced to grant higher increases in fringes  then it will decrease employment  is meant to make the union abandon the goal of further increases in fringes by pointing out unpleasant consequences for the union of forcing an unwanted by the company increase. 
　to generate the above argument  the persuader finds out which company goals are violated by the union's refusal. then  it finds out what compensating actions the company might use in retaliation  for full details on the algorithm  see  sycara 1  . to do this  the persuader 
1 	cognitive models 
matches the fringes goal in the company's belief graph. it propagates the increase in fringes that the union wants to force to the ancestors of the fringes goal. children of these ancestors might indicate subgoals that the company can fulfill to counteract the increase. such a counteracting action that violates a union goal that is more important than the increase in fringes constitutes an argument that is aimed at making the union abandon the goal of further increases in fringes. 
importance of f r i n g e s - g o a l l is 1 for unionl searching companyl g o a l - g r a p h . . . a increase in f r i n g e s - g o a l l by companyl w i l l r e s u l t in a increase in economic-concessions1  l a b o r - c o s t 1   product!on-cost! 
a increase in f r i n g e s - g o a l l by companyl w i l l r e s u l t in a decrease in p r o f i t s l 
to compensate  companyl can decrease wage-goall  decrease employment 1  increase p l a n t - e f f i c i e n c y l   increase salesl 
only decrease wage-goall  	decrease employmentl v i o l a t e goals of unionl 
importance of wage-goall is 1 for unionl 
	importance of employmentl 	is 1 for unionl 
since importance of employmentl   importance of f r i n g e s - g o a l l threat to decrease employmentl can be used to abandon f r i n g e s - g o a l l one possible argument found 
1. concluding remarks 
　in non fully cooperative multi-agent problem solving  where cooperativeness cannot be taken for granted  the agents need to be induced to cooperate. we have advocated persuasive argumentation as a general mechanism for planning how to influence agents' intentions in order to increase their cooperativeness and avoid harmful interactions. a persuader uses its model of another agent in order to generate persuasive arguments. in our work  an agent's model is represented in terms of the agent's beliefs and preferences which can be used to make inferences about the agent's behavior. we have presented a model of persuasive argumentation and strategies for argument generation. construction of arguments is performed using integration of case-based reasoning  graph search and approximate estimation of agents' utilities. the argumentation model is part of a negotiation model  implemented in the persuader program  that resolves multi-agent conflicts in the labor domain. 