 
traditional artificial intelligence studies generally approach the problem of representing knowledge following the so-called knowledge representation hypothesis  as formulated by brian smith. more recently the development of the connectionist paradigm has questioned the symbolic approach to the study of the mind bringing about a more articulated view of the problem. this article singles out five possible approaches to the problem of knowledge representation in cognitive science: compositional symbolic approaches  local non-compositional approaches  distributed non compositional approaches  cognitive subsymbolic approaches and  neural  subsymbolic approaches. in particular  in the subsymbolic cognitive approach the elements that make up the representation system are not symbols with an ascribed meaning nor do they correspond to anatomic entities at a neurological level; rather they are to be considered as  theoretical constructs  of a theory of the cognitive level which permit the deduction  in the sense of  computation   of cognitive behaviours which cannot be otherwise modelled. we consider the development of models of this kind to be essential to a computational approach to the problem of reference without hypothesizing  magical qualities  of the mind  in the sense of assuming a necessary connection between mental symbols and their referents   while remaining within a functionalist vision  in the wider sense  which does not make reference to the specific physical properties of the neural hardware. 
1 a geography of knowledge representation 
 traditional  approaches to artificial intelligence generally adopt the so-called knowledge representation hypothesis as formulated by smith  to tackle the problem of knowledge representation. 
 smith's formulation states  any process capable of reasoning intelligently about the world must consist in part of a field of structures  of a roughly linguistic sort  which in some fashion represent whatever knowledge and beliefs the process may be said to possess   brachman and levesque  1  p. 1 . he also states that there is  an internal process that 'runs over' or 'computes with' these representational structures ... this ingredient process is required to react only to the 'form' or 'shape' of these mental representations  without regard to what they mean or represent - this is the substance of the claim that computation involves formal symbol manipulation   ibid. . this  substantially  is the approach behind the formalisms used in a.i.  logic formalisms  frames  production rule systems . this approach follows the hypothesis that the mind is a formal symbol system  newell  1 . 
 the development of the connectionist paradigm  by questioning the symbolic approach to the study of the mind  has further articulated the situation. the conneclionisls disdain the hypothesis that mental structures are  in a wide sense  of a linguistic nature and that cognitive activities can be reduced to formal symbol manipulation. in addition connectionist theories have brought about a renewed interest in the lower levels of mental organisation and neural hardware. this is not however a head-on collision between two monolithic positions  the  classical  stance on the one side and the connectionist stance on the other. recent debate between traditional and connectionist models has become more articulated. following mainly mcclelland et al   fodor and pylyshyn   smolensky  we have drawn up the following  geography  of the approaches to the knowledge representation problem in cognitive science  see figure 1 : 
- 1. compositional symbolic approaches 
- 1. local non compositional symbolic approaches 

this work was partially supported by a graant of the italian ministry of education  mpi  

	frixione  spinelli and gaglio 	1 
compositional symbolic local non compositional symbolic 
distributed non compositional symbolic 
cognitive subsymbolic 
neural subsymbolic 
figure 1 

- 1. distributed non compositional symbolic approaches 
- 1. cognitive subsymbolic approaches - 1. neural subsymbolic approaches. 
　point 1. comprises the approaches in line with smith's knowledge representation hypothesis. following fodor and pylyshyn  we can say they are characterized by their adoption of the principle of compositionality of 
meaning. in brief  the syntax of the representation system distinguishes between syntactically atomic expressions and complex expressions. complex expressions can be generated from atomic expressions using recursive syntactic rules  and the meaning of a complex expression is a function of its syntactic structure and the meaning of the atomic expressions in it. it can be hypothesized that each representation system of this type can be given a model theoretic semantics. if  in fact  the representation formalism has a syntactic structure which can be characterized in terms of recursive rules  and if the meaning of each construct is a function of the meaning of its components  then each construct can be interpreted in a set theoretic model by singling out semantic rules parallel to the syntactic rules  which interpret the complex expressions starting from the interpretation of primitive expressions. model theoretic semantics has given good results for many formalisms with a compositional structure  examples are the development of kripke models for intensional logics  montague semantics  denotational semantics for programming languages . so it may be considered extensible to any well defined representation language of this type. 
　the approaches covered by point 1. are symbolic  in the sense that every element in the representation system is a symbol  that is an entity with a meaning ascribed  and local  i.e. non-distributed  in the sense that each representation is  localized  in a specific element of the system. however  the composition principle does not apply in this case: there are no syntactic rules which can generate complex representations  each symbol is  in a certain sense  
1 	foundations 
atomic. these approaches cannot be given a model theoretic semantics except in a fairly banal manner. without compositional syntactic rules it is impossible to define parallel semantic rules and every symbol in the representation system should be interpreted separately in the model.  local connectionist  models  where each conceptual entity is represented by a distinct unit in the network  are of this type. it is this lack of compositionality that fodor and pylyshyn identify as the characteristic that distinguishes connectionist models from classical models  fodor and pylyshyn  1  pp. 1 . 
　in a distributed model  each entity is represented by a pattern of activity distributed over many computing elements  and each computing element is involved in representing many different entities   hinton et a/.  1j. point 1. comprises connectionist models distributed on microfeatures  where each node of the network is a symbolic entity  in that it represents a micro-feature and it possesses a distinct semantic interpretation. the  high level  concepts however are not represented by units  rather they are distributed on the network as activation patterns. these models are subconceptual  in the sense that the representation of a concept may not be localized in a distinct element of the representation system  but not subsymbolic  the units representing micro-features are given a meaning . 
　we shall discuss point 1. later. point 1. comprises the  neural  connectionist models. in these the representations are distributed on non-symbolic units that are assumed to have exact anatomic and neurophysiological correspondences. fodor and pylyshyn  consider this type of approach not relevant at the cognitive level as it involves lower levels of mental organisation. moreover  although this type of model can be theorized  it is difficult to realize in view of the empirical evidence available. 
　finally  as regards point 1.  in this approach the subsymbolic units are not considered as having meaning  for 
example in the sense of representing micro-features   nor as corresponding to physical entities identifiable at the neurological level. we maintain that they should rather be placed among the  theoretical constructs  of a theory of the cognitive level  which allow the deduction  in the sense of computation  of cognitive behaviours that cannot be otherwise modelled. this type of model is not considered by fodor and pylyshyn   who see the only possible alternatives for a distributed representation in points 1. and 1. however  1. is the position held by smolensky   although his examples are often more suitably identified in point 1. - see for example the distributed representation of different kinds of room in rumelhart et al.  . an analogous position is that of hofstadter   from whom smolensky says he drew some of his main ideas. although the type of computation used in the subsymbolic paradigm is  inspired  by neural computation  smolensky states that:  the fundamental level of the subsymbolic paradigm  the subconceptual level  lies between the neural and the conceptual levels   smolensky  1 . further   the subconceptual level seems at present rather close to the conceptual level  while we have little grounds for believing to be close to the neural level   ibid. . again:  subsymbolic models should not be viewed as neural models   ibid. . 
 to sum up  the approaches at points 1.  1. and 1. can be characterized as symbolic in a wide sense  as they contrast with the subsymbolic approaches at points 1. and 1.  see figure 1 . approaches 1.  1. and 1. are to some extent distributed in contrast with the local approaches of points 1. and 1. lastly  while the approaches of 1. to 1. are at a cognitive level  approach 1. involves subcognitive levels  anatomic . 
1 the need for a cognitive subsymbolic level 
while recognizing the importance of compositional symbolic models of cognitive activities  if only because noncompositional models have not yet succeeded in offering a plausible alternative in many cases   there are problems which seem to suggest that there are valid theoretical reasons for hypothesizing a  cognitive subsymbolic  level. 
　reference is the one case in which a subsymbolic computation seems necessary also within a compositional symbolic paradigm. we do not subscribe to fodor's solipsistic assumptions  fodor  1   that functional relations relevant to a computational theory of the mind are exclusively those between symbols  and that all semantic concepts  including reference  are not relevant to such a theory. we would tend rather to agree with harman's statement that  of primary importance are functional relations to the external world in connection with perception  on the one hand  and action  on the other   harman  1  p. 1 . harman does not specify such relations. sloman  sloman and cohen  1  also expresses the need for links in order to anchor reference to symbols. in this paper we suggest that such links or relations could be envisaged in a subsymbolic framework. 
 we have seen how the semantics of first type representation systems can be characterized using the tools of model theory. model theoretic semantics does not claim to be an empirically adequate characterization of reference as a cognitive process. however  apart from its empirical inadequacy  it contains certain a priori limits. the 
empirical inadequacy of model theoretic semantics is related to the fact that a human does not establish the reference of complex symbolic expressions  consider the truth value of modal statements  following the rules of model theoretic semantics  in the case of natural language and presumably in the case of expressions of the language of thought . by a priori limits we mean a type of limit that would also be valid for a hypothetical  non-anthropomorphic  cognitive entity that uses the rules of model theoretic semantics. 
 the analysis of such a priori limits could clarify the problems that arise in a symbolic representation paradigm in elaborating a model of reference from a cognitive point of view. it is well known that no formal symbol system can univocally determine its own model. in a logical system  sets of meaning postulates can be used to limit the set of admissible models  but they are not sufficient to fix a particular model. in model theoretic semantics the link between a system of symbols and the objects whereon the symbols are interpreted is established via an interpretation 
function. in a logical language  for example  such a function interprets the individual constants on objects  of the appropriate type  in the domain  the one argument predicate letters are interpreted on subsets of the domain and so on. the interpretation function calculates the value of complex expressions starting from the value of primitive symbols. however in this last case the interpretation function is taken as given and  in any case  charactcrizable only in a purely extensional manner  like a table which associates  for example  to each predicate symbol  a subset in the domain. this  from a cognitive viewpoint  is not sufficient since an adequate representation of conceptual entities must take into account the manner in which the reference is established  that is  how the interpretation function is calculated. this function  and its inverse  must be  partially  computable  and it must be  in a general sense  possible to know  how they are made   that is  it must be possible to identify  in the wide sense  and perhaps in the connectionist sense  an algorithm which calculates them. as we are dealing with functions which map symbols on objects in the world and viceversa  they cannot be defined exclusively in terms of other symbols as this would imply an infinite regression. the interpretation function must therefore be calculated  at least for some symbols in the system  the  primitives   by some subsymbolic device. 
 figure 1 shows the drawing of an over-simplified hypothetical model of how the reference of symbols directly connected with sensorial inputs could be computed. the input units are connected in a causal  non-symbolic  manfrixione  spinelli and gaglio 1 
ner with the world. none of these units is a representation of anything in particular. the internal units are  in turn  non-symbolic entities and particular activation patterns on them correspond to expressions of the representation formalism at the symbolic level. the lack of a subsymbolic layer of this type would mean postulating the existence of symbols which directly  grasp  their referents  thus falling into the category of  magical  reference theories which are discussed below. 
　fodor and pylyshyn state  there are  no doubt  cases where special empirical considerations suggest detailed structure/function correspondences between different levels of system's organization. for example  the input to the most peripheral stages of vision ... at these stages it is reasonable to expect an anatomically distributed structure to be reflected by a distributed functional architecture   fodor and pylyshyn  1  p. 1 . from our point of view however the problem does not lie in the fact that for lower level cognitive functions a greater structure/function correspondence is necessary  and therefore a functional structure corresponding more closely to anatomic structure. strictly speaking it is not even necessary for subsymbolic computation to be in any sense  neural  or inspired to the anatomic structure of the nervous system. the problem is a priori and not empirical  and so  much less does it originate from considerations of an anatomic nature : an understanding of the relation of reference of a system of mental symbols cannot exclusively make recourse to other symbols as this would be simply shifting the problem. on the other hand  no symbol in the sense of syntactic object has reference as a result of some intrinsic quality  since there would be a necessary connection between symbols and referents  and mental symbols do not enjoy any  special status  in this regard. according to putnam   what is important to realize is that what goes for physical pictures also goes for mental images  and for mental representations in general; mental representations no more have a necessary connection with what they represent than physical representations do. the contrary supposition is a survival of magical thinking   putnam  1  p. 1 . to explain reference the symbolic level needs to be abandoned and a subsymbolic level as theorized by smolensky could be adopted to model that non-symbolic activity of the mind which arranges that symbols refer to something.  note that putnam's statement  which is inspired by wittgenstein's criticism of the concept of mental image  wittgenstein  1   likens mental images to other types of mental representation: from the point of view of reference  symbol systems and mental images both fail for the same reasons.  
 it is obvious that  in the real world  reference  in symbol systems such as natural language  is an extremely complex phenomenon: symbols use many  hooks  by which they grasp reality. analogously  we can hypothesize that also the reference of mental symbols comes about by means of different modalities  sensorial  motorial  etc.  variously 
1 	foundations 

	 i input units 	ointernal 	units 
figure 1 
interrelating  and depends to a large extent on components of a cultural and therefore of a partly symbolic nature. however  we consider that recourse to a subsymbolic cognitive activity is inescapable. 
 we do not intend to adopt a  referentialist  position  which reduces the problem of meaning to that of establishing the reference of terms denoting material things. however  there is a real problem of reference and it is difficult to imagine meaning without any causal relation with the world. 
 the situation is even more complex if the assumptions of  ingenuous realism'' are not accepted  and a position  which holds that the world is not intrinsically organized according to a fixed ontology and completely independent of the cognitive activities of the observer  is assumed.  a similar position is that of lakoff   which he calls experientialist in contrast with objectivist positions.  in this case the problem is not only to recognize and label ontologically given entities  but also to impose a categorization on reality. such categorization must necessarily include a non symbolic component:  before  the categorization is carried out there is no sense in using symbols as there is nothing they can refer to. 
 reference is linked to sensorial and motorial activities not only in the obvious sense that many referents are perceived as objects of the senses  but also because a symbolic and non symbolic interaction with other members of the community of speakers is fundamental both in learning how to use a system of symbols and in the reference of  abstract  terms. sensorial and motorial aspects are the basis of such interaction. the idea that an intelligent system can have symbols which refer to numbers  laws or feelings  whatever refer may mean in such a case  is unconceivable without tools which also allow a non-symbolic interaction with the world and with other intelligent systems. a system closed to the world can be only a formal manipulator of tokens  and the fact that in such systems certain tokens or sets of tokens are readable as symbols depend exclusively on the interpretation of an observer outside that system. 
　denying that a subsymbolic activity of the mind is relevant at the cognitive level means  either supposing that mental symbols have a  magical  talent for reference or that the problem of reference has no cognitive relevance and relegating it to a lower level of organisation. to assume a  subsymbolic cognitive level   even if at present completely hypothetical  could be the way to tackle the problem of reference without introducing  magical virtues  of the mind  maintaining a  functionalist  vision  in the wider sense  which does not make specific reference to the physical properties of neural hardware. 
acknowledgements 
we thank diego marconi  luisa montecucco and carlo penco for their helpful and insightful comments  and edward farrants for preparing the english version. 
