 
goal relationships resulting from the initial data and subsequent processing can he used to dynamically construct a partial topology of the solution space based on what appear to be feasible solutions. this structure can be used to make control decisions that significantly reduce the amount of search required to solve a problem in a complex domain. we examine the utility of this approach in the context of a multi-level  cooperative knowledge source model of problem solving. we present a taxonomy of goal relationships for constructing partial topologies of the solution space and show that mechanisms using this information can be built as natural extensions of an integrated data-directed and goal directed archi tecture. examples and performance results demonstrating how these additions improve the system's ability to evaluate potential activities are provided. 
1 	introduction 
making appropriate control decisions in a complex  multi-dimensional search space is a difficult task. this difficulty arises because relationships among partial results and potential activities are not readily observable. for example  in a blackboard architecture the same partial results can be used in many contexts. therefore  producing a specific result may affect many alternative solutions. in addition  the problem space is represented at multiple abstraction levels on the blackboard  and multiple solution paths for the same result may be available. this provides the problem solver with flexibility in choosing problem-solving activities but also allows results to be rederived using alternative paths without recognizing the redundancy until the last step. furthermore  the asynchronous  opportunis tic style of problem solving leads to situations where it is unclear whether a solution is missing due to a 
    this research was sponsored  in part  by the national science foundation under cer grant dcr-1  and by the office of naval research under university research initiative grant contract n1-k-1  and under contract no1-c-1. 
lack of data  in which case the solution will never be generated  or due to a lack of processing  in which case additional work will eventually produce the solution. thus  employing complex problem-solving capabilities while at the same time making intelligent control decisions is a formidable task  hayes-roth  1  hayes-roth and lesser  1  lesser and erman  1  nii  1b  nii  1a . 
　several years ago  the cooperating knowledge source architecture of hearsay-ii  erman et a/.  1  was extended to unify data-directed and goal-directed control  corkill et a/.  1 .1 this was a first step toward developing the needed interrelationships among actions and results necessary for making intelligent control decisions. in the interim  we have gained considerable experience with this control architecture. in particular  we have identified the need for new types of goals and for additional relationships among goals. these extensions allow us to more accurately relate the predicted results of future activities to existing results in order to make more informed control decisions. 
　in the next section we briefly review the unified datadirected and goal-directed control architecture. section 1 describes the new goal relationships from a general perspective and presents specific examples from two domains. section 1 outlines how these new mechanisms work in a blackboard based problem solver. section 1 is a brief presentation and discussion of our experimental results. 
1 	a review of goal-based control 
figure 1 presents a high level schematic for the integrated data directed and goal-directed control architecture as implemented in the dvmt  lesser et a/.  1  lesser and corkill  1 . the basic hearsav-ii architecture is modified to include a goal blackboard and a goal processor. the goal blackboard  which mirrors the data blackboard in dimensionality  contains goals representing intentions to create particular results on the data blackboard. goals provide an abstraction over the potential actions for achieving a particular type of 
1
　　 through a .slightly different approach  johnson and hayes-roth  johnson and hayes-roth  1  have also extended the data-directed process of the classic blackboard problem solver to include goal-directed control. 
	lesser  corkill  whitehair and hernandez 	1 


figure 1: integrated data and goal-directed control 
result and allow the system to reason about its intentions independently of the particular knowledge source  ks  actions at its disposal. 
　the two general classes of goals are data-directed and goal-directed. the blackboard monitor uses domain knowledge to create data-directed goals in response to the addition or modification of partial results on the data blackboard. each data-directed goal specifies the range of potential solutions resulting from the use of the triggering data. 
　since the creation of a goal does not guarantee sufficient information on the data blackboard to execute a ks to satisfy the goal  the goal processor runs a precondition procedure for the applicable kss to make a detailed examination. when results indicate that a ks has sufficient information to satisfy the goal  the goal triggers a ks instantiation  ksi . the scheduler assigns the ksi a priority rating and places it on the scheduling queue. the scheduler assigns priority by first determining the set of goals that may be satisfied by a ksi's predicted output. it then computes the ksi's rating as a function of the ratings of the potentially satisfied goals and the credibility of the predicted results. if sufficient information is not available to run a ksi  the goal processor can create goal-directed goals  subgoals  to generate the needed data.1 the decision to create subgoals is dependent on the importance of achieving the goals potentially satisfied by the ksi and on the cost of creating the subgoals. subgoal ratings are based on the rating of the goal that triggered the ksi. if the parent goal has a high rating  its subgoals might increase the 
1
　　goal-directed goals are also generated by the goal processor for other purposes. 
1 	cognitive models 
rating of ksis that generate data needed to satisfy the preconditions of the ksi triggered by the parent goal. 
　goal-based control does not require that control decisions be made in a top-down  goal-directed manner. goals are used to make both data-directed and goal-directed control decisions  and the classic datadirected/goal-directed dichotomy is represented in our approach by the relative ratings among goals. by ad-
justing its ksi rating computations  the scheduler can bias the system towards goal-directed or data-directed control. goal-based control attempts to incorporate domain data to build an appropriate control abstraction that will predict the type of results that can possibly be generated. this permits the system to develop nonlocal focus-of-control strategies that take into account the interactions of work on data in different parts of the problem-solving space. 
1 	goal relationships 
in addition to the goal/subgoal relationship  other relationships among goals can be exploited to improve the effectiveness of goal-based control. these new goal relationships resulting from the initial data and subsequent processing can be used to dynamically construct a partial topology of the solution space based on what appear to be feasible solutions. this structure can be used to make control decisions that significantly reduce the amount of search required to solve a problem in a complex domain. specifically  three important questions necessary for effective control can be answered by relating goals to each other: 
  can the same results be obtained by working on different goals  
  will working on two distinct goals generate equiva-lent partial solutions  
  will work on a goal differentiate between mutually exclusive solutions  
　in order to formally define the goal relationships necessary to answer these questions  we first define the following concepts: the potential solution set of a goal and the component set of a potential solution. 



	lesser  corkill  whitehair and hernandez 	1 


1 	cognitive models 

a situation in the previously described distributed vehicle monitoring system. in this scenario  four potential solutions can be formed by merging the segments labeled a  1  c and d into the potential solutions ad  ac  be and bd. if the system were to form ad first and create an inhibiting goal to restrict further processing on ad  ac could still be formed by extending c to ac since the goal to extend c is neither subsumed nor assisted by the inhibiting goal corresponding to ad. it might still be possible for some competing solutions to be precluded in anomalous situations where multiple inhibited regions interact. however  this depends almost entirely on how the intermediate potential solutions are formed. 
1 	local context 
along with inhibiting activity based on high-level results  there is also a need to inhibit activity based on a more local context. for example  if any goal that triggered a ks is satisfied before the ks runs  and if the ks can not improve on the results that satisfied the goal  the ks should have its rating decreased. consequently  which ks satisfies a goal is an important issue. if the scheduler gave priority to the ks1 with the most comprehensive triggering goal  its results might satisfy other goals and eliminate the need to execute their triggered ksis. the following situation demonstrates this point. 
   consider the pending activities ksi 1 and ksi 1   generated from work on two different derivation paths. if executed  k s i 1 would produce result rl that would subsume r1  the result of executing ks!1. executing ksi 1 first would make ksi1's results redundant  so the scheduler should give ksi: priority. however  from a local  data-directed perspective  ksi1 might be given higher priority  even though ksi 1 is the more promising of the two. this can occur if the scheduler incorporates an average of input data credibility in its ksi rating function and if ksi1 uses lower rated data in addition to highly rated data used by ksi1. for example  k s i 1 may generate r1 by extending highly credible data into areas of weak data  and ksi1 may use only the highly credible data to produce the highest rated component of r1. 
   our ear  er approach to rating ksis tried to balance the quality of the predicted result with its scope. however  we found that the appropriate balance was situation dependent. assigning too much priority to scope had the undesirable consequence of making the search too depth-first  while assigning too much priority to quality led to redundant activity as illustrated in the above example. instead  to choose among the pending ksis  we need to explicitly take into account the relationships among their predicted outputs. 
   using the goal relationships specified in the previous section  the system can form a local understanding of why a ksi is scheduled to be invoked and may instead invoke a different ksi that produces the same results more efficiently. this procedure  called the local context mechanism  can be added to the system as an addition to the scheduler. in general  before executing a ksi  the local context mechanism examines the ksi's triggering goals and searches for a more comprehensive ksi that would also satisfy these goals. if this more comprehensive ksi produces an actual result that is as good in 
	lesser  corkill  whitehair and hernandez 	1 


the subsuming area as that expected from the less comprehensive ksi  the subsumed results are removed from the output set of the less comprehensive ksi. the local context mechanism is implemented as a combination of the two algorithms shown in figure 1. 
1 	experimental results 
the goal relationship algorithms were implemented in the distributed vehicle monitoring testbed  dvmt . the d v m t simulates a network of vehicle monitoring nodes  where each node applies simplified signal processing knowledge to acoustically sensed data in an attempt to identify  locate and track patterns of vehicles moving through a two-dimensional space. a node is responsible for a specific area and attempts to recognize and eliminate errorful sensor data as it integrates the correct data into an answer map. each node has a blackboard architecture with knowledge sources and blackboard levels of abstraction appropriate for vehicle monitoring. knowledge sources perform the basic problem solving tasks of extending and refining hypotheses  partial solutions . as described earlier  data-directed and goal-directed goals are used to control problem solving activities. 
　experimental results are summarized in table 1. three environments were used for testing; a simple environment with a single vehicle track and no sensor noise  an environment with the same vehicle track but with random noise added  and a complex environment with two crossing vehicle tracks and a significant amount of noise. features used for comparison were the number of knowledge source executions required to produce the solution s   the number of hypotheses created  and the number of goals created. the system performed more efficiently with the new goal relationship algorithms. for the environment with a single track  1g% fewer hypotheses and 1% fewer goals were produced and the system required 1% fewer ks executions to compute the answer. in the second environment  1% fewer hypotheses and 1% more goals were produced and the solution was found with 1% fewer ks executions. finally  in the 
1 	cognitive models 

complex environment  1% fewer hypotheses and 1% fewer goals were produced and the solutions were found with 1% fewer ks executions. 
　in each of the environments  the new algorithms were effective in preventing redundant processing in areas where strongly believed  high-level results were found. this enabled the system to allocate resources for work in noisy areas and areas where the sensed signels were weak. although the new algorithms caused the system to generate additional goals  most noticeably in the second environment  the resulting improvement in focusing capabilities resulted in a considerable reduction in the number of knowledge sources executed. finally  the cost of processing goal relationships was significantly less than the cost of processing kss. the savings were sufficient to result in dramatic decreases in execution time required when the system used goal relationship mechanisms. 
1 	conclusion 
we have presented a taxonomy of goal relationships that include inhibiting goals. in addition  we have shown that mechanisms for accurately controlling the flexibility provided by the multi-level  cooperative knowledge source model of problem solving can be built as natural extensions to the integrated data-directed and goal-directed architecture. 
　goal relationships provide important information for making intelligent control decisions  and they are a useful tool for representing the current state of problem solving in a complex search space. their use is applicable to tasks in which combined data-directed and goal-directed control is appropriate. in order to exploit goal relationship mechanisms  it is necessary that the quality and characteristics of a ksps output be roughly predictable 

and that data-directed goals be constructed so as to contain all the possible outputs that a ks can produce based on the triggering data. additionally  the computation of goal relationships  data-directed goals  and ks output set approximations must be inexpensive compared to the cost of executing a ks. finally  it is also important that a data-directed goal's solution set not include a large number of potential solutions that can not be generated by a ks working on the triggering data. otherwise  many goal relationships will be overlooked. 
　we are incorporating these concepts into mechanisms for real time control and investigating the use of cooperating  independent  and competing goal relationships for use in complex focusing heuristics and in problem solving termination. we are also examining the potential benefits of adding additional goal attributes indicating the expected amount of resources needed to satisfy a goal  the amount of work already invested in satisfying a goal  the expected number of solutions to a goal  and the likelihood of satisfying a goal. finally  we intend to expand the notion of cooperation and attempt to reproduce the high-level planning results of durfee and lesser  durfee and lesser  1  through the use of goal relationships. 
