 
in this paper we present a novel explanation of the source of indefinite information in common sense reasoning: indefinite information arises from reports about the world expressed in terms of concepts that have been defined using only definite rules. adopting this point of view  we show that first-order logic is insufficiently expressive to handle important examples of common sense reasoning. as a remedy  we propose the use of circumscribed definite rules  and we then investigate the proof theory of this more expressive framework. we consider two approaches: first  prototypical proofs  a special type of proof by induction  which yields a sound proof theory. second  we describe cases in which there exists a decision procedure for answering queries  a particularly significant result because it shows that it is possible to have decidable query processing in circumscribed theories that are not equivalent to any first order theory. 
1 	introduction 
common sense reasoning has a bias towards definite information  as many researchers have noted. thus johnson-laird  has argued that human beings draw inferences in particular  mental models''  and levesque  has urged  for similar reasons  the study of  vivid knowledge'' in artificial intelligence. this bias towards definite information has also permeated computer science proper. the field of logic programming  for example  is based on a subset of first-order logic consisting entirely of definite clauses. indeed  makowsky  has argued that  horn formulas matter  in computer science precisely because they have a unique minimal model. 
   if this is so  then how does indefinite information arise in common sense reasoning  in this paper  we adopt a novel point of view on this question  and explore the consequences. we suggest  as a gedanken experiment  that common sense reasoning is based exclusively on definite rules  and that indefinite information arises from the application of these definite rules to definite facts in situa-
1 	logic programming 
tions where communication is almost always incomplete. an individual who receives reports about the world does not usually know the definite facts upon which these reports are based  and for such an individual the world is a  chaotically!  indefinite place. out of necessity  an individual in this situation does indefinite reasoning with definite rules. 
   if we adopt this point of view  however  it turns out that the standard way of representing indefinite information in artificial intelligence - i.e.  by a first-order language capable of asserting disjunctive and existential facts - is inadequate. we show in section 1 that first-order logic cannot express a simple form of indefinite information that seems essential for common sense reasoning. instead  we suggest in section 1 that an adequate representation of indefinite information requires the use of circumscription  mccarthy  1; mccarthy  1 . but circumscription is a second-order formalism. is it plausible to propose such a complex logical language for such a mundane purpose as common sense reasoning  we believe the answer is: yes. the principal technical contribution of the present paper  in sections 1 and 1  is to suggest two new techniques for computing the inferences that follow from a circumscribed definite rulebase. these techniques apply in special cases  of course  but they seem promising for various practical applications. 
   in section 1  we develop the notion of a prototypical proof  which is a special type of inductive proof. if a query is entailed by a circumscribed rulebase  then a prototypical proof is guaranteed to exist  and if a prototypical proof succeeds  then an induction schema can be automatically generated. furthermore  an induction schema in our system has very simple and appealing proof-theoretic properties. this means that we can search systematically for inductive proofs  at least in certain special cases that seem to be of considerable practical importance. these techniques cannot give us a complete proof procedure  of course. but in section 1  we show that an actual decision procedure exists for certain other special cases that seem to be of practical importance. previous work on circumscription has tried to find conditions under which a circumscribed theory  collapses  to a first-order theory  lifschitz  1   so that standard theorem-provers for first-order logic could then be applied. however  these conditions are extremely restrictive  and recent work by kolaitis and papadimitriou  has shown that the existence of an equivalent firstorder theory is itself an undecidable property. our results in section 1 improve upon this previous work in two ways:  i  we show that complete query-answering is possible even for theories whose circumscription is not first-order; and  ii  we provide a full decision procedure in such cases rather than a semi-decidable proof theory. 
   the overall framework in which we have conducted this research is presented in section 1  which is based on previously published work  mccarty  1a; mccarty  1b; bonner et al.  1 . in section 1  we define precisely what we mean by a  definite  rule  and we argue that our logic should be intuitionistic  rather than classical  since intuitionistic logic admits a larger class of rules that have  definite  properties. since our basic language is intuitionistic  though  another novel aspect of our work is that we then write the circumscription axiom as a sentence in second-order intuitionistic logic. although we state some of the properties of intuitionistic circumscription in section 1  a more detailed discussion will be presented in a forthcoming paper  mccarty  1 . 
1 	definite rules 
horn clauses provide the standard examples of definite rules  for a simple reason. every set of positive horn clauses has a unique minimal herbrand interpretation 
 van emden and kowalski  1; a p t and van emden  1   or  equivalently  an initial model  goguen and meseguer  1; makowsky  1 . as a result  a set of positive horn clauses  r  has both the disjunctive property and the existential property: a disjunction of atomic formulae  is entailed by r if and only if r or 
r b  and an existentially quantified atomic formula  is entailed by r if and only if  for 
some ground substitution  closely related is a prooftheoretic property  the existence of linear proofs. indeed  it is fair to say that it is the procedural interpretation of a declarative semantics  embodied in sld-resolution  lloyd  1   that makes horn-clause logic such a powerful tool for logic programming  for deductive databases and for knowledge representation in general. 
   it is well known that these useful properties are lost if we move beyond the horn-clause subset of first-order  classical  logic. however  we can preserve these properties for a larger class of rules if we use first-order intuitionistic logic. consider the following example: 
  1  
this expression should be read:  if every bug y inside container x is a dead bug  then x is a sterile container/' recall that a positive horn clause is an implication with an atomic conclusion and w i t h an antecedent consisting of a conjunction of atomic formulae. but rule  1  has a horn clause  embedded  in its antecedent. we call such rules embedded implications  mccarty  1a; mccarty  1b . intuitionistic embedded implications have been studied by several researchers  gabbay and reyle  1; gabbay  1; mccarty  1a; mccarty  1b; miller  
1: hallnas and schroeder-heister  1; bonner ct a/.  1j  and have been shown to be useful for hypothetical reasoning  bonner  1   for legal reasoning  mccarty  1   for modular logic programming  miller  1 . and for natural language understanding  pareschi  1 . 
   note that a set of rules in the form  1   interpreted classically  would give us full first-order logic. however  interpreted intuitionistically  these rules give us a proper subset of first-order l o c k with interesting semantic properties  mccarty  1a .1 first  a set of intuitionistic embedded implications r has a final kripke model  which we denote by k * . this means: given any kripke model k of r  there exists a unique homomorphism from k into k * . second  k* is generic for horn-clause queries. this means: a horn clause query is entailed by r if and only if is true in k * . t h i r d   k* has a unique minimal substatc  denoted by . taken together  these results imply that r has the disjunctive and existential properties for horn clause queries  a straightforward generalization of the fact that a set of  classical  positive horn clauses has the disjunctive and existential properties for atomic queries. for this reason  it is appropriate to refer to rules in the form  1  as  definite  rules. 
   the proof theory for intuitionistic embedded implications is also a straightforward generalization of the proof theory for classical horn-clause logic  mccarty  1b . consider a rulebase consisting of  1  plus the following two rules: 
 1  
 1  
assume a database of assertions: 'container  p ' and * heated  p '  and consider the query: sterilecontainer our proof procedure begins by constructing an sld-refutation tree in an initial tableau  to  and proceeds until it has reduced the original query to the goal:  note that this goal is a universally quantified implication. at this point  the proof procedure:  i  replaces the variable y with a special constant '!y1' and  ii  constructs an auxiliary tableau  t1  with a goal 'dead !yi ' and a database consisting of the assertions 'bug !y 1  ' and 'inside !yi p   this goal succeeds  using rules  1  and  1   which means that the universally quantified implication also succeeds. thus the overall proof succeeds  w i t h a definite answer substitution  for additional examples of such proofs  see  mccarty  1b . 
1 	indefinite information 
for common sense reasoning  definite rules by themselves appear to be insufficient. consider the following example  discussed by moore . there are three blocks: block a   block b   block c ; and two colors: red and green. the blocks are stacked in the following way: 
on a b   on b c ; and the top and bottom blocks are 
1
　　the standard semantics for intuitionistic logic is kripke semantics. see  kripke  1; fitting  1 . 
painted green and red  respectively: green a   red c . we do not know the color of the middle block  but we know that every block is painted either red or green: 
	 1  
we want to know if there is something green on something red  a situation that could be represented by the following predicate: 
		 1  
intuitively  the answer should be: yes. either ' b ' is a red block  in which case 'a' and 'b' constitute a green-on-red pair  or else ' b ' is a green block  in which case 'b' and 'c' constitute a green-on-red pair. 
   how should we represent indefinite information of this sort  one approach is to add two new types of rules to our language: 
 1   1  
we call these rules disjunctive and existential assertions  respectively. the addition of disjunctive and existential assertions to a set of embedded implications is equivalent to full first-order intuitionistic logic  of course  but there are reasons to write a rulebase in this special form. although we no longer have the properties of definite rules discussed in section 1  it makes sense to stay as close to these properties as possible. we thus show in  mccarty  1  that a set of rules in the form  1    1  and  1  has a final kripke model  i *   although i* does not  in general  have a unique minimal substate. we also investigate in  mccarty  1  an extension of the linear proof procedure in  mccarty  1b  which uses a limited  disjunctive splittiiig  operation whenever it encounters a rule in the form  1   and we show that this proof procedure is complete for intuitionistic  but not classical  logic. these results are related to recent work on disjunctive logic programming  minker and rajasekar  1; loveland  1; loveland  1 . 
   but do rules in the form  1  and  1  really capture our common sense reasoning with indefinite information  suppose the following definition is part of the 'blocks world': 
 1  
 1  
and suppose we have been told that 'above a b ' is true according to this definition. is there something on 'b'  intuitively  the answer should be: yes. but it is standard practice  kowalski  1  to write the 'only if' half of definition  1 ~ 1  as follows: 
	above x y  =  on x  y  v 	 1  
 1z  qn x  z  a above z  y   
a n d using  1   the formal answer to our query is: no. it is straightforward to verify that the final kripke model for rules  1 - 1  includes a substate that contains an infinite sequence of 'above' relations  and no relation in the form ' o n   w   b     for example: 
above a  b   
	on a  	c 1    	above c 1  b   
1 	logic programming 

moreover  there is no set of first-order rules that gives us the intuitively correct result in this case  since transitive closure cannot be defined in first-order logic  aho and ullman  1 . is there an alternative  
1 	circumscription 
in this section  we consider a radically different approach to the representation of indefinite information. assume that there exists a set of definite rules that can be applied to a world of definite facts. assume also that someone else has observed the world  applied the rules  and reported some of these definite conclusions. our job is to make inferences about the actual state of the world  even though we have not observed it directly. for example  we might be told that block 'a' is above block ' b   using the definition of 'above' in rules  1 - 1   and we might want to know whether there is something on 'b' the world could be in infinitely many different states  with infinitely many different configurations of ' o n ' facts  all supporting the conclusion 'above a b ' our information about the world is thus highly indefinite. intuitively  however  we ought to be able to conclude that  is true. 
   the formal machinery we need for this approach is provided by mccarthy's theory of circumscription  mccarthy  1; mccarthy  1 . since we are working with intuitionistic logic  however  we need to use an intuitionistic version of the circumscription axiom. let 
r be a finite set of embedded implications  and let p  be a tuple consisting of the  de-
fined predicates  that appear on the left-hand sides of the rules in r. let r p  denote the conjunction of the rules in r  with the predicate symbols in p treated as free parameters  and let r x  be the same as r p  but with the predicate constants replaced by predicate variables  
d e f i n i t i o n 1 . 1 : the circumscription axiom is the following sentence in second order intuitionistic 
logic:1 

we denote this expression by c t r c u m   r   p   ; p     and we refer to it as  the circumscription of p in r   p   .   
this axiom has the same intuitive meaning that it has in classical logic: it states that the extensions of the predicates in p are as small as possible  given the constraint 
1
　　 we define second-order intuitionistic logic precisely in  mccarty  1   following standard accounts such as  troelstra and van dalen  1 . 
that r p  must be true. since the logic is intuitionistic  however  the axiom minimizes extensions at every substate of every kripke model that satisfies r.1 
　if r consists of rules  1 - 1   then the circumscription of'above' in r forces 'above' to be the transitive closure of 'on'  mccarthy  1; lifschitz  1   and this entails the following implication: 
	 1  
we thus have a solution to the problem posed at the beginning of this section. 
　how might we compute such inferences  in general  we discuss this question in  mccarty  1   and we summarize our results briefly here. let us formulate the general query problem as follows: 
 1  
where q and r are embedded implications  and is an implication in the form  1  with a positive disjunctive or existential conclusion and an antecedent consisting of a conjunction of atomic formulae. our approach is to construct a final kripke model for under various assumptions about q and r  and then to show that this final kripke model is generic for the query  in the present paper  we will only consider the case in which r is a set of horn clauses  but we will analyze the general case of embedded implications in a forthcoming paper  mccarty  1l . for horn clauses  the construction of the final kripke model is simple  and is related to recent results of kolaitis and papamitriou . first  let k* be the final kripke model for r itself  as defined in section 1. now let b be the set of base predicates in r  that is  the predicates that do not appear in p  and let b be the herbrand base constructed using b alone. define: 

where k* s  denotes the set of substates s' in k* such that  intuitively  c* consists of the set of least fixpoints of the horn clauses in ft applied to all possible combinations of ground atomic formulae that are constructible using the predicates in b. we then have the following result: 
theorem 1: 	let r be a set of horn clauses  and let q be a set of embedded implications. let c be the largest subset of c* that satisfies q. then c is a final kripke model for 	circum 1t p ;p . 
since we can also show that final kripke models are generic for queries in the form we can solve the query problem  1  by showing that is true in c. 
　in the remainder of this paper  we will investigate two ways to do this using certain additional assumptions about the form of q and r. as an illustration of our techniques  we will work with a single example that combines the two examples in section 1. let r be the following set of rules: 
	christmasblock 	 1  
1
　　note that we have written the circumscription axiom as a second-order universally-quantified embedded implication. alternative versions  using negation and second-order existential quantification  which are equivalent in classical logic  would not be equivalent intuitionistically. 
 1  
 1  
 1  
 1  
intuitively  rules  1 - 1  define the concept of a 'christmasblock'  and rules  1 - 1  define the concept of a stack of 'christmasblocks'. suppose we are told that there exists a stack of 'christmasblocks' in which block 'a' is above block 'b' and furthermore that 'a' and 'b' are painted green and red  respectively. does it follow that there is something green on something red  intuitively  the answer should be: yes. formally  we can pose this question by circumscribing the predicates 'christmasblock ' 'oncb' and 'abovecb' in rules  1  1   adding rule  1  to q  and then asking whether the following implication is entailed: 
		 1  
we will show how to solve this problem in the following two sections of the paper  using two different methods. 
1 	prototypical proofs 
in this section  we consider a class of inductive proofs in which the induction schema takes the form of an intuitionistic embedded implication. we can think of these proofs as having two parts: the first part is a prototypical proof  and it is guaranteed to exist whenever the query  is entailed by circum r p ;p . the second part involves the proof of an embedded implication with an embedded second-order universal quantifier  and it is conjectured to exist whenever the prototypical proof succeeds. although second-order intuitionistic logic is incomplete  in general  the fragment of second-order logic that we use to state the induction schema happens to have a complete proof procedure. this means that it is possible to automate the search for a solution to our sample problem  and to certain other similar problems. 
　first  note that rules  1 - 1  in our sample problem are nonrecursive horn clauses. for such rules  the solution is the same in intuitionistic logic as it is in classical logic  reiter  1; lifschitz  1 . let comp 1t  denote clark's predicate completion  clark  1 . we then have the following result  which is proven in  mccarty  1 : 
theorem 1: let r be a set of nonrecursive horn clauses. then circum r p ;p  is equivalent to comp r . 
　the remaining rules in our sample problem have a simple form  suggesting the following: 
definition 1: r is a linear recursive definition of the predicate a if it consists of: 
1. a horn clause with 'a x ' on the left-hand side and a conjunction of nonrecursive predicates on the right-hand side  and 
1. a horn clause that is linear recursive in a  


1 	logic programming 

theorem 1: 

theorem 1 tells us that inductive proofs are sound but not necessarily complete  while theorem 1 tells us that prototypical proofs are complete but not necessarily sound. together  these theorems sanction the strategy we illustrated in our example: try to find a prototypical proof first  and then use this proof to suggest a suitable induction schema. 
　our sample problem is still relatively simple  but we have constructed proofs of this sort for more difficult problems. in particular  we have applied our techniques to prove various properties of prolog programs  kanamori and fujita  1; elkan and mcallester  1 . for example  let 'append l m n ' be defined as usual. let 'reverse r * ' be defined as follows: 
reverse nil  nil  

we can then show that  reverse x y  rever1e y x  ' is entailed by the circumscription of 'append' and 'reverse' in this rulebase. for the details of this proof  see  mccarty  1 . 
1 	a d e c i s i o n p r o c e d u r e 
we have shown in theorem 1 that a certain class of induction schemata provides a sound inference procedure for circumscribed definite rules. furthermore  the structure of these schemata allows us to use a complete proof theory for second-order embedded implications in the inductive step of the proof. this raises the question: is the resulting proof theory for the circumscribed rulebase itself complete  we show in this section that it is not. in fact there can be no such proof theory  since the query problem will be shown to be not even semi-decidable. nevertheless  we will demonstrate that one can still find interesting classes of decidable queries. our results are significant since they show that  even in cases where the circumscription of a theory is not first-order equivalent  it is possible to decide certain broad classes of queries. we refer the reader to  van der meyden  1  for proofs of the results in this section. 
　for the remainder of this section we restrict our attention to rules r which contain only positive horn clauses without function symbols  i.e.  all programs are datalog programs  chandra and harel  1 . furthermore  we require that there be no repeated variables in the heads of rules.1 we consider the following restricted formulation of the query problem: 
		 1  
where d is a set of ground base and defined atoms  and is a closed positive existential formula in the base and defined predicates  i.e.  a formula constructed using only the operators  the proof of the following 
result is by an encoding of the containment problem for context-free languages: 
　　1  this last restriction is made to simplify the presentation only; our results still hold if it is removed. 
theorem 1; for arbitrary datalog rules r  sets of ground atoms d and positive existential queries  the problem d  circum 1l p ;p  is undecidable. 
　we will now show that the complement of the query problem is recursively enumerable. define an expansion of a defined atom a x  by r to be any set e x  of base atoms such that either 
1. e = { b 1   x ; b     . . .   b n   x ; b   } for some tuple b of new constants  and for some rule 

in r such that all the bi are base predicates  or 
1.  for some tuple b of new constants  and for some rule 

in r such that all the bi are base predicates  all the aj are defined predicates  and each ej x;y  is an expansion of aj x; y  by r. 
also  if a is a tuple of constants  then we say that e a  is an expansion of a  a  by r if e x  is an expansion of a x  by r. we write expandr a  for the set of expansions of a by r.. if d is a set of ground atoms in both base and defined predicates  then an expansion of d by r is any set of ground atoms obtained from d by replacing each defined atom a d by an expansion of a by r. 
　for example  let r consist of the rules  1 - 1 . then the set: 

is an expansion of d 	= 	{green a   abovecb a  b   red b }. 
　the following proposition shows that we may restrict attention to a denumerable set of models of a particular form when answering queries: 

   lemma 1 shows that the problem of deciding that a query is not entailed is semi-decidable  since it suffices to find a single expansion of d in which the query fails. it follows from this and theorem 1 that  is not a recur-
sively enumerable set. thus the techniques of section 1 can only provide sufficient conditions for answering queries. 
　in spite of these undecidability results  there exist broad classes of queries for which the query problem can be shown to be decidable  even in cases when the circumscription of r is not equivalent to a first-order theory. define a query to be basic if it contains occurrences of base predicates only. 

decidable for sets of atoms d and queries containing the predicate p as well as the base predicates. 
　these results are all consequences of a theorem of courcelle  concerning graph grammars. in general  we retain decidability when we permit in the query any predicate to which the rulebase gives a definition expressible in monadic second-order logic. unfortunately  it can be shown to be undecidable whether a rulebase defines a predicate expressible in monadic second-order logic  so we must be content with enumerating special cases  as above  if we wish to go beyond the class of basic queries. 
	1 	c o n c l u s i o n 
we have presented two approaches to answering queries in the presence of indefinite information  both of which are able to handle the  stack of christmas blocks  example. the reader may have wondered why  since the method of section 1 is a decision procedure  one would bother with the prototypical proofs of section 1  the reason is that the the decision procedure works for a smaller class of rules than the prototypical proofs. on the other hand  the price paid by the prototypical proofs 
for their ability to deal with a potentially larger set of examples is logical incompleteness. it would be interesting to determine the extent to which this incompleteness corresponds to the incompleteness of human reasoning when faced with indefinite information of comparable logical complexity. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 mccarty  1a  l.t. mccarty. clausal intuitionistic logic. i. fixed-point semantics. journal of logic programming  1 :1  1. 
 mccarty  1b  l.t. mccarty. clausal intuitionistic logic. ii. tableau proof procedures. journal of logic programming  1 :1  1. 
 mccarty  1  l.t. mccarty. computing with prototypes. technical report lrp-tr-1  computer science department  rutgers university  1. a preliminary version of this paper was presented at the bar ran symposium on the foundations of artificial intelligence  ramat gan  israel  june 1. 
 mccarty  1  l.t. mccarty. circumscribing embedded implications. in a. nerode et al.  editors  proceedings  first international workshop on logic programming and non-monotonic reasoning  page  forthcom-
ing . mit press  1. 
 van der meyden  1  r. van der meyden. recursively indefinite databases. in s. abiteboul and p.c. kanellakis  editors  proceedings of the third international conference on database theory  pages 1. springer lncs no. 1  1. 
　note: these references are truncated because of space limitations. a full list of 