 
we present a representational format for observed movements the representation has a temporal structure relating components of a single complex movement. we also present o x b o w   an unsupervised learning system  which constructs classes of these movements. empirical results indicate that the system builds abstract movement concepts with appropriate component structure allowing it to predict the latter portions of a partially observed movement. 
1 	introduction 
motor control is a necessary facet of an intelligent agent's interaction with the environment. until recently  this topic has been largely ignored. we are encouraged by the interest demonstrated by a number of recent efforts aimed at learning sequences of operators that can control effectors external to the learning agent  laird  hucka  yager  &: tuck  1; mason  christiansen  &: mitchell  
1; moore  1 . however  we believe that a general phenomenon in human motor behavior is that generation is limited by understanding; that skilled movement behavior must be understood or recognized before it can be generated. in this paper we present o x b o w   a system that acquires knowledge structures that facilitate the recognition of observed movements. this system is the recognition component of maeander  a larger model of motor-skill learning that also involves the generation of movements  iba & langley  1 . 
　we view o x b o w within the paradigm of concept formation  fisher & pazzani  in press   in that it is re-
quired to construct  concepts  for particular classes of movements it has experienced. the current work is a descendent of gennari's classit  1  and  in turn  of fisher's c o b w e b  1 . classit extended c o b web to deal with attributes having continuous values and o x b o w extends classit to deal with structured objects with differing numbers of components. the common thread in o x b o w   classit  and c o b w e b is the control structure of the learning algorithms and the operators used to modify the knowledge structures. also  they all use conditional probabilities in calculating the category utility function  gluck & corter  1 . this paradigm assumes that storing the probabilities for a 
'also affiliated with recom technologies. 
1 	learning and knowledge acquisition 
set of instances is sufficient to summarize the set and to distinguish among members of different classes. 
1 	the o x b o w system 
when discussing a system that learns from movements  one must necessarily consider the interface between the learning system and the environment where action occurs. in this paper we assume that this action is generated by a jointed limb  and that the positional information for each of the joints is available to the system. we assume that a sensory process observes continuous motion and parses this into a motor schema  described below . our parsing process is based on rubin and richards'  1  theory of elementary motion boundaries.1 we also assume that time is discretized at a suitably fine level of granularity. since in this paper we focus on learning to recognize movements  we do not address the motor interface that causes effectors in the environment to move according to stored representations of movement. however  the analog to the motor interface for our larger system  maeander  allows it to simulate the execution of stored movements in the  mind's eye . this provides the basis for the performance measures in the experiments discussed later. 
　given this framework for the system  the recognition task is: given a motor schema representing a parsed movement  find the class of previously stored schemas that has the most similar trajectory to the observed movement. learning involves updating and restructuring memory to facilitate this process; measuring performance involves determining the similarity between the indexed class and the observed movement. 
1 representing movements as probabilistic motor schemas 
　we define a motor schema to be a sequence of state descriptions that describe the status of the arm at particular times. in turn  a state description specifies the positions and velocities for each of the joints of an arm at a specific time  relative to the time of the movement . these state descriptions are within a two-dimensional 
cartesian frame with the origin located at the base of 
　　1iba and gennari  in press  provide a more detailed description of oxbow  including our parsing  performance  and learning mechanisms. 


figure 1. a pictoriai rendition of  a  a simple movement and  b  oxbow's representation of the associated motor schema. 

the arm. the sequence of state descriptions comprising a motor schema is temporally ordered according to the time values in each state description. 
　figure 1 shows a pictorial rendition of a movement observed in the environment along with a corresponding motor schema. the positions of the arm in figure 1 a  are sampled from equal time slices during the course of the movement. note that the movement shows the position of the arm at every time step. in contrast  motor schemas specify arm positions only at a few time steps for a given movement. thus  the schema shown in figure 1 b  represents the movement shown in figure 1 a   but only specifies information for the arm at three times. in our framework  movements and schemas are closely related. although movements occur in the environment  o x b o w classifies and stores the parsed form of movements - motor schemas. 
　when motor schemas are combined to form abstractions or generalizations  we think of the resulting structures as concepts. one way to represent concepts in this type of model is to use probabilities  smith &: medin  1 . a generalized motor schema includes a probability distribution for each attribute describing the state of the arm  as well as a probability for each entire state. that is  o x b o w stores the conditional probability distribution of an attribute given a particular state description  and stores the conditional probability of each state description given a particular schema concept. 
　given this format for representing motor schemas  these structures must be organized to allow retrieval of stored schemas. in o x b o w   motor schemas are organized into an 1s-a hierarchy. nodes in this hierarchy are partially ordered according to their generality  with concepts lower in the hierarchy being more specific than their ancestors. thus  the root node summarizes all instances that have ever been observed  terminal nodes often correspond to single instances  and intermediate nodes summarize clusters of observations. fisher and langley  1  review arguments for organizing probabilistic concepts in such a hierarchy. 
　it is important to note that our representation of motor schemas as a sequence of state descriptions implies a structure on schema concepts. each state description is viewed as  part of  the entire motor schema. this significantly complicates the concept formation task. as a. further complicating factor  two motor schemas will often have a different number of states. in partial response to this problem  o x b o w stores and organizes state descriptions in an internal hierarchy of state descriptions within each schema node. thus  each node in the schema hierarchy has its own private state hierarchy. the top level of this hierarchy represents the part-of relations between the multiple states and the schema as a whole. that is  the classes of states at the top level of the state hierarchy are the state descriptions comprising the motor schema and are ordered according to the values for the time attribute in each respective state description. 
　figure 1 shows a possible hierarchy of baseballpitching schemas. the leaf nodes of the tree represent the motor schemas from specific observed pitches. the node labeled as  overhand  represents a generalization of the three specific throws stored below it in the hierarchy. this generalization is also a motor schema  but instead of specific values  the generalization stores means and variances for each of the attributes in its state descriptions. looking more closely at the overhand schema in figure 1  we see the internal state hierarchy that captures the structure of the abstract schema. we also show the first state of this generalized motor schema where means and standard deviations have been stored for each of the attributes. these values summarize the states that have been classified together. now  let us turn to a description of how these structures are constructed and modified based upon experience. 
1 	forming movement concepts 
the performance task stated above is closely related to 
oxbow's learning task: given an experienced movement  modify the current knowledge base according to the resulting classification. movements are observed sequen-

tially and are not labeled; this corresponds to an incremental  unsupervised learning task. the distinction between performance and learning in oxbow  and similar systems  is slight and only serves to clarify a means for evaluating the overall system's ability to acquire and organize movement information. we will return to this in section 1; here we focus on the learning method. 
1.1 	t h e classification m e c h a n i s m 
   table 1 presents the basic o x b o w learning algorithm; at this level of description it is functionally equivalent to that used in fisher's  1  c o b w e b and gennari's  1  classit. in these concept formation systems  the classification and hierarchy formation processes are tightly coupled. upon encountering a new instance i  the system starts at the root and sorts the instance down the hierarchy  using an evaluation function  described below  to decide which action to take at each level. this recursive algorithm terminates when the instance has been recognized. this occurs either when the current node is a leaf  has no children   or when the evaluation function already has a sufficiently high value that further efforts are deemed unnecessary.1 when an instance has been recognized  the current node is returned as the classification value for the instance. 
   at a given node tv where the instance / is still unrecognized  the algorithm decides among four options. first  the instance is temporarily incorporated into a child of tv  one at a time. the resulting partitions are evaluated and the best is selected. second  the instance is placed in a new singleton class and this new partition is also selected. the third and fourth candidates generated by the merge and split operators are intended to allow the system to recover from poor hierarchies that may result from peculiar training orders; fisher  1  gives details on these operators. the algorithm uses its evaluation function to determine which of the resulting four partitions is  best   and then either continues by recursively classifying the chosen best  or stopping and 
1
　　this decision is based upon the recognition criterion described in gennari  1 . 
1 	learning and knowledge acquisition 
returning the current node as the classification whenever the instance is placed in a new child. 
1.1 	t h e e v a l u a t i o n f u n c t i o n 
   we have mentioned that o x b o w uses an evaluation function to determine the appropriate branch to sort new instances down during classification. since a major goal of concept formation is to let the agent categorize new experience and make predictions  the system employs category utility - an evaluation function that attempts to maximize predictive ability. gluck and corter  1  originally derived this measure from both game theory and information theory in order to predict basic-level effects in psychological experiments  and fisher  1  adapted it for use in his c o b w e b model of concept formation. the measure assumes that concept descriptions are probabilistic in nature  and it favors clusterings that maximize a tradeoff between intra-class similarity and inter-class differences. initially formulated for nominally valued domains  gennari  1  extended the equation to handle attributes with continuous values. in turn  we have extended the equation to handle representations where objects consist of differing numbers of components. this version of category utility for real-valued attributes and structured objects can be stated as 

where p ck  is the probability of class c  k is the number of classes at the current level of the hierarchy  is the probability of the j t h state description in ck  is the probability of the mth state description in the parent of the current partition  is the standard deviation of attribute i in the j t h state of the kth class  and  is the standard deviation for attribute i in the mth state of the parent node.1 
1
　　 the value of is undefined for a single instance with zero variance so an acuity parameter serves as the minimum variance. gennari  1  presents an empirical study of the this parameter's impact on performance. 
1.1 	incorporating motor schemas 	1 	the performance of oxbow 　every concept formation system must address the issue of how to create an abstraction from two items in this case a new instance and an existing class. the abstraction  or the result of incorporating a number of instances  allows useful predictions to be made in the future. because c o b w e b assumed that every instance had values for every attribute  incorporating a new instance was a simple matter of incrementing appropriate attribute-value counts in the concept node according to the values in the instance. classit extended this to allow objects made up of multiple components  but each had to have the same number. that is  there was a single structure for the objects in every class. the problem for oxbow is that motor schemas may have differing numbers of components  and neither c o b w e b or classit have satisfactory mechanisms for handling this variation of the task. in this situation  there is not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence between states from one schema to the next. therefore  it is not possible to uniquely associate the attributes  at the state description level  from one schema to another. 
　oxbow's solution to this correspondence problem uses category utility to form a hierarchy of state descriptions based only on the time attribute. by treating each state in a schema instance separately in this fashion  an effective mapping is established between states in the instance and states stored in memory. this mapping may be many-to-one or one-to-none.1 
　thus  the system classifies both schemas and states  using the same algorithm given in table 1  but with two important caveats. first  if the instance is a schema  then each of its states is incorporated in the hierarchy of state descriptions associated with the current schema node. but if the instance is a state  then there is no correspondence problem and the incorporation is done the same as in classit or cobweb. the second distinc-
tion is that if the instance is a state  then the evaluation function used in the algorithm is simplified. because we are interested in capturing the temporal structure that is present in the schema instances  only the time attribute is considered instead of summing over all the attributes to determine the score. however  all of the attributes that describe a state are updated when a new state is incorporated. 
　since schemas are made up of the top-level nodes in the state hierarchy  we may think of the first level of this hierarchy as capturing the part-of structure for the schema. the part-of relation refers to an outer context  in this case the entire motor schema. because oxbow's motor schemas are presented as parsed structures that are related temporally  it can break the schema into its parts  treat the parts separately  and then pop back up to the context of the schema where the work of matching the parts has already been done. 
1
　　a one-to-none mapping occurs when a state in the instance does not correspond to any existing states in the concept and a new state is added to the schema concept. 
o x b o w provides a method for representing jointed limb movements and for acquiring a concept hierarchy of movement concepts. naturally  before we can make conclusions about the usefulness of such a system we need to know how well the system operates and improves on some performance task. in this section we present our performance measure and several experiments demonstrating that o x b o w can recognize  and improve its recognition of  observed movements. 
　the performance task for o x b o w is to classify a newly presented movement given some existing concept hierarchy. as discussed above in the context of learning  this involves associating the new instance with a node in the hierarchy representing previously observed movements that are most similar to the new movement. in humans  classification and learning occur simultaneously. however  we have implemented o x b o w to allow classification without modifications to the concept hierarchy. that is  we use a trimmed version of the learning algorithm which does not consider tree modification operators and which does not alter the contents of the nodes in the tree. 
　we evaluate the system's performance on the above task by comparing a test instance to the movement described at the node of the schema hierarchy where the test instance is classified. this comparison is performed by finding the euclidian distance between corresponding joints of the arm at a given time. we average over the joints of the arm and over the testing movement period. the error scores we report in the following experiments reflect this averaging over joints and simulated time slices. the units are for an arm with two joints operating in a reachable workspace of 1 unit radius. 
1 	experiment 1: learning single movement concepts 
recall that oxbow's representation of movements  as schemas  consists of parts  states  and the temporal relationships among them. the learning algorithm considers schemas first as a set of individual states at the state hierarchy level and then as a sequence at the schema hierarchy level. one of the first things we should verify is that the inner treatment - the determination of the part-of structure for the movement concept at large is behaving appropriately. therefore  in our first experiment we trained the system on instances from a single concept  so as to control for possible confusions between movements of different types. this should also let us determine how sensitive the system is to variance in the observed data. 
　to this end  we created four artificial movements that correspond to a slap  a throw  a wave  and a salute. observed movements in this experiment  and those following  were produced by motor schemas instantiated from the templates. the time  position  and velocity values in a motor schema used for training were drawn from normal distributions given in a template. we adjusted the variance of the distributions by a scalar to produce data sets with different levels of variability. 
in this experiment  a single run tested one movement 


figure 1. a comparison between asymptotic error rates when trained on single movement types  and the complexity of input data at different levels of variation. 
type over 1 blocks with 1 learning trials in each block. we repeated runs at four different levels of variation for each of the four movement types and measured the system's performance after every other learning trial. the performance metric compares the prototype with the schema stored at the root node of the schema hierarchy. because there is only one movement type presented in a run  and the root represents the summary over all the observed instances  this comparison lets us control for possible retrieval problems. the results indicated that error decreased as a function additional movement observations for each of the schema types at all levels of variation. however  we note that the asymptotic levels increase as a function of variability. these results indicate that o x b o w has trouble finding the central tendency in domains with high variance. because the data comes from a single prototype  we would expect that the prototype would be recoverable. this could either be due to problems determining the values within the states of the learned motor schemas  finding the correct structure of states themselves  or a combination of both. 
   to help clarify this issue  figure 1 shows the asymptotic error levels for each movement type as a function of the structural complexity inherent in the data. a d ditionally  it shows how the asymptote and complexity changes for the different levels of variation in the data. we define complexity as the number of states in a parsed description of an observed movement. for a given movement type and a single level of noise  we computed the average complexity over 1 randomly generated movement instances. 
   from this graph we see that changing the variability in the generated movements does not cause large changes in the structure of the parsed movements. we can conclude that the increased asymptote levels as a function of increased variation are not a result of a failure to determine the appropriate p a r t - o f structure for the movement concept  but rather to problems determining the correct values within the states. we are looking at ways to improve this situation. however  this figure also reveals an unexpected result - that increasing complexity tends to decrease asymptotic error level. this non-intuitive 1 learning and knowledge acquisition 

figure 1. learning curves when trained on instances from all four classes at four levels of input variation. 
result is not without precedent; for instance  vision researchers found that more complexity in the environment made things easier to disambiguate. this would suggest that oxbow could scale up to more complex environments and movements. we are currently considering these issues further to determine where to assign credit and blame  and how extensible our methods are. 
   overall  this experiment indicates that o x b o w is able to capture the p a r t - o f structure found in observed movements when faced with only a single type  but that its ability to form accurate state descriptions is influenced by variability. now let us turn to the larger problem of acquiring movement concepts from observed data when presented with instances of more than one type. 
1 	e x p e r i m e n t 1 : l e a r n i n g m u l t i p l e m o v e m e n t 	c o n c e p t s 
if we had first tested o x b o w on acquiring multiple concepts simultaneously  we would not have known whether performance errors were caused by confusions between categories when classifying an observed movement  by problems identifying the appropriate p a r t - o f structure for a particular node in the hierarchy  or both. the previous study established a baseline for comparison. we can expect that errors above and beyond those reported in the previous section are a result of classification errors. 
   to study such errors  we ran a second experiment in which o x b o w observed movements from all four of the classes  each with an equal likelihood. we presented 1 training instances  from which the system constructed its hierarchy of movement concepts. after every other training instance  we stopped learning and tested the system's performance as described above. we repeated this experiment at the same four levels of variation in the movement generators. figure 1 shows the average error  over the four movement types   again as a function of experience and variance level. the errors are averaged over ten blocks of 1 training instances with random orders of the movement types. 
   the figure gives some indication of how well o x b o w is distinguishing between observed movements of different types  even though after 1 training instances the 

tabie 1. asymptotic error rates for two training modes 

system has only seen  on average  one fourth that many training instances of each type. table 1 shows a comparison between the performance after 1 training instances from figure 1  under mixed training  and the performance level after seven training instances in figure 1  under separate training. this reveals an interaction between the training method  mixed/separate  and the variability in the domain; increased variability has a much greater impact on error when learning multiple concepts than when learning single concepts. in experiment 1  we were able to control for retrieval errors because only a single movement type was given. in this experiment  we relied on oxbow's retrieval mechanism and therefore increased errors could be attributable to misclassifications during either training  retrieval  or both. one option to clarify this would be to repeat experiment 1 and rely on oxbow's retrieval mechanism  but another option is to evaluate the retrieval mechanism in isolation as we report in the next section. 
1 	experiment 1: predicting unseen movement 
in the previous experiments  the performance measure corresponded to what has been termed recognition in the psychological literature. that is  the complete prototype of a particular movement class was classified and a comparison was made across the entire duration of the movement. in real life  one would more likely observe a partial movement and need to predict the continuation of the movement. furthermore  this puts a strain only on the retrieval mechanism  allowing an assessment of its performance. 
　thus  in a third experiment  we trained o x b o w as described before  but we altered the performance mechanism slightly. when testing  we presented only a portion of the prototype movement and we measured error over the remaining unobserved movement. because we average over time when determining error  we can compare errors among different ratios of observed movement to predicted movement  even though the number of predictions changes. any differences in errors will be attributable to classification problems during retrieval because the knowledge base is the same for each level of observation at a given point in training. 
　this formulation of the task suggests a prediction: as less of the movement is observed  classification should become more difficult and mistakes should lead to greater measured error. simply stated  the more one is able to observe  the less uncertainty there should be about succeeding movement. figure 1 shows the learning curves from an experiment in which we varied the portion of the movement to be predicted. we fixed the variation level at 1 and averaged the results over ten blocks of 1 training instances each. 

figure 1. learning curves showing error while varying the amount of the test movement that is missing and must be predicted. 
　the figure shows that when o x b o w is predicting 1% of the movement  observing only the first 1% of the movement  the errors are consistently the highest  except very early in training  when not all the movement types have yet been seen . however  there is little difference between observing 1% of the movement and observing 1%. this result suggests that the system is not adversely affected by having less information available for classification except in extreme cases like the 1% condition. this leads to another prediction: as the training data becomes more variable  the system should require larger portions of the test movement in order to prevent the error from increasing. we intend to test this prediction in future work. 
　more important  this experiment holds other factors constant while varying the amount of information in the test movement  thus indicating the sensitivity of the classification process during retrieval. the results suggest that oxbow is not readily making misclassifications when given partial structures in the input. again  this points towards problems with the mechanism for storing state descriptions when learning from new experience. we are pursuing avenues to clearly establish and to improve this situation. 
1 	discussion 
we designed the o x b o w system to address issues in both concept formation and the recognition of motor behaviors. with respect to the first area  we must conclude that although o x b o w presents a novel approach to acquiring structured concepts  it has two drawbacks. although the system shows significant improvement when learning multiple concepts  the interaction effect in experiment 1 shows that o x b o w has difficulties forming generalized motor schemas from schemas having significant variation among them. second  the natural extension to objects with multiple levels of structure would require prohibitive amounts of memory and processing. however  we believe that the significant structural aspect of representing movements is timing information  so that only a single level of components is necessary in this domain. with respect to motor behavior  o x b o w 

represents the first system that specifically addresses the recognition of movements  so it is difficult to asses its weaknesses in this area. however  the current implementation is sensitive to the values in the state descriptions with respect to scale and rotation of the observed action. we have several ideas on a normalization mechanism to address these problems and do not view them as fundamental flaws. 
　in addition to extending the implementation to normalize the representation of movements for differences in scale and rotation  we plan to apply oxbow  as a movement recognition system  to the task of signature recognition. because our approach is intimately tied to movements and not to static pattern recognition  we think there are potential advances in this direction. there also is a direct application of movement recognition in domains where humans and robots are working together; the artificial agent should be able to infer goals and plans held by the human from observing and recognizing her actions. following on our efforts at modeling human motor behavior  iba k langley  1   we seek to connect oxbow's predictions about movement recognition to the psychological literature on this subject. as a method for concept formation  oxbow suggests a connection between is-a and part-of relations by using a concept formation mechanism to extract the structure of a composite concept. we want to analyze this connection to determine its implications for concept formation in domains with more complex structure. as part of the ongoing experimentation mentioned in the previous section  we also intend to compare o x b o w with other approaches to forming structured concepts. 
   in closing  o x b o w makes an important contribution to the area of concept formation; it provides an interesting approach to the problem of acquiring concepts from objects composed of parts. the experiments indicated that the system was able to extract appropriate part-of structures  but it was not immune to confusions in domains with high variability. more important  as a motor skill system  o x b o w provides an approach to representing  recognizing  and organizing motor skills that are observed by an agent. in addition  the method is flexible with respect to environmental characteristics such as the number of joints in an arm or the number of arms operating in concert. furthermore  the system's representation and organization carries over smoothly from recognition to generation of motor skills  iba & langley  1 . we hope that this effort will contribute to the growing interest in motor control  but also that it will spark new interest  in treating motor behavior as a broader two-part process - recognition and control. 
acknowledgements 
we thank j. allen  j. gennari  p. langley  k. thompson  j. bresina  p. friedland  and g. iba; each contributed by one or more of:  a  participating in discussions that led to many of the ideas here   b  commenting on an earlier draft  and  c  providing assistance formatting the figures and tables. 
1 	learning and knowledge acquisition 
