 
an approach to generation system design is described which supports maximal expression of commonalities across languages. within this approach it becomes natural to represent inherently multilingual grammars and semantics. the approach rests on the linguistic notion of functional similarity and difference: by capturing the functions languages need to perform  we achieve a level of linguistic description which carries across languages far more effectively than accounts that are structurally based. we demonstrate the general principles  implementation  and benefits of the approach with respect to three unrelated languages: english  chinese  and japanese. 
1 	the task of multi-language generation 
despite the growing need to develop text generation systems capable of producing texts from the same knowledge source in more than one language  most major generation systems remain mono-lingual: there has also been very little work on extensible multi-language gen-
eration that seeks an architecture within which the work involved in adding a new language may be minimized. reliance upon an appropriate typological theory of language  however  makes it possible to build a system where different languages can both converge and diverge in terms of knowledge source  semantics  grammar  etc. in this paper  we describe such an approach to generation system design  showing how it supports maximal expression of commonalities across languages. within this approach it becomes natural to represent inherently multilingual grammars and semantics that provide a basis for the rapid development of new grammar and semantic components. the approach rests on the linguistic notion of fundtional a /similarity and difference: by capturing first the functions that languages need to perform  we achieve a level of linguistic description which carries across languages far more effectively than accounts that are structurally based. 
   the paper demonstrates the general principles  benefits  and implementation of the approach we propose with respect to three languages that are unrelated according to structural typologies and language families: 
natural language 
department of linguistics 
university of sydney 
sydney  n.s.w. 1 australia 
english  chinese  and japanese. we will see that despite the superficial differences between them  the communicative tasks that all three need to achieve in fact enforce a degree of commonality of description that can be used to support maximal sharing of linguistic resources. 
1 	linguistic description based on function: a monolingual example 
in order to build a theoretically sound system based on a general  typologically informed account of multilingualism  we have begun a collaborative research effort that takes a well-established english text generation system  the penman system  under development at usc/isi since 1   as its base. this choice is motivated by the functional-orientation of linguistic description within the system. our basic assumption is that commonality across languages is functional in the first instance  not structural or realizational: i.e.  functionality has to be preserved across languages  but structural realizations may very well differ. to begin our description of the multilingual system  therefore  we first illustrate the kind of linguistic description which provides a basis for multilingual!ty: i.e.  the functionally oriented description of the nigel systemic-functional grammar  matthiessen  1  for english developed within the penman system. systemic-functional grammars have the required property of representing function as theoretically prior to structure and this  as we shall see  is the crucial perspective which makes multilingual descriptions practicable. 
   a systemic-functional grammar captures grammatical variation in terms of minimal grammatical choices between grammatical features. these choice points are organized into an interconnected network representing the interdependencies between possible grammatical feature selections. the grammar of a language is the complete statement of these interdependencies and their consequences for structural realization: this is the systemic network from which the general theory takes its name. crucially  the principle motivations for including features are functional rather than structural. grammatical structures are only arrived at by making these abstract functionally motivated choices of features in the network: each feature selected can then add structural constraints to the specification of the linguistic unit being described. 

　more formally  a systemic network representing functional organization is a directed acyclic graph with labelled arcs whose nodes correspond to grammatical choice points; these are called systems. the outward directed labelled arcs denote the terms of the system. each system has two or more terras  or output features  which at the stratum of grammar represent minimal grammatical alternations. in addition  the inward directed arcs for each system denote an entry condition which determines the paradigmatic context in which the alternation represented by the system is relevant. in general  the entry condition is defined as a boolean expression over the possible input are labels. 
　as a particular example area  we consider the resources of mood in english grammar: that is  the area of the grammar concerned with speech act: questioning  asserting  etc. figure 1 shows a simplified extract from the mood fragment of nigel. here we can see that there are three grammatical systems mood type  indicative type  and interrogative type. the structural consequences of the grammatical features are shown in boxes underneath the feature which controls their application. thus  we can gloss this network fragment as follows. the speaker must make an abstract choice between whether s/he wishes to make an indicative clause or an imperative clause; if an indicative clause is chosen  then several structural constraints apply  i.e.: the insertion of functionally labelled constituents mood  subject  and finite  and the structural positioning of subject and finite as subconstituents of mood. then  the speaker must go on to make an abstract functional choice between 'declarative' and 'interrogative'; if a declarative clause is selected  then the structural constraint that the constituent labelled as the subject must precede the constituent labelled as the finite applies. finally  iff the speaker had instead selected 'interrogative'  then s/he must also go on to select between 'polarity' and 'element1; 'polarity' calls for the structural constraint that the finite precede the subject  giving rise to yes/no questions: did he go    'element' calls for the structural constraint that there is a functional element labelled wh  and that this element occurs first - i.e.  is conflated with the constituent theme which always comes first in english clauses  giving rise to wh-questions: where did he 
go  .1 
   each abstract choice point in the grammar network also has a decision procedure associated with it that decomposes the minimal grammatical alternation into the minimal semantic distinctions necessary for motivating that alternation. the decision procedures are called choosers and the individual semantic alternations are called inquiries  mann  1 . although our account of multilinguality extends into these areas also  space precludes their discussion here. we shall for present purposes simply take the level of inquiries as given and note 
1
　　for a more complete account of the nigel grammar of english and the linguistic motivations for its descriptions  see  halliday  1  matthiessen  1 . for an almost complete account of the use to date of systemic-functional linguistics in  monolingual  text generation  see  matthiessen and bateman  1l . 

figure 1: grammar fragment for english speech acts 
that the set of semantic distinctions for the mood systems are: command-q  statement-q  question-q  and polarity-variable-q; these may for the purposes of this paper be seen as classifying speech acts sernantically in the obvious way suggested by their names wr see something of their use below in section 1. 
1 the move to multilinguality: chinese and japanese 
although the nigel treatment of mood is part of a grammar of english  its functional orientation is not   in fact  particularly english-specific. it seems very likely that all languages have evolved grammatical resources for establishing and maintaining symbolic interaction - i.e.  for engaging in dialog and this basic dialogic resource can be understood more generally in terms of the metaphor of exchange  halliday  1 . 
　given this level of abstraction  it is not surprising that many other languages also make use of this functional organization. in fact  we can up to a point use identical system networks fragments for chinese and japanese also. all three languages contrast  for example  declarative clauses with polarity interrogative ones. it is only when we come to more specific  or delicate  areas of functional potential that the languages begin to differ: whereas en-
glish stops in delicacy at polarity interrogative clauses  chinese and japanese provide further options. for chinese  the speaker's expectation as to the answer to the polarity interrogative may be neutral  'tag' interrogative  or neutral/biased  'particle' interrogative   li and thompson  1  section 1 ; and the interrogative tag may be either clause-medial or clause-final. thus  in addition to simple polarity interrogative1 just  chinese  for example  provides the following further  more delicate functional distinctions:1 
　　1 there are  of course  further subtypes and distinctions: this is the case for almost all of the examples we give in this paper. our purpose here is  however  to make the general principles and mechanisms clear rather than to provide exhaustive accounts. 
bateman  et al. 

　similar types of extensions in options are provided by japanese. furthermore  japanese offers increased delicacy beyond the features 'declarative' and 'element'. the functions of these areas are as follows. in addition to giving information  'declarative'   a speaker of japanese must also indicate whether s/he is the original source of that information  'originating'  or not  'nonoriginating1 : i.e.  if the information was obtained from some other source  e.g.  heard on the radio or generally rumored  then this must be overtly indicated. this is done by adding the expression sou-desu/da following the main process of the clause. the latter component of this expression is the copula verb 'to be' and it is this that carries the 'interpersonal deictic center'  idc  of the clause: i.e.  the part of the clause that carries statements concerning the social distance between the interlocutors  near: da; not near: desu . also  in addition to demanding information concerning a particular element  'element'   a speaker of japanese must also cither leave the possibilities for that element unrestricted 
 'open'   which is equivalent to a simple wh-question in english  or restrict the possible fillers of that element to a determinate set  'restricted' : 

the increased functionality beyond polarity is similar for both chinese and japanese  although the more delicate variance between final or medial tags is not available for japanese. given the areas of convergence and divergence of functionalities we have now seen  it is possible to present a combined  multilingual grammatical system network for mood that covers english  chinese  and japanese; this is shown in figure 1. here we can clearly see the sharing of areas of grammatical description. 
   while english  chinese  and japanese thus have a number of mood systems in common  the various options in these systems are tactically different: that is  they are realized in different ways in the three languages. for example  in english the contrast between a 'declarative' and a 'polarity'-interrogative is realized by the mood element  that is  by the combination of subject and finite; specifically  'declarative' is realized by 'subject before finite'  as in he has  and 'polarity' is realized by 'finite before subject'  as in has he. however  chinese does not have a mood element consisting of subject and finite; the contrast between 'declarative' and 'polarity' is thus not realized by variation within such an element. rather  the contrast is realized by the presence or absence of a special mood tag or particle; specifically  it is the 'polarity' interrogative that is marked by either a mood tag or a mood particle  depending on the type of 'polarity' interrogative  whereas in 'declarative'  there is no presence of mood tag or mood particle. japanese acts 
natural language 
in this respect very similarly to chinese; it does not have a mood element and also realizes the contrast between 'declarative' and 'polarity'  in fact all 'interrogatives'  by the deployment of a mood particle  ka . now  since the grammatical theory separates the functional  strategic part of the grammar from the realizational  tactic aspect  stating these three sets of realizations separately is quite straightforward. 
　the realization statements for the three languages are tabulated in figure 1; an example of their use is given in section 1 
1 c o m p u t a t i o n a l i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of m u l t i l i n g u a l s y s t e m i c n e t w o r k s 
in this section we briefly describe the computational implementation of the multilingual environment for grammar description that we rely on to express generalizations of the kind illustrated in the previous section. to add the ability to define multilingual grammar components  we have extended the monolingual grammar definition notation provided by the penman system. figure 1 shows the current internal monolingual definition of the indicative type grammatical system used above: the definition simply linearizes the information given graphically in the network notation; entry conditions for the system are given as a boolean expression over grammatical features  in this case simply 'indicative'  under the slot : inputs and the output terms of the system  i.e.  the grammatical features that are at issue for choice  along with their respective structural realizations  are given in a list under the slot : outputs. the value of the : chooser slot determines where to locate the decision procedure  or chooser  responsible for selecting purposefully between the grammatical features of the system in the context of a determinate text need. 
   we extend this definitional notation for system networks by allowing conditionalization according to language of all or some of the inputs  outputs  realization statements  and choosers. language conditions are given as disjunctions over the languages for which the grammatical system definition is to hold specified by the keyword :variety. these disjunctions may be nested and cumulatively restrict the language applicability of the conditionalized components. we also allow conditionalization of entire systems by introducing a : variety slot for the definition as a whole 1 
1
　　we use the term : variety rather than  e.g.  :language  to draw attention to language variety both across languages and within individual languages. functional variety  or reg-


figure 1: multilingual mood network for english  chinese  and japanese 

figure 1: multilingual realization options for speech function 
bateman  et al. 


　figure 1 shows example multilingual internal definitions required for some of our chinese  japanese and english mood systems given above. the first system  indicative-type  is applicable to all languages covered  but only has structural consequences in english and japanese. the second applies only to chinese and japanese. this means that all languages will have grammatical features such as 'interrogative' and declarative'  but only chinese and japanese have the features 'tag' 
and 'particle'.1 
　given this implementation  we can now generate clauses in multiple languages given a single knowledge base specification - as long as the information required by the distinct languages is common or more specific information than necessary is available. when divergent information is required in distinct languages  as  for example  occurs in our english  chinese  and japanese experiment when one language makes more delicate distinctions than another  then further inferencing may be required in order to obtain sufficient information for 
ister  is also being addressed using this extended framework  although this goes beyond the scope of the present paper. 
1
　　 for more details of the currently implemented algorithms  see  bateman et a/.  1  
natural language 
guiding generation. this can be seen more concretely in the following  where we provide an input specification that spans our three example languages. the input specification is the standard one used by penman - the sentence plan language  spl:  kasper  1  . 
　the partial spl input specification1 shown in figure 1 states that there is a process t of semantic type f i n i s h with an actor p of semantic type person and an actec a of semantic type assignment. in addition  a set of inquiry and inquiry responses concerning speech acts are present. the generation process then proceeds as follows. the general multilingual network is entered and when decisions concerning mood are made  the grammatical features 'indicative'  'interrogative'  and 'polarity' are made irrespective of which language is being generated. since no language restrictions are given outside of the realization statements for the definitions of these systems  there is no difference internally in the representation of these systems to the state of affairs in the monolingual penman generator. the inquiry specifications in the spl  i.e.  :command-q  :statement-q  :question-q  and :polarity-variable-q  are sufficient to motivate grammatical feature selection. naturally  however  depending on which language is being generated  distinct sets of realization statements will have been collected. the pool of constraints following selection of these three grammatical features is as follows for each language: 

this simply follows the constraints as specified according to grammatical feature and language in figure 1. 
　subsequently  however  different states of affairs hold in the three languages. if the language is english  there are no further systems to consider; if  however  the language is chinese or japanese  then further options must be resolved. for example  if the :expectation-q inquiry  which we use to motivate the grammatical alternation under polarity type: section 1  calls for the grammatical feature 'particle' to be selected  the realizational constraints added are: 

   combining these particular contributions of constraints with those that are generated by the other components of the grammar network for each of the three languages  i.e.  those concerned with tense  aspect  process types  participants  lexical selection  etc.  we obtain the very different clause structures shown in figure 1. thus  we can see how multiple generation possibilities which differ widely in structural properties can be generated from a single semantic specification and with a single multilingual network. 
　　1 this is partial in that we have omitted much information that is necessary for generation in any language but which is not central to the discussion here. 


figure 1: distinct resultant structures for the input specification 
1 	conclusions 
our trial languages  english  chinese and japanese are typologically very different structurally. for instance  japanese has fairly elaborate verb structure  whereas chinese does not; japanese is classified as an sov language  but english and chinese are basically svo  while german is sov only in 'dependent' clauses. however  we have now illustrated how such languages can share systemic potential as well as diverge within a system network. we used genetically unrelated languages in order to show that the crucial criterion for grasping commonality is functionality. it can be noted that already for the restricted area of mood grammar  the functional viewpoint allows groupings of languages along dimensions of similarity and dissimilarity where a structural typology would not have suggested a basis for comparison. it should also be clear that many further languages could be added without substantial alteration: the important observations to make are that resources of a more general nature are shared and diversification in function across languages only appears later  at more delicate levels in the network  and that functional organization differs less than syntagmatic organization. 
ture and language  volume 1. frances pinter  london  1.  open linguistics series . 
 halliday  1  michael a.k. halliday. an introduction to functional grammar. edward arnold  london  
1. 
 kasper  1  robert t. k asper. a flexible interface for linking applications to penman's sentence generator. in proceedings of the darpa workshop on speech and natural language  1. available from 
usc/information sciences institute  marina del rey  ca. 
 li and thompson  1  charles n. li and sandra thompson. a reference grammar of mandarin chinese. university of california  california  1. 
 mann  1  william c. mann. the anatomy of a systemic choice. discourse processes  1. also available as usc/information sciences institute  research report isi/rr-1  1. 
 matthiessen and bateman  1  christian m.i.m matthiessen and john a. bateman. text generation and systemic-functional linguistics: experiences from english and japanese. frances pinter  london  1. 
 matthiessen  1  christian m.i.m. matthiessen. the systemic framework in text generation: nigel. in james d. benson and william s. greaves  editors  
systemic perspectives on discourse  volume 1. ablcx  norwood  new jersey  1. 
 matthiessen  1  christian m.i.m. matthiessen. lexicogrammatical cartography: english systems. technical report  university of sydney  linguistics department  1. ongoing expanding draft. 

