confirmations and joint action* 
philip r. cohen 
artificial intelligence center sri international 
menlo park  ca  usa 1 
hector j. levesquet 
dept. of computer science 
university of toronto 

a b s t r a c t 
   we argue that current plan-based theories of discourse do not by themselves explain prevalent phenomena in even simple task-oriented dialogues. the purpose of this paper is to show how one difhcult-to-explain feature of these dialogues  confirmations  follows from the joint or team nature of the underlying task. specifically  we review the concept of a joint intention and we argue that the conversants in a task-oriented dialogue jointly intend to accomplish the task. from this basis  we derive the goals underlying the pervasive use of confirmations observed in a recent experiment. we conclude with a discussion on generalizing the analysis presented here to characterize dialogue itself as a joint activity. 
1 	introduction 
this paper is concerned with analyzing features of communication that arise during joint or team activities. specifically  we discuss the origin of two types of confirmations: confirmations of successful fulfillment of requests  and of referent identification. we show how the same underlying principles  namely the joint nature of the partners' activity  gives rise to the goals underlying both types of speech acts. to make this precise  we examine data from a study of task-oriented dialogues  provide a formal analysis of joint action  describe the subjects' task in the formalism  and then derive the goals that we claim give rise to the confirmations. 
   both types of confirmation  as well as requests for them  occur repeatedly in the task-oriented dialogues for assembling a toy water pump studied in  1  1 . first  successful satisfaction of each request from an expert to an apprentice was nearly always confirmed with utterances such as  got it     o k     or  done.  for example  1 
   *thi1 paper was supported by a contract from atr international to sri international  by a gift from the systems development foundation  and by a grant from the natural 
sciences and engineering research council of canada. the second author also wishes to thank the department of computer science and the center for the study of language and information at stanford university where he was a visitor during the preparation of this paper. 
+ fellow of the canadian institute for advanced research dialogue fragments are quoted verbatim from transcrip-
e x p : and attach the pink thing so it covers the hole in the middle. 
a p p r :  pause  got it. one way-valve. we're all set. 
the confirmation clearly indicates that the apprentice thinks he has successfully assembled the relevant part  and not simply that the request was understood or would be complied with. similarly  confirmations of referential understanding  including many so-called  back-channel  utterances  such as   m m - h m m   or  yeah   were also frequent. for example  
e x p :  okay  i want you to take the largest tube  or actually 
it's the largest piece of anything  that has two openings on the side -a p p r : yeah e x p : - and threads on the bottom. a p p r : yeah. these two categories  confirmation of successful action and of successful referent identification  accounted for 1% of all confirmations in the telephone dialogues. when confirmations were slow or absent in these dialogues  experts often explicitly requested them. for example  requests for both types of confirmation can be found in the following fragment: 
e x p : and stick it on the en-onto the uh spout coming out the side. 
you see that  a p p r : yeah  okay e x p : you got that on  	okay  a p p r : yeah. overall  1% of the verbal interaction in telephone mode was spent eliciting and issuing confirmations  with an average rate of one confirmation every 1 seconds. 
   clearly  confirmations and requests for them are such a crucial component of dialogue success  in this task and many others  that any adequate theory of dialogue should be able to explain why and where they should occur. however  no current plan-based theories of dialogue or speech act theories do so.1 essentially  the reason for 
tions from the study  but with emphasis added for clarity. 
1
　　because space precludes an extensive discussion  we will assume the reader is familiar with those theories. if not  please see  for example   1  1  1  1 . 
cohen and levesque 
this failure is that such theories do not tell us when the goals underlying such speech acts would arise. 
　to be more specific  how would plan-based theories of dialogue fashioned after the allen and perrault model  attempt to account for the apprentice's confirmations and the expert's requests for them  essentially  there are three possible routes: first  the apprentice's goal of attaining mutual belief of successful action  which would lead to one kind of confirmation  could be added to the semantics of a request. thus  in addition to conveying what action the speaker wants the addressee to perform  a request would also convey that the speaker wants the outcome of the requested action to become mutually believed. since these plan-based theories required illocutionary act recognition  1  1   if a request were recognized as part of the expert's plan  so too would his goal of attaining a mutual belief  or perhaps  just a belief  that the requested action has been performed. then  by helpful goal adoption  the goal of attaining mutual belief of successful action would be adopted by the apprentice. this augmentation of the meaning of requesting might handle the problem  but no argument has been given on independent grounds for doing so. 
　second  in the course of attempting to recognize the expert's higher-level plan  such a goal might be inferred to be a precondition to some subsequent action  and helpful goal adoption would transfer the speaker's goal for attaining mutual belief to the addressee. but  in general  an addressee might be able to infer only that the speaker was going to do something based on the outcome of a requested action  but not what that action was. in the plan-recognition models under discussion  such vague plans are not representable. still  in the task-oriented telephone dialogue case  one would expect the apprentice to confirm success  or report trouble  even in cases where no specific plan can be attributed to the speaker. 
　the most promising possible explanation is to use  expectations  about the conversant' goals. in other words  there would be expectations that the apprentice would already have the goals of attaining mutual belief of the result of the requested actions. this approach may indeed work  if the notion of expectation is handled properly  but it begs the question - where would such expectations come from  this is in fact the question we are trying to answer. 
　regarding the analysis of expectations per se  if one were to describe expectations in the allen and perrault model in terms of mental states  rather than in terms of data structures  they would be mutual beliefs that the conversants have a given set of goals. in the case of these task-oriented dialogues  it would be mutually believed that the apprentice has the standing goal of making public the outcome of any requested actions. but the proper mental state characterization of such expected goals cannot be based solely on mutual beliefs because those beliefs could be revised: if the apprentice did not do what was expected  the expert could simply assume his own beliefs  and hence the mutual beliefs  were wrong. hence  the expert's expectation would disappear. without further stipulation that the expert also wants to attain this state of mutual belief  no prediction could be made that 
1 	natural language 
the expert would have the goals leading to a request for confirmation  which frequently occurred in such circumstances in the corpus. but  such a stipulation would be insufficient as simple goals or desires can be changed too easily. 
　both parties should not merely predict the apprentice will have the goal to attain mutual belief of successful action  they should be committed to his having it - the apprentice is supposed to confirm  and the expert can hold him to it. 1 these requirements on the apprentice arise  we argue  because both parties jointly intend to engage in the task. thus  we are claiming that to characterize the nature of many situation-specific expectations properly  one needs an account of joint intention. 
　in an earlier papers  1  1   we defined and explained the concepts of joint commitment and intention parallel to our treatment of individual commitment and intention . in those papers  we showed how the adoption of joint commitments and intentions by agents entails their having individual commitments and intentions to do their parts of the collective activity. here  the theory of joint intention is only briefly summarized. then  a model of the subjects' task as a joint activity is provided  and the theory is applied to explain the origin of the goals underlying the pervasive use of confirmations. finally  we discuss extending the theory to handle dialogue more generally as a joint activity. we now proceed to describe formally what is meant here by joint commitments and 
joint intentions. 
   1 t h e f o r m a l i s m 
our account of individual and joint commitment and intention is formulated in a modal language of belief  goal  action  and time. due to space limitations  we can only sketch some of the features of the formalism  and only the assumptions and general properties that are needed in the linguistic application. 
　in addition to the usual connectives of a first-order language with equality  we have formulas  bel x p  and  goal x p  to say that x has p as a belief and goal respectively  and  mb x y p  to say that x and y mutually believe that p holds;  know x p  and  mk x y p  are used for knowledge and mutual knowledge  respectively. to talk about actions  we use  done x 1 ...x n a    doing xi...x  a   and  does x 1 ...x n a  to say that a sequence of events describable by an action expression a was just done by the agents xi  is being done now  or will be done next  respectively. an action expression here is built from variables ranging over sequences of events using the constructs of dynamic logic: a;b is action composition; a|b is nondeterministic choice; a||b is concurrent occurrence of a and b; p  is a condition; and finally  a* is repetition. the usual programming constructs like if/then actions and while loops can easily be formed from these.1 to deal with time  we use  earlier p   
   1  a similar situation arises in the train station domain . patrons do not simply believe that the clerk will answer questions about trains  they know he is supposed to do so. 
   1  test actions occur frequently in our analysis  yet are potentially confusing. the expression p ;a should be read as  eventually p    never p  and  until q p  to say that p was true at some point in the past  will be true at some point in the future  will not be true at any point in the future  and will remain true until q is true  respectively. many of these operators can be defined in terms of the others  but that need not concern us here. for a full semantics of this language  and a discussion of its properties  see other papers of ours  1  1 . 
1 	the assumption of memory 
the formalism we are developing embodies various assumptions  understood as constraints on models  concerning beliefs and goals. for example  we assume that all agents eventually drop their achievement goals by either achieving them or by giving up  see    and that goals are always compatible with what is believed. in exploring the properties of joint intentions and commitments below  we also assume that individuals and groups realize what they did not believe or mutually believe in the past. more formally  
assumption 1 	memory 

that is  agent x did not believe p iff the agent now believes that he did not believe p. a corresponding property is assumed to hold for joint memory  namely: 
assumption 1 	joint memory 

in other words  we do not allow agents  or groups of agents  to have doubts or inaccurate beliefs about their past beliefs. 
1 	individual commitment and intention 
based on these primitives  a notion of individual commitment called pgoal  for persistent goal  has been defined  that describes an agent a.s being committed to p if he knows that he will keep his goal to eventually bring about p at least until he believes it is true  is impossible  or is irrelevant. more formally 1 

the important points to observe about individual commitments are these: once adopted  an agent cannot drop them freely; other commitments need to be consistent with them; and agents will try again to achieve them should initial attempts fail. condition q is an escape clause  which we will occasionally omit for brevity   against which the agent has relativized his persistent goal. should the agent come to believe it is false  the commitment is no longer relevant  and can be dropped. note that q could in principle be quite vague  allowing 
 action a with p holding initially   and analogously for a;p . 
　　this definition differs slightly from that presented in our earlier work   but the difference is of no consequence here. for disjunctions  quantifiers  and the like  although for sufficiently broad conditions  not much of a commitment would remain. 
　merely having a commitment to get some action done is not sufficient for an agent to act deliberately. it is consistent with what we have said so far that an agent with a pgoal to achieve  done x a  could blunder about at random until he discovers that he has in fact done the required action  perhaps by accident. but  an agent who does an action intentionally should at least realize what he is doing throughout the execution of the action. in this paper  however  we merely require the agent to believe at the start of the action  that he is about to do it: 

therefore  an intention is a commitment to having done an action starting in a specific mental state. 
　it is also useful to model agents who have intentions where only certain parts of the overall action are specified. for example  an agent might intend to something of the form a;. . . ;b  where what is to be done between a and b is not known at the outset of the action. to express this  we use a new form of intention  intend*  that takes an open action expression as an argument  with the unspecified parts bound by an existential quantifier. 
1  
then we have a commitment to there being an e such that a;e;b gets done. however  prior to executing this sequence  we do not require the agent to satisfy 

for a specific event e  as we would with intend  but only that 

must be true. although the agent must know that he will do something between the a and the b  he need not know initially what it is. 
1 	joint commitments and intentions 
we have argued elsewhere  1  1  that to act together as a team  a group of agents is in a complex mental state termed a joint intention  which is defined as a joint commitment to act in a shared belief state. a joint intention binds team members together  enabling the team to overcome misunderstandings and surmount obstacles. the analyses of joint commitments and intentions given in the earlier papers are motivated by nonlinguistic examples  such as driving in a convoy  and by a principle of making minimal changes to the analysis of individual intentions and commitments. 
　as in the individual case  we start with the notion of a joint persistent goal  jpg  which is the analogue of pgoal with belief replaced by mutual belief  and goal replaced by mg and wmg  as below: definition 1 
if the last line here had been  mg x y  eventually p    then the analogy between the individual and joint case would have been clearest. unfortunately  we must instead use   defined below  which says that the agents have a  weak mutual goal  to achieve p. this is defined to be a mutual belief that each agent has  weak goal  to achieve p relative to the other agent  which in turn is defined as the agent either having the goal to achieve p  or  if he comes to believe  typically privately  that p is true  impossible  or irrelevant  the goal of making this a mutual belief. more precisely  
definition 1 

so a joint persistent goal to achieve p relative to q means that the agents mutually believe that p is false  they mutually believe that each wants it to be true at some point  and they mutually know that they will keep p as a weak mutual goal at least until they mutually believe it holds  is impossible  or irrelevant. 
　this weaker notion of goal is necessary here because an agent may not be aware of what his partner has discovered privately about p; thus  it would be unreasonable to expect an agent to assume obliviously that the other is still trying to achieve p. however  the persistence of a weak goal still predicts a level of robustness: the individuals are committed to achieving p  and if they discover privately that it is done  impossible or irrelevant  they have the goal of making this mutually known. in fact  it can be shown that in normal circumstances  this goal will be a pgoal: 

so  if x and y are jointly committed to p  and some condition c holds  c says that once the agent comes to believe p  he will not change his mind   then until the agents mutually believe that p is satisfied or impossible  if one agent  say x  comes to believe privately that p holds  then he has a persistent goal to make p mutually believed. similar theorems can be proven about commitments to attain mutual belief of the impossibility or irrelevance of 
1 	natural language 
thus  two agents jointly intend to do some  possibly underspecified  action iff they are jointly committed to having done the action mutually believing they were about to do it. for further discussion of how joint commitments and intentions work to bind teams together and protect them against misunderstandings  see  1  1 . 
1 	c o m m i t m e n t s t o a c t i o n s e q u e n c e s 
as we will see in the next section  our analysis of taskoriented dialogue begins by assuming that the agents 
jointly intend to perform together some partially specified sequence of actions. much of our analysis depends on how a commitment to an action sequence gives rise to a commitment to elements of that sequence. 
　first of all  observe that if an agent is committed to doing some sequence a;b  it does not follow that the agent is committed to either doing a or doing b by itself. for one thing  the agent may believe that b has already been done  without being preceded by a . also  he may only be interested in having b done just after a. similar considerations apply to a. however  in the case of the tail of a sequence  we do get a commitment that is relativized to the larger goal: 

the proof is as follows: any state where a sequence a;b has just been done will necessarily be one where b was just done. thus  a goal to achieve the former implicitly includes a goal to achieve the latter. it follows that a goal to achieve the latter must persist at least as long as a goal to achieve the former  and so the relativized version of the pgoal  or jpg  holds. 
　similar reasoning does not apply in general to the first element a of a sequence  even assuming that the agent believes he has never done a. the reason is that the agent may not be able to tell where a ends and b begins  but still expect to correctly execute the entire sequence. that is  an agent can start with the goal of doing a;b  then at some point  without necessarily knowing that a is done  drop the goal of doing a  but continue the sequence nonetheless  thinking that eventually a;b will have been done. for example  an agent can click on a phone receiver a number of times and know that one of those clicks disconnects the line and produces a dial tone without ever having to know which click did it. because the goal of doing a can be given up without thinking that it has just been done  or impossible or irrelevant   the agent is not committed to doing the action by itself. 
　however  if the first element of a sequence is an action that cannot be done without the agent  or agents  realizing it  then we do get an appropriate relativized commitment. in particular  this is true when the initial element of sequence is a condition requiring the agent  or agents  to believe  or mutually believe  something: 

the proof  in the individual case  is as follows: let q stand for  bel x p . any state where q ;a was just done will be one where q was true earlier. so if there is a goal of having q ;a done in the future  and at that point it is believed that q has not been true  there must be a goal of q being true in the future. now to see that a goal to achieve q must persist relative to the larger goal  imagine that at all points up to some point in the future  q ;a has remained an achievement goal  and that at no point was q thought to be true. at that point  by the memory assumption  it will be believed that q has not been true  and so there will be a goal of q being true in the future. thus the goal to achieve q will persist as long as the one to achieve q ;a or until it is thought to be satisfied. the proof in the joint case is analogous  using the joint memory assumption. 
　we now proceed to show how this analysis predicts the discourse goals underlying various linguistic phenomena found in our study. 
1 	m o d e l i n g t h e t a s k 
we have argued informally elsewhere  that in our telephone and audiotape conditions  the expert and apprentice jointly intended to perform the task. moreover  it was given to the partners that the apprentice would build the pump  following part-by-part instruction from the expert. so the task for both consists of the apprentice's picking up and assembling each part in the order required by the expert. thus  each pick-up and assembly event must occur in a context where that event is what the expert wants the apprentice to do just then. so if we let part be a variable ranging over parts to be assembled and ae be a variable ranging over assembly actions  which take part as an argument  then  task part ae  will he the full action required for that part:1 

　　we will not concern ourselves with stating that ae must be a sequence of assembly events performed by the apprentice. we will also assume that  pick-up appr part  refers to the unique sequence of events that constitutes picking up the part by the apprentice. 

that is  the apprentice is to pick up a given part  in the context of the expert's wanting him to pick it up then. next  he is to act on it  in the context of the expert's wanting him to do that action on that part then  after which the part will be assembled. 
　we can model the joint mental state that resulted from the subjects' having agreed to participate in the study  as a joint intention by the expert and apprentice to perform this task for every part: 
stipulates that for each part  
the expert and apprentice are jointly committed to the apprentice picking up and assembling that part  and moreover  they are jointly committed to the part that is picked up being the one the expert wants just then  and the assembly action being the one the expert has selected. so although we do not stipulate the order in which the parts must be tackled  the task does not consist solely in somehow correctly assembling the entire pump independently of the expert. 
1 p r e d i c t i n g t h e d i s c o u r s e g o a l s u n d e r l y i n g 	c o n f i r m a t i o n s 
the data show that when the conversation is proceeding smoothly  each discourse assembly segment typically has the following structure : first  the expert utters a temporal marker  followed by a request for the apprentice to identify some part; the apprentice typically confirms that the identification is made  and the expert proceeds to request an assembly action to be performed; the apprentice performs the action  and then confirms that the requested action was finished. although our account of the task in terms of  cannot predict what utterance events will actually take place  we can predict the presence of a number of goals that naturally give rise to the utterance events. we examine two of these below: confirmation of successful action and confirmation of understanding. an expanded paper will show how other patterns of dialogue follow from the analysis of joint intentions  especially requests from the expert for confirmation of referential understanding. 
1 	confirmation of successful action 
given  we have for each part a joint intention to execute some pick-up and assembly actions after which the part will be assembled. expanding the definition of jl*  we have a joint commitment of the form 

　by theorem 1  and elimination of the quantifier   this implies that we have a commitment to getting each part assembled  relative to the larger joint commitment. that is  we have 
 jpg exp appr  assembled part   
once the apprentice convinces himself that he has assembled the part correctly  this jpg dissipates since it is no longer the case that both parties mutually believe they are still trying to get the part assembled. however  by theorem 1  the apprentice is left with a residual commitment: 
 pgoal appr  mb exp appr  assembled part   . 
it is this persistent goal that compels the apprentice to confirm success. moreover  this discourse goal is a direct result of fact that the expert and the apprentice took on the assembly task as a joint commitment. without that assumption  the role of the apprentice would have ended with the assembly of the part. 
1 	confirmation of referential understanding 
by treating the task to be performed as a joint activity based on our notion of a joint intention  we can also see where the confirmations for referential understanding originate. again expanding the definition of jl*  we have for each part a joint commitment of the form 
1  

so for each part to be assembled  the conversants are jointly committed to arriving at a state where it is mutually known that the expert wants the apprentice to pick up that part at that time. in fact  at the start of the task  there are a set of such joint commitments  which will then get discharged at different times during the task. 
   notice that although the part variable is quantified into this mutual knowledge  the assembly event ae never is  which means that the apprentice  in particular  does not need to know initially what assembly action is required next. this is as it should be and is a direct result 
1 	natural language 
of our use of jl*  which replaces the ae variable by a new one ae*  within the scope of the mk operator. 
　thus  the interaction of joint intention and joint memory enables us to conclude that mutual knowledge of what actions the expert wants will occur as the dialogue progresses. this mutual knowledge is usually achieved in the corpus by the apprentice's signaling understanding with  uh-huh  or  ok ''  where it is obvious that he has yet to do the requested action . notice that if a simple jpg rather than a ji* were used here  it would be possible for the apprentice to simply convince the expert after getting the part that he indeed knew prior to the assembly what part the expert wanted him to work on. 
　on the other hand  if the apprentice does not yet understand what part the expert wants him to work on next  he shares with the expert a joint commitment to acquiring that knowledge  which often results in his asking clarification questions. for his part  the expert may attempt to attain this mutual belief with a request confirmation of understanding  often by way of rising intonation over noun phrases  or by explicit questions  e.g.   you see that   . requests for both types of confirmations can be seen in the earlier fragment. 
1 c o n c l u d i n g r e m a r k s : d i a l o g u e as a j o i n t a c t i v i t y 
many writers have argued that dialogue itself should be regarded as a joint activity  see  for example   1  1  1  . what remain to be demonstrated  though  are the consequences that follow from taking this approach seriously. which phenomena require a precise notion of collaboration for their explanation  how do collaborationist accounts of discourse predict phenomena that other theories do not  to begin to answer these questions  we have shown here how a a formal theory of joint action explains confirmations that arise in task-oriented telephone dialogues. however  we are not the only ones to have considered confirmations as evidence of joint action. 
　for example  regarding confirmations of understanding  schegloft  has claimed that  uh-huh ' and like utterances require treating dialogue as an  interactional achievement   an accomplishment of both conversants acting together. in his analyses  the purpose of such confirmations is to convey understanding and to signal passing up the opportunity to seek repairs or clarifications. but  such analyses are not related to other forms of confirmations  such as those of the success  or failure  of requested actions. if we are correct  in our analysis  both stem from the same underlying principles. 
　clark and wilkes-gibbs  have provided an extensive set of examples of referential phenomena that  they argue  call for a collaborative explanation. among these phenomena are sentence completions and confirmations. they claim that the key to collaborative reference is for the conversants to attain  roughly by the beginning of the next turn  a state of mutual belief that the description is adequate for present purposes. we agree with their conclusions  but observe that in their theories  conversants' goals for attaining mutual belief are not derived from more general nonlinguistic behavior. this misses 

the possibility for significant generalizations. 
　the results obtained in this paper stem from the joint nature of the task under discussion by the conversants  and not from the joint nature of the process of engaging in a dialogue. a substantive promisory note of our approach is thus to view dialogue itself as a joint activity  one that is appropriately initiated  monitored  and closed  and is robust against miscommunication. from our perspective  by agreeing to engage in a dialogue  the conversants have tacitly adopted a joint commitment to understand one another. it is our goal to be able to model this intuition formally and derive discourse goals that underlie such phenomena as confirmations  clarifications  repairs  elaborations  and the like  for dialogue situations more general than those about joint tasks. 
　however  there are two reasons why we have considered only task-oriented dialogues here. first  though these dialogues are very simple in structure  there has been no satisfying account of them. we can gain much by sharpening our tools on the simple cases first. 
　second  a technical difficulty is looming. we were able to derive numerous predictions about goals underlying discourse phenomena from the single assumption that the two conversants had joint commitments for the apprentice to pick up and assemble a part once he knew what part the expert wanted him work on next. formally  this involved only quantifying over parts and events. in a more general setting  understanding what a speaker means goes beyond identifying a part or an  went  and can involve any proposition. to say that both participants are committed to making what the speaker means mutually known  we would need to quantify over the propositions. this we cannot do with our possibleworlds approach  but we look forward to a more finegrained semantic theory  e.g.  situation theory   to provide the technical apparatus. still  the present paper depicts the shape of such an account  and illustrates some of the potential benefits to accrue from treating dialogue as a joint activity. 
　finally  we believe the properties of dialogue discussed here are not simply a result of the interaction of plan generators and recognizers working in synchrony and harmony  as plan-based theories propose. rather  what clark and wilkes-gibbs   grosz and sidner   and we are suggesting is that both parties in a dialogue are responsible for sustaining it. participating in a dialogue requires the conversants to have at least a joint commitment to make themselves understood. the key question to be answered is how to formalize such general commitments precisely  and to show how they predict the fine-grained synchrony so apparent in ordinary conversation. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 j. f. allen and c. r. perrault. analyzing intention in dialogues. artificial intelligence  1 :1  1. 
 j. barwise and j. perry. situations and attitudes. mit press  cambridge  massachusetts  1. 
 h. h. clark and d. wilkes-gibbs. 	referring as a collaborative process. 	cognition  1-1  1. reprinted in: intentions in communication  cohen  
p. r.  morgan  j.  and pollack  m. e.  editors  mit press  cambridge  massachusetts  1. 
 p. r. cohen. the pragmatics of referring and the modality of communication. computational linguistics  1 :1  april-june 1. 
 p. r. cohen and h. j. levesque. intention is choice with commitment. artificial intelligence  1   1. 
 p. r. cohen and ii. .j. levesque. teamwork. nous  1  to appear  1. 
 p. r. cohen and c. r. perrault. elements of a plan-based theory of speech acts. coqnitive science  1 :1  1. 
 b. grosz and c. sidner. plans for discourse. in p. r . cohen  j. morgan  and m. e. pollack  editors  intentions in communication. m.i.t. press  cambridge  massachusetts  1. 
 j. hobbs and d. evans. conversation as planned behavior. cognitive science  1 :1  1 
 h. j. levesque  p. r. cohen  and j. nunes. on acting together. in proceedings of aaa1  san 
mateo  california  july 1. morgan kaufmann publishers  inc. 
 d. j. litrnan and j. f. allen. discourse processing and commonsense plans. in p. r. cohen  j. morgan  and m. e. pollack  editors  intentions in communication  pages 1. m.i.t. press  cambridge  massachusetts  1. 
 s. l. oviatt and p. r. cohen. discourse structure and performance efficiency in interactive and noninteractive spoken modalities. computer speech and language  1  in press. 
 e. a. schegloff. discourse as an interactional achievement: some uses of unh-huh and other things that come between sentences. in d. tannen  editor  analyzing discourse: text and talk. georgetown university roundtable on languages and linguistics  georgetown university press  washington  d.c.  1. 




	cohen and levesque 	1 

1 

	cohen and levesque 	1 

	cohen and levesque 	1 

	cohen and levesque 	1 







