p l a n n i n g 	r o b o t 	c o n t r o l 	p a r a m e t e r 	v a l u e s w i t h 	q u a l i t a t i v e 	r e a s o n i n g * 
s t e p h e n f . p e t e r s +   s h i g e o k i h i r a i     t o r u o r n a t a     a n d t o m o m a s a s a t o   
+jet propulsion laboratory  electrotechnical 	laboratory california institute of technology 1-1 umezono  tsukuba 1 oak grove drive ibaraki 1  j a p a n 
pasadena  california 1  usa 
a b s t r a c t 
a qualitative reasoning planner for determining robot control parameters to drive manipulation actions has been developed  integrated into a telerobot system  and demonstrated for a match striking task. the planner consists of a qualitative reasoner and a numerical execution history which interact to jointly direct and narrow the search for reliable numerical control parameter values. the planner algorithm  implementation  and an execution example are described. the relationship to previous qualitative reasoning work is also discussed. 
1 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
model-based intelligent robotic systems typically make use of numerical-especially geometric-representations of the robot and the workspace when planning robot motions in detail. such plans  even after successful computer simulation with the model  frequently fail to achieve the intended results when actually executed by the robot. approaches to overcoming this problem include precise calibration  more detailed modeling  error recovery  and human intervention. 
　the qualitative reasoning paradigm can help overcome some of the difficulties associated with error and uncertainty by reasoning about the behavior of the physical equations describing a system  thereby providing the system with intelligence about its own behavior and how to achieve desirable states. 
   *the research described in this paper was performed at the electrotechnical laboratory  with support from the jet propulsion laboratory  california institute of technology  under contract with the national aeronautics and space administration of the united states of america  and support from the agency of industrial science and technology  ministry of international trade and industry of japan. 
1 	robotics 
　a considerable amount of theoretical work has been done on qualitative reasoning  de kleer and brown  1  forbus  1  kuipers  1  kuipers  1  sacks  1   but much of this work has focussed on simulation and has not specifically addressed planning issues. a topic currently receiving attention as real applications are attempted is the coordination of qualitative and numerical elements  kuipers and berleant  1  to achieve a complete reasoning system. 
　this paper describes a qualitative reasoning planner which has been developed and integrated into the meister  model enhanced intelligent and skillful 
teleoperational robot  system  hirai and sato  1  
hirai et a/.  1  and has been demonstrated for a match striking task. a qualitative reasoner and a numerical execution history work together to search for effective control parameter values. the present work makes use of earlier studies on the application of qualitative reasoning to manipulation planning and the relevant physical equations  ornata et a/.  1  hirai et al  1j. 
　in the following sections we describe a match striking network and the qualitative math used. then the planning algorithm is presented. descriptions of the telerobot  workspace  and an execution example follow. finally  this work is placed in context with the qualitative reasoning literature. 
1 	a n e t w o r k f o r m a t c h s t r i k i n g 
a qualitative reasoning network was proposed  hirai et a/.  1  to represent a single match striking motion. the network represents the physical equations describing bending moment on the match stick and the total accumulated heat at the contact point of the match head with the striking surface. the physical parameters considered were the force perpendicular to the striking surface  the velocity along the striking surface  and the angle from perpendicular that the match is inclined in the direction of motion  figure 1 . the possible outcomes were match figure 1: physical parameters for match striking 
breakage and match ignition  represented as the absolute value of bending moment on the match and the amount of accumulated heat respectively. 
　the proposed network has been extended here  figure 1  to include an additional preliminary motion to the starting position and force. representations of the parameters actually used for controlling the eta1 robot and the results of actual trial execution-match breakage and match ignition-were also added. note that the match can break as a result of either motion. both actions are in the same network because they share control parameters related to angle and force. 
　in the figure  nodes with wide shaded arrows indicate the interface with the external system; other nodes are entirely internal to the qualitative reasoning network itself. the robot control system does not support servoing to force and velocity during the brief match striking action so the corresponding monotonically increasing digging depth  distance of position control trajectory into the match box  and jumping gap  distance between servo samples  robot control parameters are used. angle  digging depth  and jumping gap are all parameters controlled by-and therefore known to-the robot system. match ignition and breakage are results observed by the human operator or an appropriate sensing system. 
1 	q u a l i t a t i v e m a t h w i t h   l i k e l i h o o d s   
eight network node types are defined: sum  product  
m +   negative  absolute-value  constant  control  and threshold. each node logically consists of two parts:  1  a value for a parameter and  1  the relationship between the parameter itself and its cause nodes. this relationship provides for reasoning in both directions through the network. relationships with effect nodes are contained in those effect nodes as relationships with causes. ultimate cause nodes  control and constant  have a relationship part of nil. 
　four qualitative values are defined: +  1  -  and   for unknown. all nodes in the network have qualitative values  and the externally visible control and threshold nodes have additional actual values. the qualitative value of each control node is the sign of the actual numerical value. the qualitative value of each threshold node is + when its actual logical value is true  indicating that an unknown real number has exceeded an unknown positive threshold  and - when the actual value is false. 
　relation-tables  figure 1  have been constructed to represent the qualitative function for each node type. reasoning functions use these tables both to propagate 

figure 1: example of the computation of likely-potentials 
current qualitative values through the network and for planning changes to control values for subsequent trials. values in shaded triangles in the figure are qualitative values of the parameters; other values are qualitative values of numerical change consistent with the associated shaded values. 
　the heart of the qualitative math engine is the likelypotentials function  described through an example below. this function is used both for propagating qualitative values through the network and as an aid in selecting among alternatives during the planning process. the analogous likely-change-potentials function is used for propagating and planning change. 
   figure 1 illustrates the computation performed by the likely-potentials function for the example of the sum relation  given inputs + and   and a result of + a triple of potentials is assigned to each entry in the table  repre senting the relative likelihoods that a result of +  1  and - will occur when inputs match the table entry. these triples always add up to 1  embodying an assumption that each combination of inputs is equally likely. triples defined for results +  1  -  and   all appear in step 1 of the example. three possibility factors are assigned to each of the input and result arguments  with 1 representing the possibility of a match with the values +  1  and -  and 1 representing a mismatch. for inputs  these factors are multiplied into all three triplet values of the table entries of corresponding rows and columns; for the result  the factors are multiplied into the corresponding triplet values of each table entry. the resulting table is shown in step 1 of the example. the final likelihood potentials returned by the function are  for the inputs  the sums of all triplet values in the rows and columns and  for 
	peters  et al. 	1 

1. control nodes  ultimate causes  which are at physical or contextual limits are marked with the atmaximum and at-minimum properties as appropriate. these properties are propagated toward effects and depend upon the actual relations in the network. 
plan qualitative change  propagating through the network from all must-change results toward ultimate cause nodes. 
1a. planning for this trial is complete if all nodes marked must-change are changed and at least one change to an ultimate cause node has been made. 
1b. propagation of this thread is complete if a change has already been planned for one of the causes of this node. 
1c. select an immediate cause of this node to propagate change through according to the following selection preferences: 
highest nodes marked must-change intermediate nodes not marked low nodes marked resist-change very low nodes for which a change of 1 has the highest likelihood potential 
lowest nodes for which no change is possible consistent with the current known values  changes  
and at-maximum and at-minimum limit con-
straints 
lowest nodes marked cycle-back 
1d. for the selected cause  choose the change  + or -  which has the higher likelihood potential. 
1e. make the change to the selected node and propagate. 
record  choose numerical value  and execute. 
1. put the last trial and this plan  goals  numerical control values  results  and qualitative plan  on the history. 
1. choose a numerical value to use in the next trial  within the contextual numerical range  for the control parameter selected for change. 
1. execute the newly planned trial. 
1 	u t i l i z a t i o n of n u m e r i c a l e x p e r i e n c e 
the most important feature of the planner is the mechanism of coordination of qualitative and numerical information for planning. 
　qualitative information is embedded within the numerical execution history in the form of a qualitative vector at a point in the numerical search space which indicates the qualitative direction of the goal region from that point. numerical information influences qualitative search by asserting constraints on qualitative motion when numerical limits are exceeded. 
　the key is the use of limits. for the 1-dimensional example in figure 1  the limits visible from a most recent trial are the physical limits above  below  and to the right  but to the left  an earlier trial asserts a tighter 
1 	robotics 

figure 1: control limits visible from a point and overlap 

figure 1: just before the strike motion 
limit. only the region in white is considered for the next trial. when limits overlap  the planner must consider another direction. the qualitative reasoning engine easily handles limits by zeroing out the likelihood potentials for changes in nodes which would attempt to exceed limits. 
1 	t h e m e i s t e r t e l e r o b o t a n d 
	e x p e r i m e n t 	w o r k s p a c e 
the qualitative reasoning planner and match-striking network described have been integrated into the meister  model enhanced intelligent and skillful teleoperational robot  telerobot system  hirai and sato  1  hirai et al.  1 . 
　meister hardware includes the 1-dof eta1 slave manipulator  a lord gripper with force/torque sensors at the base of each finger  a 1-dof master manipulator  several cameras  some on pan-tilt heads  and several monitors including a sun workstation and a custom multi-media display  which supports real-time stereo graphics overlay. 
   meister high-level software is written in objectoriented euslisp  matsui and inaba  1 . the matchstriking network was added into the match-box object. 
　among a variety of objects in the workspace for a flame-test chemical experiment is a match box in a clamp on a stand and several matches lined up for easy grasp-



figure 1: match striking example 
ing by the manipulator. figure 1 shows the robot just before executing a striking motion. 
   with euslisp running on a spare station equipped with 1mb of memory and evaluating uncompiled qualitative planner lisp code  it took less than 1 seconds to plan each trial. the qualitative reasoning software consists of approximately 1 lines of general-purpose qualitative reasoning code  1 lines of match-striking network definition  and roughly 1 lines of m e i s t e r interface code. 
1 a match striking example 
figure 1 presents the data and the search performed during actual execution of the qualitative reasoning planner while directing the robot for the match-striking task. the vertical dimension in each frame is the angle in degrees and the horizontal dimension is the digging depth in millimeters. all frames represent the plane where the jumping gap is at the maximum physical limit of 1mm. the match neither ignited nor broke upon a first trial 
at a digging depth of 1mm and angle of 1deg. the qualitative reasoning planner determined that the digging depth should be increased. this trial is represented by a point and an arrow. the half-tone bar indicates a limit due to non-ignition/non-breakage visible along the angle=1deg line. the 1nd and 1rd trials were similar  successively increasing the digging depth. the match broke upon the striking action of the 1th trial. at this point  the planner decided to decrease the angle  asserting a limit  striped bar  along the digging depth=1rnm line. a new match  on the 1th trial  broke on the move to the starting force and position  at an angle of-1deg. again the planner asserted a limit  cross-hatched bar  visible from the 1mm line  but in the opposite direction. the angle at this digging depth must now lie between 
1deg and -lodeg. breakage on the striking action in the 1th and 1th trials further narrowed the angle range until on the 1th trial the angle was fixed at -lodeg. notice that there were two trials at this precise location in the control space with different results. now the qualitative reasoner was constrained from changing the angle and decided to reduce the digging depth instead. the 1th and 1th trials both resulted in breakage on the striking action and an 1th trial was successful at an angle of -1deg and a digging depth of 1mm. 
   this example illustrates the narrowing of numerical search and the need for contextual limits to achieve success. overlapping of failure regions is also evident. 
1 relationship to other qualitative reasoning work 
sacks  characterized qualitative simulation as a trajectory through phase space. here  we view planning similarly as a search for a path through the space of control parameters. 
   de kleer and brown  mentioned the use of additional network nodes to represent landmarks. the constant node  figure 1  is just such a landmark corresponding to the angle where  during the striking motion  the force is directed along the match stick and the bending moment is zero. 
   forbus  uses the term  quantity space  to represent a relative ordering of comparable values. a single representation is used to express qualitative values of multiple physical parameters. in the present work  the state of the entire system is represented in terms of ranges of control parameters  ranges whose values vary with position in the control space. 
   kuipers  1  1  uses a network to describe the physical equations governing the system  and defines a set of network node types. we do the same here  adding  in the same spirit  absolute-value and threshold node types. our approach is similar to kuipers'  with differences deriving from the use for planning rather than simulation. we use only the values +  1  and - instead of a 
   system of general intervals  and so do not generate landmarks during simulation. indeed  we are concerned only with where the goal region is relative to any  current  region  and are not interested in the topologies of paths through the various regions as embodied in the series of 
	peters  et al. 	1 

intervals of kuipers' simulation. also  the development of qualitative math functions which return  likelihood potentials  in place of simple boolean values is a direct consequence of their application to planning. 
   kuipers and berleant  propagate constraints on the numerical value each node in the network can take. we do not attempt to imbue network nodes whose numerical values are not externally visible with numerical information beyond the constraints of the qualitative representation. 
1 conclusions 
a simple planner utilizing qualitative reasoning and numerical experience has been developed and integrated into the meister telerobot system and demonstrated for a match striking task. the primary contribution of this work is the identification of a mechanism utilizing limits for coordinating numerical and qualitative information to direct search. qualitative math functions which return  likelihood possibilities  facilitate the use of qualitative constraints in the planning process. 
   directions for the future include work on more robust search algorithms  exploring expanded use of likelihoods for planning  and more extensive testing of applications to a variety of tasks. 
acknowledgements 
the authors would like to thank t. yuba  director of the information systems division  and t. matsui and all the other members of the robotics group at the electrotechnical laboratory for their comments and support. they would also like to thank w. schober  manager of robotics and automation advanced development  and 
s. grenander and the many other members of the jet propulsion laboratory automation and robotics program and the sequence automation research group who have given support  and especially r. doyle for technical guidance. 
