 
preference relations can provide a more realistic model of random phenomena than quantitative probability or belief functions. in order to use preference relations for reasoning under uncertainty  it is necessary to perform sequential and parallel combinations of propagated information in a qualitative inference network. this paper discusses the rules for such sequential and parallel combinations. 
1 	introduction 
many intelligent systems employ the numeric degrees of belief to make decisions. one of the difficulties often encountered in using a quantitative theory of partial belief is the estimation of the required numeric input. in creating the knowledge base  the human expert may not be familiar with expressing his belief in terms of numeric values. thus  the problem of obtaining the numeric degrees of belief from the expert is a major concern in the design of a decision support system. on the other hand  there are qualitative methods for uncertain reasoning such as those using qualitative probability  qualitative belief or relative plausibility  which are all based on the concept of preference relations. in these approaches  the experts are not required to provide numeric values for the individual propositions  but are asked instead to specify the qualitative relationships between the propositions. in many applications  the qualitative approaches seem to be more realistic  as it may not be feasible to represent the available information numerically. besides  people are usually more confident in supplying qualitative relationships such as proposition a is more probable than proposition b. 
모in addition to the representation of uncertain information  another important issue is to propagate such information many researchers have studied the possibility of using networks for inference. heckerman  1   pearl  1   shenoy and shafer  1  studied the propagation of quantitative information such as certainty factors  probability and belief functions in quantitative networks. wellman  1  extended pearl's framework to qualitative networks by classifying the influence of different sources of evidence on a proposition into four classes +  
1 	qualitative reasoning 
-   1  and  . if the class is +  then the proposition has become more probable due to the presence of the new evidence. on the other hand if the class is -  then the proposition has become less probable due to the presence of the new evidence. class 1 indicates that the new evidence has no influence on the probability of the proposition  while class   indicates that the influence of the evidence on the proposition is unknown. one can also define different operators for the manipulation of these influences. it is clear that qualitative networks can be useful for suggesting potential actions  eliminating inferior plans  identifying important tradeoffs  and explaining probability models  wellman  1  however  wellman's study is restricted to frames with only two elements  a proposition and its negation   and the suggested classification of influence lacks a theoretical basis. 
모this study outlines a qualitative inference network whose nodes are frames of discernment consisting of mutually exclusive and exhaustive propositions  and whose edges represent the relationships between different frames. in such a network  the two basic rules are the sequential and parallel combinations of propagations  heckerman  1 . the former deals with propagating information from a frame s to another frame t from t to 1  and so on  in a sequential manner. the latter considers the propagation of information from two or more frames  t1  t1  ...  to another frame 붣 followed by a parallel combination of the propagated information  lingras and wong  1a . 
모the main objective of this paper is to analyze the fundamental elements of a qualitative inference network based on preference relations  namely  the sequential and parallel combinations of qualitative information. we believe that the results of this analysis provide a basis for the development of a network useful for qualitative reasoning. 
1 	qualitative preference structures 
suppose 붣 = { 1  . . .   m } is a finite set of all possible answers to a given question according to one's knowledge  and only one of these answers is correct. this set 1 is referred to as the frame of discernment or simply the frame defined by the question  shafer  1 . any subset a c 1 is regarded as a proposition  which represeuts the assertion that the correct answer to the question lies in a. the power set 1 of denotes the set of all propositions discerned by the frame 붣. in a situation with incomplete or vague information  it is not possible to say with certainty which proposition contains the correct  answer. however  based on the evidence at hand it may be possible to express one's judgement on a given proposition either quantitatively or qualitatively. in the quantitative representation  a real number is used to indicate the degree of belief in a proposition. alternatively  one can also characterize the uncertain knowledge qualitatively in terms of a preference relation. we assume that one can define the preference or indifference relationship between any two propositions a  b   the assertion  a is preferred to b  is denoted by 
in the absence of strict preference  i.e.  and we say that a and b are indifferent  written 
모모모모that is  the preference relation  represents the qualitative information or one's knowledge about a particular situation. the precise meaning of the preference relation depends of course on the context of the application. for example  in the exposition of qualitative probability  a  b represents the assertion that a is mart probable than b. 
   the notion of preference relations enables us to specify whether a given proposition is more probable than another proposition. such a notion can be useful for a number of reasons. for example  if it is not possible to provide a reliable estimation of the required quantitative probabilities  a preference relation can provide a more realistic model of random phenomena. obviously  qualitative preference relations provide a wider class of models to represent a given situation than quantitative probabilities. preference relations also facilitate the study of the structures of quantitative probabilities and belief functions  fine  1 . to illustrate this point  consider the following axioms that  impose certain restrictions on the class of preference relations that can be used for representing uncertain information: 
 i  
 ii  
 iii  
 iv  
 v   
모wong et al.  1  have shown that there exists a belief function consistent with   i.e.  
		 1  
if and only if the preference relation  satisfies axioms  i  -  v . the belief function obeys the following three axioms  shafer  1; smets  1 : 
1. 
1.  
모thus  belief functions can be used to represent the class of preference relations which obey axioms  i - v . a preference relation satisfying axioms  i - v  is called a qualitative belief or a belief relation  yao and wong  1 . for a given belief function  one can define a plausibility function pi as follows: for  
 1  
where ac represents the complement of a  i.e.  ac =  - a. similarly  we can also define a qualitative counterpart of a plausibility function. let  bel he a belief relation  the corresponding plausibility relation  pl is defined as 
		 1  
which is consistent with the definition of plausibility functions. 
   based on the notion of preference relations  in the following section we consider a qualitative inference network  and analyze the fundamental elements of such a network. 
1 	a q u a l i t a t i v e inference n e t w o r k 
in making decisions  we are often interested in a number of related questions. we can formulate a frame of discernment for each question  and build a qualitative inference network based on the relationships  represented by compatibility relations  between these frames. if we want to evaluate the beliefs in a particular frame  we may have to propagate and combine the beliefs from different sources of evidence to the frame of interest. thus  we have to consider the propagation of information from one frame to another  yao and wong  1   and the sequential and parallel combination rules  lingras and wong  1a . 
모we assume that the information about a frame 1' is represented by a preference relation   and that the re lationship between frame t and the frame of interest is described by a compatibility relation. we consider the propagation of the preference relation  on frame t to frame  
definition /: consider two frames t and 1. an element 
t t is compatible with an element  written  
if the proposition does not contradict the proposition 

compatibility is symmetric: / is compatible with 1 if and only if 1 is compatible with t. a compatibility relation c between two frames t and is a subset of pairs in the cartesian product t 1 such that t c the compatibility relation provides a qualitative description of the relationships between the elements of two frames. 
definition 1: a compatibility relation c between two frames t and is complete if for any t t there exists a such t h a t   and vice versa. 
	wong  lingras  and yao 	1 
without loss of generality  we may assume that the compatibility relation between any two frames is complete  because one can always obtain a reduced frame by deleting those elements in one of the frames which are not compatible with any element in the other frame  and vice versa. 

 i  suppose we have a reading 1  1 from a phmeter for the solution. if we use this ph value as a measure of acidity of the solution  we will have to consider the question of reliability of the ph-meter. the frame corresponding to this question is defined by t  = {reliable  unreliable}. based on our knowledge of the 


1 	qualitative reasoning 

ph-meter  we can specify the following weak order  fishburn  1 : 


	wong  lingras  and yao 	1 


1 	qualitative reasoning 

axioms l = {asymmetry  negative transitivity} for a weak order. 
we can order the preference relationships from  and  for example  according to the priority scheme de-
scribed earlier. the following priority scheme is used in this example. 

1 	summary and conclusion 
preference relations  which specify whether a given proposition is more probable than another proposition  provide a more realistic model to represent uncertain information than quantitative probability or belief functions. in order to use preference relations for reasoning under uncertainty  it may be necessary to organize1 and propagate the available information in a qualitative network. sequential and parallel combinations of propagated information are two of the fundamental elements in such a system. this paper suggests rules for sequential and parallel combinations using the notion of compatibility relationships. it is also shown that if the input preference relations obey certain properties  the combined relations will also obey these properties. 
모the qualitative inference networks discussed here are different from wellman's qualitative probabilistic networks. the qualitative probabilistic relations used by wellman correspond to the compatibility relations in this study. the use of qualitative probabilistic relations instead of compatibility relations may lead to a more generalized qualitative inference network. 
