 
viewgen  an algorithm and program for belief ascription  represents the beliefs of agents as explicit  partitioned proposition-sets known as environments. a way of extending viewgen to the interpretation of metaphor  and in particular to the comprehension of metaphor within the belief spaces of particular agents  has been described elsewhere. the paper reports the further refinement and recent implementation of this approach  as well as summarizing the argument for the claim that ordinary non-metaphorical belief ascription and the transfer of information in metaphors can both be seen as different manifestations of a single environment-amalgamation process  one in which explicitly metaphorical amalgamations are triggered by  preference breaking  in the sentence being processed. this requires a consideration of the scoping of metaphor with respect to belief contexts  analogous to the scoping of quantification and definite descriptions with respect to such contexts. as a topic of ongoing and future work  the issue of mixed metaphor  of two distinct types  is briefly addressed. 
1 	viewgen: the basic belief engine 
a computational model of belief ascription is described in detail elsewhere  wilks and bien  1  1   ballim  1   wilks and ballim  1   ballim and wilks  in press  and is embodied in a prolog program called viewgen. the basic algorithm of this model uses the notion of default reasoning to ascribe beliefs to other agents unless there is evidence to prevent the ascription. perrault  1  1  and cohen and levesque  have also recently explored a belief and speech act logic based on a single explicit default axiom. as our previous work has shown for some years  the default ascription is basically correct  but the phenomena are more complex than are normally captured by an axiomatic approach. 
   viewgen also avoids certain counter-intuitive assumptions  such as the non-persistence of ignorance about any given proposition p  perrault  1 . also such systems avoid any individual-dependent criteria for ascription  such as the individual expertise notions in viewgen  see below . 
   viewgen's belief space is divided into a number of explicit  topic-specific partitions  called topic environments. viewgen also generates a type of environment known as a viewpoint. a viewpoint consists of some person's beliefs about some topics  parcelled up into topic environments. w i t h i n viewgen  all beliefs are ultimately beliefs held by the system  e.g.  the system's beliefs about france  what the system believes john believes about cars  etc.  and so  trivially  lie within the system's viewpoint. 
   the system's view of some topic  say  atoms  is pictorially represented as in figure 1. this diagram contains 

figure 1: the system's view of an atom. 
two types of environments: first  there is the box labeled with  system  at the bottom. this is a  believer environment  or  viewpoint.  viewpoints contain topic environments  such as the box labeled with  atom  at the top. a topic environment contains a group of propositions about the  topic.  so  for example  the above diagram conveys that the system believes that atoms are light and small. viewgen's own  knowledge-base  is a viewpoint containing a large number of topic environments. 
   if the topic of a topic environment is a person  the topic environment may contain  in addition to the beliefs about the person  a viewpoint environment containing particular beliefs held by that person about various topics. normally and for obvious reasons of efficiency  this is only done for those beliefs of a given person that are  as some would put it  reportable  where that will often mean beliefs that conflict with those of the system itself. for example  suppose the system had beliefs about a person called john who believes that the earth is flat. this would be pictorially represented as in figure 1. the john 
	wilks  barnden  and wang 	1 

figure 1: i he organization of belirefs about and 1 jonn. 
viewpoint  shown as the box with  john  on the lower edge  is a nested viewpoint  as it is enclosed within the system viewpoint shown  through an intervening topic environment about john  shown as the box with  john  on its upper edge . environments are dynamically created and altered. the basic algorithm of interest in this paper is an amalgamation mechanism that ascribes beliefs from one viewpoint to another  or   pushing one environment down into another  ; ascribing certain beliefs  transforming some  and blocking the ascription of others. the simplest form of this algorithm  described in  wilks and bien  1  1   is that a viewpoint should be generated using a default rule for ascription of beliefs. the default ascriptional rule is to assume that another person's view of a topic is the same as one's own except inhere there is explicit evidence to the contrary. in examples of this sort  where the topic is also the agent into whose environment an ascription is being attempted  i.e.  replace  earth  by  john  in the example   propositions in an outer topic environment e  for the topic john  in the example   are pushed inwards into a topic environment  for the same topic  within a believer viewpoint  john's  nested within e. such inward pushing is central to our later observations on metaphor. 
　belief ascription is a far more complex phenomenon than is shown in this brief summary and the key to our method is the delimitation and treatment of cases where the default algorithm is incorrect. we call these atypical beliefs and they include technical expertise  selfknowledge  itself a form of expertise   and secrets. for example  beliefs that t have about myself  such as how many fillings i have in my teeth  are beliefs that i would not normally ascribe to someone else unless i had reason to do so  if  say  the person to whom i was ascribing the belief was my dentist . a representation based on lambda expressions is used in dealing with atypical beliefs  and is described elsewhere  ballim  1    ballim and wilks  in press   wilks and ballim  1   and follows a suggestion originally made by mccarthy and hayes . this combination of a basic default ascription rule with a mechanism for dealing with atypical belief is an original algorithm and has not  to our knowledge  been described or tested elsewhere in the literature. 
1 metaphor: shifting the belief engine to a higher gear 
metaphor is normally explicated  formally or computationally  by a process that transfers properties by some 
1 	natural language 
structural mapping from one structure  the vehicle  to another  the tenor . classic examples in ai would be the work of falkenhainer  forbus and centner  and of indurkhya . all these authors are concerned  as we are  with metaphor and analogy viewed as some form of structural mapping; the difference from them of what we offer here is the linkage between that process and the process of belief ascription  and also that of  intensional identification    as explained in  ballim  wilks and barden  1 . 
　we are exploring the application of our basic belief algorithm to metaphor as an experiment to see if it gives insight into the phenomenon. that should not be as surprising as it may sound: metaphor has often been viewed  in traditional approaches  as  seeing one thing as something else   a matter of viewpoints  just as we are presenting belief. we propose that propositions in the topic environment for the vehicle of a metaphor be  pushed inward   using the standard algorithm mentioned above   into an embedded environment for the tenor  to get the tenor seen through the vehicle  or the view of the tenor-as-vehicle. 
　the key features here are:  1  one of the conceptual domains  namely the metaphor vehicle  is viewed as a  pseudo-believer ;  1  the pseudo-believer has a metaphorical view of a topic or domain;  1  the generation of such a view is not dissimilar from ascribing beliefs to real believers;  1  explicating this by pushing or amalgamating environments yields new intensional entities after an actual transfer of properties. 
so  in 
jones threatened smith's theory by reimplementing his experiments. 
we would know we had a preference-breaking  and potentially metaphorical  situation from the object-feature failure on  threaten   assuming this expects a person object   at least if we accept the argument of wilks  that metaphors could be identified  procedurally at least  with the class of preference-breaking utterances.  this includes assertions that violate class relationships  such as  an atom is a billiard ball.   
　the awkward cases for that broad delimitation are forms like  connors killed mcenroe   which breaks no verb preferences but is read metaphorically by some as  beat soundly at tennis . here one might consider taking the classic marcus-escape and use our procedural definition to rule this example out of court as a  garden path metaphor . 
　we could now plausibly form a metaphoric view of theory-as-person using the environment-amalgamation process sketched above. figure 1 shows possible system environments for theory and person  and the resulting theory-as-person environment  where the arrow indicates the new environment resulting from the application of the default rule when the properties of the outer environment  for person  are amalgamated into the inner environment  for theory  and survive unless contradicted  as the concrete predicate in fact is . so  by this maneuver  a new and complex metaphorical property of theories is derived. it might be  of course  that this procedure of belief-overriding as a basis for metaphor would 


figure 1: forming a theory-as-person environment. 
produce no different a set of plausible properties transferred than any other system  e.g. that of falkenhainer et a/. ; and that would be  again  an experimental question  as would be the very difficult issue how many  irrelevant  properties are ascribed as well  and whether there is a danger of them swamping the metaphorically relevant ones. but the importance or originality we propose would lie in the fact that it was further application of an algorithm designed to explicate another phenomenon altogether  i.e.  belief   and therefore yield a procedural connection between the notions  as we argued in detail in  ballim et al.  1 . 
　there is a further interesting aspect to the connection between belief and metaphor. we have stressed a procedural connection that may seem improbable to some people. there is also the important but neglected phenomenon that the content of belief is often inherently metaphorical  and in a way that conventional theorists totally neglect by their concentration on simplistic belief examples like  john loves mary . a far more plausible candidate might be a truth such as: 
prussia threatened france before invading it successfully in 1. 
what are we to say of this historically correct belief  
what are the entities referred to by  prussia  and  france   simple translation into some first-order expression like invade  prussia  france  1  just ob-
scures the real problem  one for which the semantics of first order logic are no help at all. are the entities referred to somehow metaphorically the prussian people  etc.  or army  or a part of the army  
　following the approach described earlier  we might expect to detect breaking of linguistic preferences of the verb  threaten ; perform a trial pushdown of properties of the  people  environment  given by the conventional preferences of  threaten   into an environment for prussia  = a land mass  the basic representation . an important safeguard  that there is no space to discuss here  would be that we examined our inventory of representations to see if we had one for  prussia  that already expressed the  dead  metaphor of a country-name-as-apolity  some would insist that this was a metonymy  but we do not address this alternative here . 
　the amalgamation of the notions of belief ascription and metaphor interpretation is described and justified in detail in  ballim et a/.  1 . the method as described there explicitly addresses the case of metaphor only at the top level of discourse  within the system's own notions of the component elements of the metaphor. but of course  in the general process of metaphor interpretation  we must relativize these processes to the space of any relevant believer. the system might believe the zoological truism that pigs are clean and neat  but when talking to the non-zoologist john  use the standard metaphor  he's a pig  on the assumption that john would perform the ascription against the dirty-unhygenic-pig belief that the system believes john to hold. the system must be able to model that metaphorical ascription  whose elements the system itself does not believe. 
　this relativization is included in a recent implementation of the approach within vtewgen by ballim  as extended by one of us  wang . the need for relativization underscores the benefits of our method of unifying metaphorical transference with belief ascription. we shall analyze such examples later in more detail  but we must first discuss an issue of  metaphorical scope  that is implicitly raised by the above. 
1 	metaphorical scope 
consider the sentence 
john believes that a cure for terrorism is needed. 
the complement of this belief report -＊ the clause following the word  that  - can be construed as involving a terrorism-as-disease metaphor. we must first realize that there is a metaphor scoping issue here. the  inner scope  reading involves the idea that john himself thinks of terrorism as a disease  and we might predict that he would report his belief by means of the sentence  a cure for terrorism is needed  . the  outer scope  reading is that john believes something about terrorism that is being portrayed by the speaker in terms of disease-curing. john does not necessarily have a belief couched in these terms  nor would he necessarily report his belief in these terms.  perhaps john would say:  something needs to be done to eliminate terrorism and repair the damage it has done to society.   
　we now concentrate on the inner scope reading. in the process of setting up a topic environment for terrorism inside john's belief environment  the system needs to perform  i  the normal default ascription proces  here moving some of its own beliefs about terrorism down into john  as well as performing  ii  a metaphoric transference process. this combination of tasks is simplified by our method of dressing the tasks in essentially the same algorithmic clothes. 
　this is especially so since it is john's view of disease that is important in the metaphoric transference  not the system's. after all  john might believe that diseases are caused by demonic influences  say  and this belief could affect what he would think of as reasonable ways of curing terrorism - e.g.  exorcism. thus  in task  ii   a disease topic environment must be set up within john's 
	wilks  barnden. and wang 	1 

the treatment is such that it makes no difference whether  i  a-as-b is seen as c or  ii  a is seen as b-asc. this seems to accord well with our intuitions about examples we have considered. we plan to tackle parallel mixing as well in future work  especially as both types are common in the realm of metaphors of mind  which form the central concern of barnden  1  1  . 
acknowledgments 
this paper builds on work done in conjunction with 
afzal ballim. we are grateful also for useful suggestions from subhankar banerjee  david fawell and dihong qiu. references 
 ballim  1  afzal ballim. the subjective ascription of belief to agents. in advances in artificial intelligence. edited by j. hallam and c. mellish. chichester  england: john wiley & sons. 
 ballim and wilks   in press  afzal ballim and yorick wilks. artificial believers. hillsdale  n.j.: lawrence erlbaum associates. 
 ballim et a/.  1  a. ballim  y. wilks and j. barnden belief ascription  metaphor  and intensional identification. cognitive science  1  pp. 1. 
 barnden  1  john a. barnden. belief  metaphorically speaking. in proceedings of the 1st intl. confi on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning. san mateo  ca: morgan kaufman. 
 barnden  1  john a. barnden. n aive metaphysics: a metaphor-based approach to propositional attitude representation  unabridged version . memoranda in computer and cognitive science  mccs-1. computing research laboratory  new mexico state university. 
 bochenski  1  i. bochenski. a history of formal logic. indiana: notre dame university press. 
 cohen and margalit  1  j. cohen and a. margalit. the role of inductive reasoning in the interpretation of metaphor. in semantics of natural language.. edited by d. davidson and g. harman. dordrecht: reidel. 
 cohen and levesque  1  p. r. cohen and h. j. levesque. speech acts and rationality. in proceedings of the 1rd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics. university of chicago. 
 davidson  1  d. davidson. what metaphors mean. critical inquiry  1  pp.1. 
 falkenhainer et ai.  1  b. falkenhainer  k. forbus and d. gentner. the structure-mapping engine: algorithm and examples. artificial intelligence  1  pp.l1. 
 indurkhya  1  b. indurkhya. approximate semantic transference: a computational theory of metaphor. cognitive science  1  pp.1. 
 lakoff  1  g. lakoff. on generative semantics. in semantics. edited by d. steinberg & l. jokobovits. london and new york: cambridge university press. 
1 	natural language 
 mccarthy and hayes  1  j. mccarthy and p. hayes. some philosophical problems from the standpoint of artificial intellgience. in machine intelligence. edited by nleltzer & mitchie. edinburgh university press. 
 perrault  1  r. perrault. invited presentation. meeting of the association for computational linguistics. stanford  calif. 
 perrault  1  r. perrault. an application of default logic to speech act theory. in plans and intentions tn communication and discourse. edited by p. cohen  j. morgan & m. pollack. cambridge  mass.: mit press. 
 rieger  1  c rieger. conceptual memory and influence. edited by r. schank. north holland: amsterdam. 
 wilks  1  y. wilks. preference semantics. in formal semantics of natural language. edited by e. keenan. cambridge  uk: cambridge university press. 
 wilks  1  y. wilks. making p