t h e 	h y b r i d 	p h e n o m e n a 	t h e o r y * 
e r l i n g a - w o o d s 
s i n t e f automatic control 
the norwegian institute of technology 
division of engineering cybernetics 
n 1 t r o n d h e i m 
n o r w a y 

a b s t r a c t 
the hybrid phenomena theory  hpt  is a framework for formalizing how dynamic state space models of physical systems are built from first principles. the hpt descends from the qualitative process theory  qpt    forb us  
1   from which it inherits basic concepts like views  phenomena and influences. however  the hpt redefines some of these concepts in a 
more strict manner in order to represent knowledge of physics with the accuracy needed to develop full parametric models. specifically  influences may specify quantified non-linear functions of several variables. a mechanism denoted subsumption is introduced to ensure consistency in the emerging models when different simplifying assumptions are made. the hpt has been implemented in clos. 
1 	b a c k g r o u n d a n d m o t i v a t i o n 
qualitative reasoning   bobrow  1; weld and de kleer  1   has provided valuable insight and methods for analyzing physical systems. yet  several fundamental problems have been identified. the inherent ambiguity described by kuipers  poses a problem in some potential areas of application. the problems with the qualitative mathematics pointed out by struss  imposes limitations on what can be accomplished using any form of qualitative simulation. 
　it is something of a paradox that while hayes  argued that it was time for ai to move away from the toy problems commonly addressed by ai research at that time and tackle a real world problem  he simultaneously argued for a purely qualitative approach. but a large class of problems involving the physical world depends on quantitative knowledge. by choosing a purely qualitative approach  many researchers have disqualified their methods from a vast number of potential application areas in science and engineering. 
　for all the merits of qualitative simulation  it is the authors view that the greatest accomplishment of the 
   *this research was supported by the royal norwegian council for scientific and industrial research under doctoral scholarship grant no st.1.1. 
1 	qualitative reasoning 
qualitative reasoning community is the development of methodologies enabling reasoning about how structural relationships between objects comprising a physical system impose constraints between the parameters and variables describing that system. this reasoning captures essential parts of the reasoning performed by physicists and engineers when building mathematical models of physical systems. however  a predominant fraction of those models incorporate parameters and variables intended to have a quantitative interpretation. 
　the hybrid phenomena theory  hpt  was developed with monitoring and diagnosis applications in the process industry in mind. the hpt builds on the framework of the qpt  forbus  1; forbus  1 . but contrary to the qpt  the hpt derives parametric state space models. the parameters may have a quantitative interpretation. the mathematical models derived provides a basis for quantitative simulation  filtering and estimation schemes developed within such fields as control and chemical engineering. this allows us to utilize quantitative information when available  thus avoiding the problems associated with qualitative simulation. 
   de kleer  laments that physicists have a hard time understanding the goals of qualitative reasoning. the physicists typically argue that they know all that the qualitative reasoning approaches do. and since the methods developed in qualitative reasoning fails to produce the quantitative models the physicists normally use  physicists understandably see little merit in the enterprise. by deriving parametric models commonly used for a number of scientific and practical purposes  the hpt may help convince people outside the ai community about the utility in the qualitative reasoning methods. perhaps we could then initiate a coordinated effort  towards developing a  non-naive physics . 
1 	r e l a t i o n s h i p w i t h t h e q p t 
the qpt can be considered to consist of three components as shown in figure 1. the purely declarative first component provides the framework  or vocabulary  used to represent a description of the physical systems to be analyzed and knowledge on how different physical phenomena affect relationships between objects and variables. the second component combines the description of an actual system  given in the vocabulary in the 


figure 1: components in the q p t and h p t . 
first component  with information on the current state of the system. it produces a set of constraints describing the system in its current state. the procedural third component uses the constraints to derive possible successor states. for each successor state  the procedure of component two is reactivated to produce a new set of constraints. the q p t then iterates until quiescence occurs or the new state equals a previously encountered state. the final result is an envisionment  a description of all possible sequences of qualitative states which the physical system might evolve through. 
   the h p t comprises the same three components. the concepts included in the first component of the q p t are also found in the h p t   but some concepts have been renamed and others reinterpreted to allow for the more accurate description of knowledge necessary to derive state space models rather than qualitative constraints. the concepts of instantiation and activity are retained and the procedures employed in the second component of the h p t are similar to those of the q p t . w i t h the hpt  numerical simulation normally replaces envisionment in the third component. 
the term phenomenon in the h p t replaces the term 
 process  in the q p t .  process  is commonly used in a number of contexts. it normally denotes a series of actions or changes invoked to make or transform something. a heat exchanging process is commonly interpreted to include a number of physical phenomena such as fluid flows  heat flows and possible condensation and evaporation. it is the notions of such individual phenomena which must be formalized in the h p t . the word phenomenon is more descriptive in the current context and therefore less apt to create confusion. 
   similarly  the use of the terms direct and indirect influences as employed in the q p t are counter-intuitive. a direct influence describes how the value of one quantity influences the derivative of another. this means that a change in the influencing quantity only indirectly affects the value of the influenced quantity. an indirect influence on the other hand describes how the value of one quantity directly relates to the value of another quantity. the notion of influences is retained in the h p t   but the names  syntax and semantics differ from those employed by the qpt. 
1 	influences in the h p t 
influences express how the value of a given variable is affected by one or a set of other variables. there are two types of influences  dynamic influences and algebraic influences. dynamic influences correspond to the direct influences of the q p t and specify how a term affecting the derivative of the influenced variable is affected by a 
set of influencing variables. the syntax for a dynamic influence is as follows: 

an example where a variable x  is dynamically influenced by the two variables x1 and x1 is shown in  1 . if this is the only influence affecting x1  the derivative of x  will be computed from  1 . 
 i  
 1  
algebraic influences corresponds to the indirect influences of the q p t   for algebraic influences it is the actual value of the influenced variable which is affected by the influencing variables. the syntax is as follows. 

consider a container with a closed top. the container is partially filled with liquid and a gas is taking up the remaining volume. the liquid has a level h  the gas a pressure p1. the pressure at the bottom of the container  p1  are affected by two different influences given in  1  and  1 . if no other influence specifies p1 as the influenced variable  p1 will be given by  1 . 
 1   1  
 1  
note that a given variable influencing a another variable may do so in more than one influence. this accounts for the possibility of a variable being involved in several terms in an equation simultaneously. 
   any influenced variable  whether directly or indirectly influenced  is computed as the sum of all the influences affecting it. there is an historical evolution here. the notion of a process was first introduced by hendrix . but as is pointed out in the overview and motivation of chapter 1 in  weld and de kleer  1   hendrix approach suffered from poor modularity because variables are calculated inside a process  different processes are not allowed to influence a given variable. the q p t is modular with respect to dynamic variables  it computes the value of the derivative of all directly influenced variables as the sum of all influences affecting it. however  the q p t is not fully modular for non-dynamic variables. although several views and processes may specify indirect influences affecting a given variable  the q p t fails to specify a general mechanism for deriving the value of an indirectly influenced variable whenever two or more influences are pushing it in different directions. the h p t is fully modular in both kind of variables. 
	woods 	1 

1 	different types of quantities 
the h p t distinguish between three types of quantities; constants  parameters and variables. constants are universal and invariable  avagadros number  and the specific heat capacity of water at atmospheric pressure are two examples. 
   parameters are quantities which are associated with a specific object. the value of a parameter may change with time  but the value can always be computed from a prescribed function of other parameters and variables associated with that very object. the heat capacity of an amount of water found in a specific container is an example. this parameter may  somewhat simplified  be described as a function of the mass of the water  no variables associated with other objects will affect it. 
   variables are quantities whose value may depend on other variables as expressed in algebraic and/or differential equations. influences are specified between variables only. parameters and constants  which are within the scope of the definition which the influence belongs to  may be used in the function specification! part of the influence to quantify the effect of the influence. parameters and constants are never influenced. 
1 	views and phenomena 
definitions of individual views and phenomena describe types of interactions in the physical world. the definitions prescribe a set of conditions which must be satisfied for the definition to be relevant in a specific situation. they also specify consequences when an instance of the definition is actively participating in a situation. examples of definitions of views and phenomena in the h p t are shown in figure 1. the purpose of the different parts of the definitions are broadly consistent with the corresponding parts in the q p t   a brief explanation follows below. 
   the i n d i v i d u a l s are listed in the first line of the definition  src  dst and hbr are the individuals in the definition of heat-flow in figure 1. the individual conditions govern instantiation of views and phenomena definitions. once a set of objects which fulfill the conditions specified in the individuals field have been identified  an instance of the definition is created. the objects fulfilling the conditions are bound to the corresponding individuals. such an instance represent a potential interaction between the specific objects bound to individuals in that instance. 
   for the view container-with-liquid in figure 1  it does not suffice that an object a is a container-with-open-top and that the object b is a liquid. the liquid b must in addition be situated in the container a. when all these conditions are satisfied  an instance of contatner-withliquid where a is bound to c and b is bound to / is created. in general  a system may consist of many tanks with liquids. each set of objects which satisfy all of the conditions for the individuals in a definition gives rise to an instance of that definition. each definition is thus applicable to many different objects. 
   also note that instances of views and phenomena are themselves objects and thus candidates for binding to individuals in other definitions of views or phenomena. 
1 	qualitative reasoning 
 defview c o n t a i n e r - w i t h - l i q u i d  c 1  
	  i n s t - n a m e 	v i e w - i n s t - w i t h - h e a t - c a p a c i t y   
  i n d i v i d u a l s 
	  c 	  i s - a c o n t a i n e r - w i t h - o p e n - t o p   
  c a n - c o n t a i n - l i q u i d     
	  1 	  i s - a l i q u i d     
	  p l a c e d - i n 1 	c     
	  q u a n t i t y c o n d i t i o n s 	   m a s s   l   	1     
  r e l a t i o n s 
	  d e f i n e - v a r i a b l e 	temp 
	  r v a l u e 1 	: u n i t   k       
	  d e f i n e - p a r a m e t e r 	hcp 
 :what   heat c a p a c i t y   	r u n i t 	        :compfun 
	  + h c p   c   	  * 	s h c p   l   m a s s   l           
	  c o n n e c t - q u a n t i t y area area 	  c     
  i f   r e s t s - o n   c x     t h e n   r e s t s - o n   s e l f x       
  i l   h a s - h e a t - l e a d i n g - b o t t o m   c     then  has-heat-leading-bottom self    
  a l g - i n f l h  mass l   
	 / mass l  	 * density l  area c     
  a l g - i n f l p  h  
 * h density 1  g   g l o b a l           
 defview heat-bridge  ob1 ob1  
 individuals 
	 obi 	  i s - a object-with-heat-capacity   
	 ob1 	  i s - a object-with-heat-capacity   
 heat-connected ob1 ob1   
 relations 
	 define-parameter 	a l f a 
 rvalue 1 :what   heat transfer coeff  runit  j s-1 k-l m-1    
	 define-parameter 	salf 
 :what   heat transfer pr degree kelvin  runit  j s-1 k - l   r compfun 
 * a l f a  min area obl  area ob1        
 defphenomenon heat-flow  src dst hbr  
 individuals 
	 hbr 	 instance-of heat-bridge src dst    
	 src 	  i s - a object-with-heat-capacity   
	 dst 	  i s - a object-with-heat-capacity    
 quantityconditions 
   temp src  temp dst    
 relations 
 define-variable hstr 
 rwhat   heatflow from src to dst  runit  j s-1    
  a l g - i n f l hstr  temp src  temp dst   
	 * salf hbr  	 - temp src  temp dst      
 dynamics 
  d y n - i n f l temp dst  
  h s t r     / hstr hcp dst    
  d y n - i n f l temp src  
       h s t r     / hstr hcp src      figure 1: definitions of views and phenomena. 
to satisfy the conditions for the individual hbr in the definition of heat-flow in figure 1  the object must be an instance of the view definition heat-brtdge. 
　preconditions describe conditions which may depend on external actions. turning on or off the power supply for a hot-plate is an example. no heat will be generated in the hot-plate unless the power is turned on  but the power does not come on or off depending on the state in the system. at least not until we introduce a feedback loop and starts to control the power. it is beyond the scope of any computer program to deduce when a human will turn the power on or off. 
　quantityconditions concern the values of variables and thus depend on the state in the system. a quantitycondition either specifies absolute limits on one variable  or limits relative to two variables. an example of the first is that there is no acceleration unless the sum of the forces differs from zero. an example of the second is that there is no direct heat flow from object a to ob-
ject b unless the temperature of object a is greater than that of b. the truth value for a quantity condition may change in the course of a simulation or operation of a process plant  but it is always derivable by a computer program having access to the values of the variables. 
　preconditions and quantityconditions together form both the necessary and sufficient conditions for an instance of a view or phenomenon to become active. before introducing the fields describing the effects of in-
stantiation and activity  the hpt concept scope must be explained. a variable  parameter or constant is said to be within the scope of an object if it is defined by that object  or if it is within the scope of an object bound to one of the individuals in the object. in addition  there exists a set of global constants which are inside the scope of all objects. 
　the relations field specifies properties to be associated with each instance of the definition as well as consequences of activity. a statement in the relations field performs one of the following tasks: defines a new variable or parameter to be associated with each instance of the definition  establishes a logical relation involving the instance  specifies creation of a new object which comes into being as a consequence of the instance becoming active  or defines an algebraic influence between variables within the scope of the instance. 
　all fields mentioned thus far are common for both views and phenomena definitions. in addition  phenomena incorporate a dynamics field which specifies dynamic influences between variables within the scope of the phenomenon instance. a view may thus be considered a special kind of phenomenon where no dynamics are involved. 
1 	assumptions and subsumption 
1 	assumptions are the essence of modeling 
it is tempting to assume that it is possible to formalize a mapping from a description of a physical system to a mathematical model of that system. this would be a big mistake. there is no  correct  mathematical model of a physical system  any given model is more or less adequate for the intended application. obtaining a  suitable model requires that the correct simplifying assumptions are made. the effects of a specific assumption propagates through the modeling procedure and will typically influence a number of later decisions. in recognition of this  the hpt incorporates a mechanism denoted subsumption. the purpose of the subsumption mechanism is to disable instances of views and phenomena which become invalid because of an assumption. 
   consider an example with a pan containing an amount of water placed on a hotplate. we want to model the effect of the heatflow from the hotplate to the water. a common simplifying assumption would be to consider the pan and water as one object with respect to the heatflow. the definition of container-with-liquid in figure 1 implements this assumption  the view defines a parameter equaling the combined heat capacity of the two objects. an instance of this view binding the pan and water will satisfy the individual conditions in the definitions describing the heat-flow from the hotplate. but the pan and water still exist as objects  we can not and will not remove them merely because they are bound to individuals in some instance of a view or phenomenon. consequently  the pan is going to satisfy ail the conditions for heat exchange with the hotplate and thus give rise to instantiations of the same view and phenomena definitions describing exchange of heat with the hotplate as the instance representing the combined pan and water object. 
1 	subsumption affects one kind of assumptions 
the subsumption mechanism ensures that conflicts between several instances of the same view or phenomenon definition do not arise. this will only happen when an assumption involving more than one object is required. the subsumption mechanism works from the principle that the most specific alternative prevails. in the example  the choice is between looking at a heat flow from the hotplate to the pan  or a heat flow from the hotplate to a view instance involving the pan. since the view instance is considered more specific than the pan as such  the alternative involving the view instance is selected. the subsumption mechanism merely marks one of the instances as subsumed  it does not remove objects. subsumed objects may still be bound to individuals in other instances  but they will not be tested for activity and hence can never contribute to a mathematical model. any instance where one or more of the objects bound to the individuals are subsumed  is said to be indirectly subsumed and treated as any other subsumed object. 
　the subsumption mechanism is defined as follows: for any two instances insl and ins1 of a given view or phenomenon definition with individuals d1 d1 .. dm  insl subsumes ins1 if and only if  for any individual 
di  i = 1 .. m  the object bound to di in insl is an instance in sb of some view or phenomenon definition such that the object bound to di of ins1 is also bound to an individual in in sb  and the object bound to each of the other individuals in insl is identical to the object bound to the same individual in ins1. 
	woods 	1 

1 	other kinds of assumptions 
phenomenona may appear in different manners. as an example  think of fluid flows which may be laminar or turbulent. which mathematical description to apply depends on the actual appearance of the flow. with the hpt  we would define at least two different phenomena  one describing a laminar flow and another one describing a turbulent flow. these definitions would incorporate different functional specifications in the influence part. they should be mutually exclusive in the sense that their pre and quanticonditions should prohibit both definitions to become active at the same time. selecting one of the definitions will amount to making an assumption. for this kind of assumptions  the subsumption mechanism is irrelevant. 
　as was pointed out earlier  different assumptions are required for different applications. the present implementation of the hpt presumes that the conditions controlling the validity of an assumption is incorporated in the view or phenomenon definition. this amounts to in-
corporating heuristics  an approach which is necessary if we want to incorporate the hpt in systems performing automatic monitoring and diagnosis. 
   if the hpt is to be used as a basis for an intelligent modeling assistant  the user of the program will want to control which assumptions are made  check out the consequences of the assumptions  and possibly modify these. the present hpt implementation explicitly represent all dependencies between instances. retracting a view or phenomenon instance automatically causes all other instances depending on it to be retracted  and removes possible subsumptions caused by the instance. by incorporating some kind of  query the user  precondition  the hpt implementation will be able to support the functions needed in an intelligent modeling assistant. investigating diagnosis of electrical circuits   davies  1  made the observation that making assumptions was vital and that the important thing was to explicitly represent and carefully manage those assumptions. this is certainly true for building mathematical models of physical 
systems as well. the hpt provides a basis for doing just 
that. 
1 	a n e x a m p l e 
the hpt has been implemented in clos on a tl explorer lisp machine. the paper does not discuss the subtleties of the implementation  but to illustrate how the hpt works  some results from running the program on the physical system in figure 1 will be presented. the views and phenomena definitions given in figure 1 is used in the example. two additional definitions are involved. electric-heat-hotplate defines how the temperature of a hotplate is affected when the power is turned on. boiling takes two individuals  a container with liquid and a heatflow and defines how the boiling phenomenon will remove heat and evaporate liquid when the temperature exceeds the boiling point of the liquid. the input description to the hpt program is shown in figure 1. the defobject statement takes two required arguments  the name identifying the object and the name of the 
1 	qualitative reasoning 

figure 1: a physical system to be modeled. 
 defobject pan 'container-with-open-top  bottom-area 1  . . . . 
 has-heat-leading-bottom   
 defobject hotplate 'electric-hotplate  power-consumption 1  . . . . 
 has-heat-leading-top   
 defobject water 	'water-liquid 
	 vaporization-heat 1e1  	. . . .   
 defrelation placed-in  water pan   
 defrelation rests-on  pan hotplate   figure 1: input description to the hpt program. 
clos class to be instantiated to describe the object. the rest of the arguments are optional and specify initial values for variables and parameters defined for the class in question. a series of dashes indicates that not all the parameter values normally included are shown. the input also defines a set of relations between the objects. 
1 	instances and a c t i v i t y 
identifying all possible instantiations of views and phenomena is an iterative task. whenever a new instantiation has been made  this new object may potentially satisfy the conditions posed for some individual in some definition. this may give rise to a new instantiation. figure 1 shows the instances created by the hpt program. instances are described by the name of the definition they arise from with an extra number added to uniquely identify each instances. this is followed by a list of the objects bound to the corresponding individuals in the definition. 
　note that symmetric versions of several instances exist. this is natural since when heat can flow from object a to object b  heat will also be able to flow from object b to object a. two such symmetric instances will never be active simultaneously  the quantityconditions will see to that. depending on the state in the system  various combinations of instances may now be activated  and different models of the system will emerge. space does not permit the exemplification of this. 

non-subsumed hpt o b j e c t s : 
container-with-liquid-1  water pan  
electric-heat-hotplate-1  hotplate  
heat-bridge-1  hotplate 
cohtainer-with-liquid-1  
heat-bridge-1  container-with-liquid-1 hotplate   
heat-flow-1  heat-bridge-1 
container-with-liquid-1 
hotplate   heat-flow-1  heat-bridge-1 hotplate 
container-with-liquid-1  boiling-1  heat-flow-b 
container-with-liquid-1   subsumed o b j e c t s : 
heat-bridge-1  pan water  
heat-bridge-1  water pan  
heat-bridge-1  hotplate pan  
heat-bridge-1  pan hotplate  
heat-flow-1  heat-bridge-1 pan hotplate  heat-flow-1  heat-bridge-1 hotplate pan  
heat-flow-1 	 heat-bridge-1 water pan  
heat-flow-1 	 heat-bridge-1 pan water  
figure 1: instances created by the h p t program. 
1 	reasoning about relations 
the input description of figure 1 specifies a relation 
u
rests-on  between the pan and hotplate. the defini-
tion of the heat-bridge requires that the two objects to be bound to its individuals must be  heat-connected . the present hpt implementation employs a backward chaining approach from the conditions specified in a definition. the rules accounting for the instances in figure 1 specify that: 
 if rest-on a b  then heat-connected a b   
 if rest-on a b  then heat-connected b a   
1 	subsumption revisited 
the example illustrates the utility of the subsumption mechanism. all views and phenomena instances which describes some aspect of the potential heat transfers between hotplate and pan as well as between pan and water has been disabled by subsumption. note that an instance may be passified in more than one way simultaneously. heat-bridge-1 is subsumed by both heat-
bridge-1 and heat-bridge-1 while heat-flow-1 is subsumed by heat-flow-1 and indirectly subsumed by heat-bridge-1. 
1 	future work 
an important aspect of the future development of the 
hpt is to define a set of relations which is consistent and suffices to express all relevant relations between physical objects in the context of building models. redundancy should preferably be avoided as this will only complicate the reasoning which must be performed by the hpt. the solution to this problem should be common for both the qpt and the hpt. 
　the hpt runs into problems whenever the required numeric values for parameters or variables are missing. in this case  qualitative simulation techniques must be employed. the mathematical models produced by the hpt maps easily onto the qualitative constraint models employed by the qpt or qsim  kuipers  1   qualitative analysis techniques may therefore be integrated with the hpt. to convert to a qpt representation  we start with the instances of views and phenomena derived by the hpt. all elements of information in these instances may be considered specializations of the concepts introduced by the qpt  and the mapping onto a qpt representation is thus straight forward. also note that since a state space model is merely a special kind of ordinary differential equation  ode   the procedure for mapping from ode's onto a set of qsim constraints described by kuipers  is directly applicable. 
　the real challenge ahead lies in developing a set of views and phenomena definitions which are as universally applicable as possible. hopefully  the connection to parametric models now established will help convince physicists and engineers about the importance of this task. after all  these are the people who  given the proper tools  should be best placed to formalize our knowledge about the physical world. 
