 
the authors argue for a generalisation of inference from the standard account in terms of truth preservation to one which countenances preservation of other desirable metalinguistic properties. the development is partly historical and partly analytic. a relational account of preservation is then presented and from this the two notions of inferential structure and inferential model are derived. to illustrate the generality of the relational conception of inference  we show how such structures and models can be realised in the development of a legal advisory system. 
1. inference as preservation 
1 historical illustrations 
a conventional dogma takes the essential feature of inference to be the preservation of truth. thus a system of inference is said to be sound if and only if it never permits the inference of a false conclusion from true premisses. the doctrine is sometimes expressed in terms of inferential closure by saying that a system of inference s is sound iff for any set of sentences contains only true sentences  then the inferential closure of under contains only true sentences. 
　　　historically  this view was inherited from boole  shrocder and frcgc and finds its quintessential refinement in the material conditional of classical logic  whose one virtue  as we tell our bewildered students  is that it preserves truth. the secret vice of material implication is revealed only when there is no truth to preserve  for a false sentence materially implies any sentence whatsoever. that vice has been the pulse of an important portion of twentieth century logical research. c.i. lewis  whose most important work had tins interest as its inspiration  and to whom we owe the resurgence of interest in modal logic in this century  located the problem with material implication in its cxtensionality. mis proposed solution lay in introducing a notion of intensional  later called strict  implication. ultimately the focus of his research lay in the investigation of logics of necessity in which  if only the correct system could be 
1 	philosophical foundations 
identified  a suitable conditional would emerge as the necessary material conditional. in the strongest of his systems  strict implication coincides with provable material implication. lewis mitigated the difficulty. a merely false sentence does not strictly imply every sentence whatsoever. his success  however  was imperfect  for every necessarily false sentence strictly implies every sentence whatsoever. but he had improved matters  and the improvement can be expressed in the language of preservation. it is this: strict implication preserves both truth and possibility. whereas inference which is based upon material implication becomes unprincipled if premisses are false  inference based upon strict implication  even from false premisses will be principled  provided that the premisses are possible. and the licensed conclusions will all be possible  even if some of them arc false. 
　　　although lewis argued vigorously that unprincipled inference from impossibilities is no vice  others have not been content. so lewis' advance has spawned new research  this time into systems of implication  and of inference more generally  which permit controlled inferences in the presence of contradiction. richard sylvan and graham priest have introduced the term 'paraconsistem' as a label for systems of this sort. our account will be schematic  because our interest in paraconsistent systems here is merely as illustrations of inference understood as preservation. 
　　　there have been numerous proposals for contradiction-tolerant inferential strategies. we will mention just three  conveniently partitioned by national boundaries. although there has been some debate among their proposers  the three need not be seen as competitors  but rather should be looked upon as having different kinds of applications in different circumstances. 
i. the american programmme 
　　　there have in fact been many american proposals  more than one of them originating with nuel belnap. we mention just one of his. in  belnap 1  belnap imagines a computer required to draw inferences from some stock of sentences to which truth value assignments arrive from more than one source. how in particular  he asks  should the computer exercise its inferential duties when the assignments are in conflict  in this circumstance  he argues  classical inference places no constraint upon what the computer may infer. our interest lies in belnap's diagnosis of the difficulty. it lies  he maintains  in the failure of classical inference to preserve truth when both truth and 

falsity are assigned. the resulting semantic is four-valued  the values being 1 1. 
ii. the australian programme 
     again  there have been many australian initiatives  and of them we mention only one  the strongly paraconsistent approach. the barebones of this approach  also dependent on the truth preservative paradigm  is this: ii we do not accept that p follows from then there must be models which have true at indices where p is false. again  the locus of the failure of classical inference  according to this programme  is its failure to preserve truth at a crucial point in inferential life. to accommodate the truth of contradictions  the truth condition for negations is altered to: 

iii. the canadian programme 
　　once again we mention only one of many suggested approaches. in  schotch and jennings 1    jennings and schotch 1  and elsewhere  the doctrine that truth is the sole preservation-worthy property is called into doubt. in particular  an automated reasoner receiving data from more than one source must be capable of drawing inferences in some disciplined way even when a datum from one source is inconsistent with a datum from another. the approach advocated there looks for additional metalinguistic properties which are worthy of preservation when not all of the sentences of a premiss set can be true. one such property is the level  of coherence of  
definition 
the coherence level of a set of sentences  is the cardinality of the least partition of  into coherent subsets. if there is no such partition  then  
it is a plausible constraint upon an automated reasoner that  in the case in which it receives contradictory data from different sources  it take account that difference of provenance in its reasoning. the requirement that the level of coherence of the inferential closure of  be no greater than  may be thought of as a way of making that requirement formally precise. the requirement of itself does not define any system of inference  but particular schemes of level preservation do. in  schotch and jennings 1  we systematise an inference relation  which is defined: definition 
where 
in  jennings and schotch 1  we introduce the inference relation which is defined: 
definition 

　　　one may find a logic attractive without liking every model-theoretic account that happens to characterise it  and it is tempting to conjecture that a semantic account can be given of the sylvan-priest logics which characterises those metalinguistic properties in addition to truth that their implication preserves. specifically  some of the central examples of allegedly true contradictions that sylvan and priest want to see dealt with arise out of paradox. on their account  a world in which the russell set exists is a world about one of whose inhabitants contradictory sentences will be true. at that world  the russell set both contains itself as an element and does not. what such a view neglects is that the russell set necessarily contains itself and necessarily does not. these properties hold of it in virtue of the definition of the set it is  therefore  the adopted language  and not some feature of a world which permits the russell set to be defined which gives rise to the contradiction. accordingly if one's only concern were that paradoxical contradictions  i.e.  those conjoining necessary truth with necessary falsehood of such a language not give rise to unprincipled inference an implication would suffice that preserved in addition to truth  the language-derivativeness of truth values. such an implication would license the inference  from paradoxical contradictions  only of sentences also dependent for their truth value upon the language. for a preliminary discussion of such a paradoxtolerant implication  see  jennings and johnston s1 .1 it is not claimed of that account that it proves the conjecture. it merely illustrates a point: t r u t h is not the only inferentially preservable property. a system of inference essentially provides procedures by which a set ♀ of sentences  for example  the set of one's beliefs  having some complex of metalinguistic properties can be unfailingly extended to a larger set having the same complex of properties. by all means  we may regard truth as one of the properties to be preserved  but what other properties are to be preserved can depend upon our interests. a practical corollary is that for particular applications  a system of inferential principles should be bespoke  not off the rack. 
　　　some welcome relaxation in the grip of the conventional dogma became evident recently among situation semanticists  who have shifted their attention from truth preservation to the conveyance of information. 
.. .the study of valid inference as a situated activity shifts attention from truth preservation to information extraction and information processing.  barwise 1 p. xiv} 
inference is an activity that attempts to use facts about the world to extract additional information  information implicit in the facts...a sound inference is 
1. cf.  kripke 1  where ihe noli on of the groundedness of a sentence is introduced 
given a sentence a of let us define a to be grounded if it has a value in the smallest fixed point  otherwise ungrounded. .it a is grounded  define the level of a to be the smallest ordinal a such that a has a truth value in 

it is a plausible restriction to place upon an implication relation that it preserve  in addition to truth  the level of sentences in kripkc's sense  when that level is infinite. 
	jennings  chan  and dowad 	1 
one which has the structure necessary to serve as a link in an informational chain.  barwise1 p.1. 
having said all of that  one must still say what distinguishes valid inference from invalid inference in this idiom. here again  the informational requirement for validity is readily viewed as a preservational constraint. for if we consider what the inference is made from on the one hand  call it p   and what is inferred on the other  call it c   it is evident that the information conveyed by p is a subportion of the information conveyed by p and the property of conveying only subportions of that information in c must be one mark of sound inference on the informationextraction view of what inference is. 
1. generalising preservation 
1 the lesson 
inference as typically construed may be regarded as a sentence-formulating activity constrained by preservational requirements. the so-called paradoxes of material implication and of strict implication make those relations inferential liabilities when the premisses which are the basis for the formulation of new sentences lack the only metalinguistic properties which those implication relations arc capable of preserving. the usefulness of an inference relation depends upon its capacity to preserve significant metalinguistic properties. which such properties are significant depends upon the particularities of an application. but in general  inference will remain principled provided that at each step it is constrained by the requirement that what is inferred preserves some property that the premisses happen to have  even if what that is may degrade from inferential step to inferential step. a thought experiment might ideally take us from premisses known to be true to conclusions whose truth is discoverable  but if the premisses are possible though suppositional  we will nevertheless expect the conclusions also to be possible  whether true or not. it is a desideratum of a priori design of inference procedures for particular fields of application  as for example  in diagnosis  that the preservative constraints of inference be fully specified for every stage of the investigation. 
　　　two final points on the subject of truth preservation: first  a completely satisfactory account of the nature of truth has yet to be given. in logical practice as distinct from metaphysical chat  it is not truth  but the assigned truth value 1 which is preserved. merely to call this truth is to give no more than a reading of the semantic value  certainly not an account of it. formally  it is merely the designated value. by contrast  in many real-life cases  the question of the applicability of truth and falsity is at best dubious  and frequently irrelevant. we ask of physical theories  not that they be true  but only that they be consistent with experience and have expressive power and explanatory utility. yet we still must draw conclusions from them in order to test their utility. in this context  the preservation of truth is a curious and puzzling requirement. for the falsification of a consequence of a theory prompts as often as not a modification of the language of the theory rather than the insertion of a negation into it. it is an oddity of the history of philosophical logic that it should so glutinously cling to the preservation of a commodity of which it professes to understand so little. 
1 	philosophical foundations 
　　　finally  we should note that the preservation even of assigned truth is not strictly a feature of inferential practice  but only a necessary feature of valid inference on a particular account of validity. we may think of the principled formulation of hypotheses as an inferential practice  which may involve numerous intermediate steps. but the hypothesis is made before the performance of experiments intended to provide a negative check upon the preservation of truth. the preservation of truth provides a 
　　　standard by which inferential practices are judged; it is not directly a guide for inferential practice itself. there is nothing new in this claim; it is no more than what we teach to introductory students in insisting that they keep their proof theory and their truth theory distinct. 
1 inference and logic 
it is  of course  possible to define a language as an element of a particular formal system  and specify rules for the introduction and elimination of the logical constants of the language. but it is also possible to discuss inference independently of any particular language  even to prove results whose effects we normally notice only when the language of premises and conclusions has been given. thus for example  without knowing anything of the language of premisses or conclusion we may know of a particular inference relation that it satisfies certain structural conditions  say  transitivity  monotonicity  and reflexivity   and we know that any inference relation satisfying those structural properties corresponds to a class of valuations.  scott 1j again  we may know quite generally that if a relation preserves a property  its converse preserves the absence of that property. modus ponendo ponens and modus tollendo toilens for material implication are just particular instances of this structural requirement. another  at least as important for some inferential tasks  is that if causation preserves normality  then the converse of causation preserves abnormality. to take a concrete example from the simplest kind of diagnosis  consider the natural relation between a patient and a thermometer. it is this physical relation which enables the diagnostician to infer from an abnormal length of the column of liquid in the latter to a fever in the former. thus  although ultimately we will want to say what role our ordinary logical vocabulary is to play in inference  it is nevertheless possible to discuss and commit ourselves to general inferential practices independently of any discussion of or commitment to detailed rules governing what sentences follow from what. 
1 preservation as inclusion 
it is a simple generalisation from a monadic to a binary account of the preservation of designated value in inference. define a classical truth relation by the following: 

where v is a classical truth value assignment. an inference relation / between sentences preserves truth iff  for every valuation v. 
clearly any n-valued function will similarly generate a partial ordering of uniform depth n  that is  having uniform length n chains   but preservational sense can be made even when the restriction to partial orders of uniform depth is dropped. the utility of the approach becomes evident when we consider cases in which we hypothesise causal 

explanations of events in real physical settings. to be izuidcd in one's causal inferences by chains of mechanical  electrical  or electromagnetic connexions  or spatio-temporal adjacence is to make inferences which preserve  in the sense outlined  the transitive closures and asymmetric decompositions of relevant natural relations between states. such inference as from smoke to fire or from symptoms to disease may plausibly be called natural inference. 
     the idiom of preservation allows us to represent at a usefully abstract level more particularistic requirements of inference that have already been discussed in the literature. notable in this connexion is the work of nau and reggia |nau and reggia  1: 
possible causes exhausts the possible causes is  if it is so  a useful additional piece of information  but it is causal information  and belongs to the level of domain representation  not to inference. 
　　　the preservation paradigm of inference promotes a 
　　　clear demarcation between representation and inference. its value is best seen when relational distinctions are maintained rather than obscured. it is capable of exploiting the diversity of causal or more generally  productive  relationships  mechanical  electrical  electromagnetic  thermodynamic etc.  and non-causal relationships  topographical proximity  comparative probability  comparative reliability of sensors etc.  as well. 

　　　part of the reason why the usual rule-based approach cannot produce diagnoses satisfying  certain of their criteria  is that the information contained in the production rules is simply incorrect. the underlying causal knowledge is not of the form 
if manifestations then disorder 
typically found in rule-based expert systems but is instead of the form 
if 	disorder 	t h e n manifestations. 
     their own approach looks for a principle which will permit an account of diagnostic reasoning expressible in terms of truth preservation. 
suppose  for example  that a manifestation m1 can be caused by any of the disorders d1  d1  and d1. if m1 is present  then we cannot deduce the presence of d  nor of d1  nor of d1. the correct action would instead be to postulate d1 d1  and d1 as alternative possible hypotheses for what is causing m1. however  if we further knew that d1   d1  and d1 were the only disorders capable of causing m1  then we could 
correctly deduce that at least one of d1   d1  and d1 must be present. this is a special case of a diagnostic principle which we will call the principle of abduction. 
to be sure  if d1   d1  and d  are not only severally sufficient but also exhaustive of the sufficient conditions for m1t then even in the ordinary way of things  there are grounds for inferring their disjunction from m1. but whatever role such a closed-world-like assumption may play for a particular diagnostic algorithm  it is not necessary in a formal account of the kind of inference required here. and from a representational viewpoint  not altogether desirable. the if-then rules from disorders to manifestations assert causal relations. the if-then rules from manifestations to disorders  on the present view  represent possible inferential relations which preserve the transitive closure of the converse of the causal relation. that a certain set of 
1. inferential structures and models 
an inferential structure consists of two elements: 
1. a domain d of objects  where objects are thought of as internally composed of no more than a set of functions and their values.  the assumption is that for each of these a 
normal range of values can be primitively specified or computed.  
1. a set of intransitive and asymmetric relations defined over d.  these arc the relations which preserve the normality of the values of the functions that constitute the objects of d.  
　　　an inferential model is an inferential structure together with: 
1. a partial specification of normal ranges for the functions consisting the objects of d and 
1. a preference ordering on . this specifies what is ideally to be preserved  and what given up in what order in the course of drawing inferences about the objects of d. 
the distinction between structure and model is intended to suggest the parallel use of that vocabulary in the model theory of various propositional logics. to cite a familiar example  recall that  in modal correspondence theory  typically what counts as a model for a first order theory  counts as a model structure  or 'frame'  upon which a model for a modal language is defined. what counts as a 
model for one language counts as the structure for another. the point of insisting upon the distinction here is to emphasise that the language of inferential structures is assumed to be the language of physics  while the language of normality and of inferential strategy is not assumed to be independent of the values  even aesthetic sensibilities of the user of it. both what counts as normal values and what is taken to be preservable depends upon the interests that the model is intended to serve. if the structure represents a complex of devices in an industrial operation  and the functions represent transducers  then the normal values will typically be those which represent whatever is acceptable for the ordinary running of the plant  but they may vary depending upon what the plant is being used to produce. and the preference orderings may vary depending  for example  upon whether the inference is a projection of hypothetical values resulting from a contemplated adjustment or a diagnosis of a detected abnormality. 
	jennings  chan  and dowad 	1 

1 some examples 
examples of such structures and models that come most readily to mind have to do with machinery wearing sensors and patients wearing thermometers or the electrodes of an ecg. certainly these conform closely to the description implicit in our account of inferential models. all represent physical connexions which may be described as preserving normality of the values from certain magnitudes to other magnitudes. in the case of ecg use  we sec particularly the point of treating specifications of normality as of the model and not of the structure. though lead placements do not vary  computerised diagnostic criteria differ from manufacturer to manufacturer and clinical criteria of normality as well as inferential strategies differ from cardiologist to cardiologist. but the conception of inference that we arc advancing goes beyond the standard examples of what is normally regarded as diagnostics to all cases which can be brought within the organisational framework of the general account of inferential structure and model outlined. all that is required is that within the proposed domain of application there be discernible objects in natural relationships  about which we make judgements of normality and within which we seek explanations of abnormalities according to the perceived natural relationships among the objects. to illustrate the generality of the conceptions of inferential structure and model  we consider how they might be realised within the realm of legal advisory systems. 
　　　take for example an application of the inferential model to the remoteness domain |chan  1 . the issue addressed is that of remoteness in the law of negligence. specifically  the question is: how far down the chain of causality could a person be liable for a negligent act so that a damage would be recoverable  negligence usually involves the creation of risk of harm to someone. the injuries of the primary subject of the risk are generally not tcx  remote; the remoteness issue arises when other persons suffer a loss as a result of the negligence to the primary subject  smith  1 . 
　　　the objectives of the remoteness advisor are  1  to establish whether negligence and remoteness is involved and if so  to categorise the negligent act that has led to the damage;  1  once it is determined that remoteness is involved  to retrieve all prior court cases which could be used as precedents in court. the major objective of developing the knowledge based system is the second one. the extent to which the system is able to identify precedent cases that are as similar  or dissimilar  as possible to the one that is to be argued in court is one of the key measures of its values to the lawyer  chan and benbasat  1 . 
　　　in applying the inferential structure  the domain d of objects is the class of all cases past and pending or some subclass of cases satisfying a condition of minimal similarity to the present case. the set of relations r among these objects include similarity relations  with respect to various properties or functions of each case such as physical circumstances or nature of the activity involving risk   jurisdictional relations  cases being adjacent if in the same jurisdiction and distant according to their capacity to create precedence   circumstantial relations  cases being distant according to their circumstantial relevance   temporal  citational  cases being in this relation if the one was cited as a precedent in the decision of the other   seniority  whether 
1 	philosophical foundations 
decided at county court  queen's bench  superior or supreme court  and so on. for simplicity's sake  let us assume that the cases are all civil. 
　　　a binary function for an object may be the result of a case  which takes the value of 1 if the case was decided for the plaintiff  and 1 if it was decided for the defendant. non-binary functions for an object may be activities in a case that involve risk and settlement details. 
　　　so much for the structure. for the model  we must provide two further items  we must say which value counts as the normal value for the function  and provide a preference ordering on subsets of the relations. 
　　　in the first particularly we see concretely that what we want inference to preserve depends upon our own interest. for the solicitor consulting such a system  whether 1 counts as the normal value or 1 depends upon whether he or she is representing the plaintiff or the defendant. the judgement in each precedent case may have favoured either the defendant or the plaintiff  which may or may not coincide with the orientation with which the present case is being prepared. hence for each of the precedent cases also  either 1 or 1 can count as the normal value. 
　　　the preference orderings on  arc also affected by that orientation. but typically  one supposes  the consulting solicitor will hypothesise that there is risk to the client  the abnormal value  and want the system to provide an account of where such risk comes from; then she will hypothesise risk to the opponent and want a similar account. the system will find the source of the hypothesised risk first in the most similar cases already decided within the same jurisdiction and then in cases cited in those in whatever jurisdiction. or  finding no sufficiendy similar cases in the same jurisdiction  it will look farther abroad  and finding cases there will move to cases cited in them. 
1. conclusion 
john austin is said to have rejected the notion that oversimplification is an occupational hazard of the philosopher in favour of the view that it is his occupation. the same may be said of the logician. it is  accordingly  a mistake to take the lessons of logic too literally. the logician speaks of the preservation of truth  and may not himself see  as it is likely that c.i. lewis did not see  the more natural generality even in his own contributions. the canny consumer will discount a logician's rhapsodic attachment to truth as he would a poet's to beauty. he should consider all that there is to be preserved  and design with a view to preserving it. insofar as what he is already doing can be described in such terms  even if they are not his own  he is engaged in constructing a system of inference; it is the logician who should be taking notes. 
