 
the task of obtaining a line labeling from a greyscale image of trihedral objects presents difficulties not found in the classical line labeling problem. as originally formulated  the line labeling problem assumed that each junction was correctly pre-classified as being of a particular junction type  e.g. t  y  arrow ; the success of the algorithms proposed have depended critically upon getting this initial junction classification correct. in real images  however  junctions of different types may actually look quite similar  and this pre-classification is often difficult to achieve. this issue is addressed by recasting the line labeling problem in terms of a coupled probabilistic system which labels both lines and junctions. this results in a robust system  in which prior knowledge of acceptable configurations can serve to overcome the problem of misleading or ambiguous evidence. 
1 	introduction 
given a greyscale image of solid  opaque polyhedra with exactly three planes touching at every vertex  we wish to obtain a line labeling for the image. this is illustrated in figure 1  where  a  is the input image  and  b  is the line labeling produced for that image. the labels used here are based on the well-known work of  huffman  1; clowes  1   
   in this task  there are a number of difficulties which are not present in the original formulation of the line labeling problem  or in subsequent work  waltz  1; malik  1 . it has generally been assumed that input will be in the form of an idealized line drawing  with each junction correctly pre-classified into one of several types  e.g. t  y  arrow  etc . the algorithms proposed 
   *this work was supported by onr contract n1k-1 and onr grant n1-j-1 to donald glaser of uc berkeley. the author gratefully acknowledges support from him  and from jerome feldman of the international computer science institute in berkeley. jitendra malik of 
uc berkeley suggested the application of mrfs to the line labeling problem. 
 a  		 b  
figure 1: line labeling from an image 
		 b  
   figure 1: perceptual similarity of junction types have been critically dependent on the correctness of this a priori junction classification. 
   in an actual image of a set of objects  however  junctions of different types may be perceptually quite similar  and thus difficult to classify on the basis of perceptual evidence alone. figure 1 presents two examples of this. in  a   the circled y junction is flat enough to be quite similar to a t junction. if the junction were misclassified this way  the classical line labeling schemes would be worthless. in  b   we see two junction types taken from  malik  1   an extension of early line labeling work to cover the case of piecewise smooth curved objects. the two junction types are perceptually very similar  but place different constraints on the labels of the incoming edges. as malik points out  it is probably asking too much of a separate front-end process to be able to consistently distinguish these. 
   thus  quite apart from issues of edge detection and junction detection  this problem of the perceptual simi-
regier 

larity of junction types must be addressed by any work which seeks to provide an account of line labeling from images. 
1 	a coupled system 
the approach taken by this work is to reformulate the line labeling problem in terms of a coupled probabilistic system. under this scheme  we do not assume correctly pre-classified junctions  as earlier work has. instead  the issue of perceptual similarity of junction types is addressed by labeling both lines and junctions. once lines and junctions are detected  external evidence for particular junction and line labels is extracted from the image  and this  together with prior probabilities for given configurations of junction and line labels  gives us a posterior distribution over all possible labelings. the idea is to have the system arrive at the labeling with the maximum a posteriori probability. 
　this provides a solution to the problem of perceptual similarity of junction types  since any junction in the image which is not clearly of a single junction type will provide weak evidence for all possible labels. for example  in figure 1 a   the circled junction will provide weak evidence for both the  t  label and the  y  label. the  y  label will eventually be chosen since it is more consistent with the rest of the image  i.e. because there exists a resulting overall labeling with higher a posteriori probability than any overall labeling in which that 
junction is labeled as a  t . note that since the a posteriori distribution over labelings is derived through bayes' rule from the a priori distribution  we are actually letting the prior probabilities of particular configurations of line and junction labels help us determine the label for junctions like this  rather than relying on perceptual evidence alone. 
line labels are determined in the same fashion. 
1 	markov random fields 
markov random fields  mrfs  are used to implement the above ideas. this formalism has found several uses in machine vision recently  cross and jain  1; geman and geman  1; chou and raman  1; 
cooper  1 . before proceeding to outline the details of the system  we present a brief introduction to mrfs  as used here. 
   let s be a set of sites connected through an undirected graph  called the neighborhood graph  and let  be a set of random variables indexed 
by s. adjacent vertices in the graph correspond to neighboring mrf elements. we assume  without loss of generality  that there exists a state space  or label space  l common to all the variables  such that the value  of x  is in l. the term denotes an assignment of some value from l to each element of x  and is referred to as a configuration. 
　x is a markov random field if and only if the probability distribution is a gibbs distribution 

figure 1: system architecture 
where t is the temperature  u is an energy term  and z is a normalizing constant. u is obtained by summing over applicable clique potentials; it is through assigning potentials to cliques1 in the neighborhood graph of the mrf that one specifies constraints governing local label configurations. each time a clique matches a subgraph of the neighborhood graph  its clique potential is added to the sum u. 
　in the work presented here  we wish to take into account not only the prior probabilities of particular configurations  but also external evidence. the external evidence for a particular label ws at a site s after an observation os is given by the likelihood  we make the assumption that these likelihoods are conditionally independent. this allows us to derive the following formula for the posterior gibbs energy after an observation o: 
		 1  
where the vc's are the clique potentials. 
　 chou and raman  1  present a deterministic method  the  highest confidence first   hcf  algorithm  for constructing a configuration with a local minimal a posteriori energy measure  giving an estimate to the configuration with maximal a posteriori probability 
. the basic intuition behind the algorithm is that initially  all nodes take the null label  and after that  the first sites to be labeled should be those for which the evidence is most decisive in favor of a particular label. hcf tends to provide fast convergence  requiring an average of around one update per node. this is the algorithm used in the work presented here. 
1 	architecture 
the architecture of the line and junction labeling system is presented in figure 1. it consists of three stages: line and junction detection  extraction of lines and junctions from the image  and line and junction labeling. the final stage  highlighted with a dotted outline in the figure  is the coupled system that this paper focuses on. 
1 	detection and extraction of lines and junctions 
the detection and extraction mechanisms are covered 

       in detail in  regier  1 . because of considerations of  1  1 recall that a clique is a completely connected subgraph. 
vision 


figure 1: line roles for different junction types 
space  only a brief overview of their operation is presented here. 
1.1 	detection of lines and junctions 
　the line and junction detection mechanism accepts a greyscale image of trihedral objects on a dark background  and produces an array of labels  such that each pixel has been labeled as belonging to either the foreground  the background  a line of one of 1 orientations  or a junction. this stage is implemented as an mrf. 
1.1 	extraction of lines and junctions 
　the line and junction extraction mechanism is responsible for translating the output of the first stage into a format suitable for the final one. it accepts as input the pixel-based array of labels computed by the detection mechanism  and produces a neighborhood graph for the line and junction labeling mrf  in which nodes will represent individual junctions and lines  rather than pixels. it also outputs likelihoods for the various labels of the final mrf. this is done by searching through the pixelbased output of the first stage  looking for individual 
junctions and lines. it must then 
  create a junction node for each junction found. 
  create a line node for each line found. 
  set up the neighborhood graph so that each junction node is connected to the line nodes that correspond to lines touching that junction  and so that each line node is connected to the two junction nodes corresponding to the junctions which that line touches. 
  produce likelihoods for the various node and junc-tion labels in the final mrf. 
1.1 	line and junction roles 
　figure 1 illustrates the roles that lines may play relative to junctions. there are three possible roles  ro  r1  and r1  which are assigned as shown in the figure. this assignment is easily done by measuring the angles between adjacent lines at a junction  as follows: 
ro is that line for which the clockwise arc distance to the next line is greatest  r1 is that next line  and r1 is the next line after that. if there are only two lines meeting at the junction  r1 is null. 
　these roles serve to let us differentiate one line from another at a junction. this will be crucial when designing cliques for the mrf itself. note that we do not assign junction labels to junctions at this point; that is done by the mrf. the idea behind this is to give us enough in-
formation to solve the labeling problem without rigidly classifying a given junction prematurely. 



figure 1: computing junction likelihoods 
　there are also roles relative to lines. the extraction mechanism assigns a role to each of the two junctions that a given line connects: these are jo and ji. there is no particular significance to the numbering here; it is important simply to keep the two distinct. this  together with the other connectivity information described above  is enough to allow us to build the neighborhood graph for the mrf  which will be presented below. 
1.1 	external evidence 
　there is one last thing the extraction mechanism must do: determine the evidence for each of the possible junction and node labels for each node in the mrf being built. the evidence is currently based on relatively ad hoc personal judgments of what would be appropriate likelihoods  given a particular feature of the image. the values given here have consistently yielded good results. 
the label set for junctions is 
		 1  
in the determination of likelihoods for these labels  we examine two cases  depending on the number of lines at a given junction: 
two lines: in this case  the junction has to be an  l   
　three lines: in this case  we let clockwise arc distance from any of the three lines to the next  and compute the likelihoods for each of the threeline labels as a function of  as shown in figure 1. we also set p os l  = 1. 
the label set for lines is 
               	 1  i.e. lines can be labeled as either convex  concave  or occluding. 
　note: it is important to point out that this line label set is not identical to the original huffman/clowes formulation. in particular  in the case of occluding edges  the original formulation marked which side of the edge the foreground of the object was on; this label set does 
regier 

not capture that distinction. thus  we have a collapsed label set  and the solutions found are underspecified in the sense that they do not indicate what is being occluded by what. the decision was made to use this label set since it simplified the graph structure of the final mrf somewhat. current work is directed at updating this system so as to capture the missing distinction. 
　given this  it is straightforward to compute reasonable likelihood estimates for the line labels. for a given line  we let  be the fraction of the length of the line which borders the background; this is computed during the line-tracing process described above. then 
this reflects the fact that if the edge is either convex or concave  we know it will not border the background  while if it is an occluding edge  it may or may not. 
1 	line and junction labeling 
as there are separate label sets for lines and junctions in the line and junction labeling mrf  this is in fact a coupled mrf. we consider first the structure of the neighborhood graph1 for this mrf  and then the cliques used. 
1.1 	the neighborhood graph 
　figure 1 should serve to give a feel for the interplay between junction nodes and line nodes in this coupled system. figure 1 a  shows a portion of some trihedral object  with two junctions and four edges shown. 
　figure 1 b  indicates which line nodes are neighbors of the two junction nodes  e and /. as described above  the structure of a junction node's neighborhood reflects the structure of the junction in the original image  in that the roles  r1  r1 r1  are filled appropriately. for example  since the clockwise arc distance from b to a in  a  is greater than that from a to b  junction e's r1 neighbor is b. 
　figure 1 c  indicates which nodes are neighbors of line node a. recall that junctions are assigned roles relative to lines  as well; junction e fills role jo relative to line a while junction / fills role j1. 
　note that line nodes also have  as immediate neighbors  the neighbors of neighboring junction nodes. thus  the graph constructed by the extraction process also causes line node a to have  as neighbors  each of the line nodes which play roles relative to a's junction neighbors. the neighbor filling the j1 r1 role for a is that line which fills the r1 role for a's jo neighbor. this is line node b. 
　under this scheme  one would expect a's jor1 neighbor to be a itself  since the r1 neighbor of a's jo neighbor  e  is a. instead  the fact that a particular role of a is filled by a itself is encoded by having the corresponding neighbor of a be a special node permanently labeled  self . i.e. the  self  node denotes the fact that a node's neighbor is meant to be the node itself. this is 
1
　　recall that this is the graph over which the mrf is defined.  neighbors  are adjacent nodes in this graph. 
vision 



figure 1: junction catalog  adapted from huffman  
done for reasons that will be made clear when discussing the cliques over this graph. 
　since each line node has two junction neighbors  and since each of these junction neighbors has the original line node as a neighbor  the  self  node is pointed to twice by each line node in the system. 
1.1 	cliques used in line labeling 
　figure 1 presents the junction catalog which the cliques of this mrf embody. it has been adapted from the original  as we are currently not capturing the directionality of occluding edges. 
　figure 1 presents three sample cliques from the set used here. the node being currently examined is marked by the symbol     in each of these. as is usual in the mrf formalism  we try to match each clique against subgraphs of the neighborhood graph. 
　figure 1 a  expresses the knowledge that if the current line is in role r1 relative to a junction which has been labeled  arrow   and if roles r1 and ro of that junction are lines which have been labeled  +   then it is favored1 that this line node take on the label  - . 
　note how the  self  node is used. we can check to see if the r1 neighbor of the current node's jo neighbor is the current node itself  simply by checking to see if the label on the jo r1 neighbor is  self. it is crucial to be able to do this  since we need to be sure that the line node we are currently examining is in fact the middle line in an arrow junction. it is  if the jo neighbor is labeled  arrow   and the jor1 neighbor is labeled  self . 
　referring back to figure 1  and focusing on the junction highlighted by a dashed outline  we find that the 
1
　　recall equations 1 and 1. in general  a low value for a clique potential indicates that the corresponding clique is a relatively acceptable  probable  configuration  while higher values indicate less likely configurations. 



　　　　　figure 1: cliques for line labeling clique corresponds to the assertion that the middle branch of the arrow should be labeled  -  if the junction has been labeled as an arrow  and if the other two branches of the junction have been labeled  + . since this clique covers only junctions which are in relation jo to the line in question  we require a similar clique to take care of the corresponding case when the junction fills role j1. 
　while considerations of space preclude the inclusion here of a complete listing of the cliques used by the system  most are of the type shown in  a   and encode very specific pieces of knowledge from the catalog  regarding what line labels are acceptable in what configurations. 
　figure 1 b  encodes the knowledge that if all three lines touching a junction are  +   it is appropriate to favor labeling the junction  y . conversely   c  encodes the knowledge that if the line filling the role r1 for some 
junction is labeled something other than  -    the junction should probably not be labeled  t . 
　it is the inclusion in the system of cliques of this latter sort  governing the appropriateness of particular junction labels  that makes this work something more than 
just an mrf implementation of a standard line-labeling algorithm. through these cliques  the system is able to perform junction labeling which is not just a direct reflection of the evidence  so that ambiguous or misleading evidence can be overcome  resulting in a globally consistent solution. 
regier 


figure 1: example results 

	 a  	 b  
figure 1: overriding misleading evidence 
1 	r e s u l t s 
　figure 1 presents correct labelings produced by the system for a pair of trihedral objects.1 
　in both cases  the number of node updates required was equal to one per node. recall that the hcf algorithm first updates those nodes which have strong evidence in favor of a particular label. thus   l  junctions and occluding edges tend to be marked first  as there is always strong evidence for each of them.1 these decisions then influence the other choices  eventually resulting in a complete labeling. 
　more interestingly  figure 1 presents a situation in which misleading evidence  the apparent  t  junction in  a   is outweighed by constraints placed on the junction label by the adjacent line labels. thus  the solution arrived at in  b  is one in which what looked like a  t  junction has been labeled as a  y  junction.1 this extreme case indicates the system's ability to overcome the problem of perceptual similarity of different junction types  since in this example  a junction which had evidence identical to that for a  t  was labeled as a t since that was the node label which resulted in an overall labeling with maximum a posteriori probability. 
　as one might expect  the  y  junction is the last to be labeled  as it is the identity of the three convex lines that touch it that force it to take that label  recall figure 1 b  and  c  . this is in contrast to the first figure in figure 1  
1
　　input to the coupled mrf was constructed by hand for the second of the two objects shown  on the basis of what the extraction mechanism would have produced for such an object. 1
　　the presence of only two lines at a junction is strong evidence for an l  and the presence of a stretch of background bordering an edge is strong evidence for an occluding edge  though an occluding edge need not border the background . 
1
　　input to the mrf was constructed by hand for this case as well. 
vision 
in which the  y  had strong evidence  and was labeled relatively early. 
1 	c o n c l u s i o n s 
the problem of perceptual similarity of different junction types  in producing a line labeling from a real image  is addressed through a system which performs both line labeling and junction labeling  in a coupled probabilistic system. lines and junctions are first detected in the image  and then extracted and used to build a graph for a coupled mrf. this mrf then produces the labeling. 
　extensions to this work are currently under consideration. among the extensions being looked into are  a  marking occluding edges for directionality  which will require some minor modifications of the neighborhood graph structure for the mrf  and  b  using other junction catalogs  covering more than simply trihedral ob-
jects. in particular  the junction catalog of  malik  1  has features that seem to require some of the abilities of this system  as we have seen. this would thus be an appropriate direction for extension. 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 chou and raman  1  paul chou and rajeev raman   on relaxation algorithms based on markov random fields   technical report 1  computer science department  university of rochester  1. 
 clowes  1  m.b. clowes   on seeing things   artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
 cooper  1  paul cooper   parallel object recognition from structure   technical report 1  phd. thesis  department of computer science  university of rochester  july 1. 
 cross and jain  1  g. r. cross and a. k. jain  
 markov random field texture models   ieee pa mi  1 l :1  january 1. 
 geman and geman  1  s. geman and d. geman  
 stochastic relaxation  gibbs distributions  and the bayesian restoration of images   ieee pami  1 :1  november 1. 
 huffman  1  d  a  huffman   impossible objects as nonsense sentences   machine intelligence  1 1. 
 malik  1  jitendra malik   interpreting line drawings of curved objects   technical report 1  phd. thesis  department of computer science  stanford university  december 1. 
 regier  1  terry regier   line labeling using markov random fields   technical report  international computer science institute  berkeley  ca  1   in preparation . 
 waltz  1  d. waltz   understanding line drawings of scenes with shadows   in the psychology of computer vision. mcgraw-hill  1  edited by p. h. winston. 
1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

