 
we present an account of action whose main features are that actions are content  properties that agents have in virtue of  i  the bodily movements they effect and  ii  the wider circumstances in which those movements are effected. 'the account includes definitions of one action being a way oj doing another  and of performing one action by performing another. although this account is intended to form part of a theory of intelligent action  including the deliberate and intentional actions of human agents or of autonomous robots  in this paper we abstract from the information processing and cognitive factors involved in such actions. 
1 	introduction 
action is the goal of planning  for planning is reasoning about what actions to perform  given certain circumstances  in order to achieve a goal. most actions  perhaps all  involve movements of an agents body  or more gen erally of its movable parts. what is the relationship between actions and movements1 are actions movements that are caused in a special way  for example by way of certain aspects of the mental states of their agents- their beliefs  desires  and intentions  this seems wrong  for our notions of actions involve much more than mere bodily movements  however caused. consider a simple example: moving a block from one location to another. first   we must determine whether we are thinking of one nonrepeatable particular or of the repeatable kind of action: moving a block from one location to another. if the latter  if is clear that different kinds of bodily movement might be involved. moving a block from one place to another may be a kind of action  but it is not one kind of movement. moreover  whether we have in mind a single nonrepeatable event or a repeatable kind  it is 
   *the research reported in this paper has been made possible by a gift from the system development foundation and was conducted as part of a coordinated research effort with the center for the study of language and information  stanford university. 
1 	philosophical foundations 
also clear that moving a block requires more than a bodily movement  however caused. it also requires a block  and  roughly  a path through which the block can be moved. the action of moving a block cannot be characterized solely in terms of the bodily movements of agents that perform the action; on the other hand  bodily movements can be characterized independently of the actions those movements are associated with when performed in given circumstances. 
   what is the relationship between actions and movements 1 on our theory  actions are not special kinds of movements  but content properties oj agents that agents have in virtue of performing those movements in certain circumstances. we proceed to explain this idea and to show how a theory based on it can be used to develop accounts of relationships between actions that are central to a theory of intelligent action 
   it will be useful to begin by examining a report of an action. in the course of this brief examination  we shall introduce much of our theoretical vocabulary  and some of our theory. 
consider: 
 1  john turned on the light. 
   we take  1  to describe an act an unrepeatable event in the past. actions  on the other hand  are temporal properties of individuals  agents   in the sense of being predicable of an individual at a time. turning on a light  is an action  as is turning on some particular light 1. various people at various times have had the property of turning on a light; the same is true or could be true for the property of turning on 1. the act described by  1   is a movement of john's that has the property of resulting in is being turned on. thus actions are not kinds of acts  but properties of individuals at times. 
    1  does not mention movements  nor use the term  result . but there are movements and results involved in john's action  in his having the property of turning on the light then  and we think these movements and results are the keys to developing a theory of movements  actions and the relations among them. when john turned on the light a complex movement of his body occurred. his elbow straightened somewhat ; his upper arm rotated forward and upward at the shoulder. his right  index finger bent somewhat while the other fingers of his right hand were bent more into a fist  keeping them out of the way   and his body remained stable and his feet stationary. given his position in front of the light switch  the movement  resulted in the switch being flipped to the on position  the appropriate circuit closing  and the light going on. john's turning on the light thus consisted in his effecting a movement which  given the circumstances of the movement  had certain results. 
   actions are grounded in movements. most of the things we do  we do by producing effects on the objects around us by moving our bodies.1 we plan what  to do in accord with what we know about relations among actions. intentional action requires executing various types of movements  with knowledge of which effects they will have. which effects are produced is not merely a matter of which types of movements are executed  however. they also depend on the circumstances in which the movement  occurs; not only the. immediate circumstances  but ones that are quite remote. in the example above these would include  for example  the continued operation of the electrical generating plant that  supplied the lights with power. the type of movement john exe cuted will turn on a light in circumstances like the ones he was in-which light depending on which light is connected to the switch he is standing in front of; in other circumstances it might  result in someone being tweaked on the snout.  or someone being insulted  or a circus dog being commanded to do a somersault. 
   reasoning about action  either in planning/practical reasoning or in plan recognition  must ultimately be grounded in reasoning about movements. in designing robots able to act effectively in a wide variety of environ meuts  we must keep in mind that the tilings the robot can directly control are the movements of its own effectors; to know how to do things in any of a wide variety of circumstances is to know how to move one's body appropriately in those circumstances. for any intelligent agent  there will be a repertoire of types of movements that meet two conditions: 
 a  the agent can produce movements of these types in a very barge range of circumstances. 
 h  the agent knows what effects movements of these types will have in  at least  some of  the types of circumstances it  encounters. 
that  is  an intelligent agent must  grasp at least part of the causal role of the movements it can produce in the environments in which it is likely to find itself. it must associate with the movement types a pattern or relation between types of environments and the effects movements of that  type will have in these environments. we call these relationships the meanings of types of movements. 
   the term  meaning  suggests the perspective that underlies our approach. we regard movements as having propositional contents  and in this regard there is a structural similarity to utterances. the propositional con-
1
 we do not here address the issue of purely mental actions. 
in the interests of simplicity  we shall be dealing only with the kinematics of movenients  abstracting completely from considerations of masses and forces. finally  we shall not consider actions of maintenance and/or prevention. 
tent of an utterance what  is expressed-depends on the type of sentence used and the context and wider circumstances in which it occurs. the propositional content of a movement what it results in-depends on the type of movement and the context and wider circumstances in which it  occurs. the term  meaning  has been used for the relation between circumstances and propositional content associated with sentences. here we extend it to types of movement and types of result.1 
   our account is based on a good deal of oversimplification and streamlining  both with respect to agents and the language we use to describe thern  and our goals are strictly limited. we assume that the agents in question can be viewed as systems with a set of effectors related by an architecture; the types of movement  of the whole system are systematically determined by the types of movements available to the effectors and the architecture. these agents effect movements; movements are concrete  unrepeatable particulars that belong to various types acts  then  are movements effected by agents. an agent who effects a movement of a given type is said to execute that type. such executions  which play the role of basic actions in our theory  constitute our first category of actions. 
　when an agent effects a movement  of a given type in certain definite circumstances  that  movement will have various results  propositions made true by the effects of the movement. we say that the agent  beings about these results. this is our second category of actions  which we call accomplishments.1 we consider only these two categories of actions in this paper and focus most of our attention on accomplishments. 
   actions are mainly of interest t.o people insofar as they are done purposively  intentionally  vindictively  and the like. the part  of our theory that we present here does not touch any of these interesting features of action. the only reason it doesn't apply to a tree falling as well as to a man shooting is that the former is not an act: frees don't effect movements; they just. move. nothing in our theory explains the difference between acts and other movements. 
　before we can develop an account of the meanings of movements  we need to develop some ideas about movements themselves. we turn to this in the next section  and to the meanings of movements in ′1. in ′1  we introduce actions and focus especially on those actions  accomplishments  that can be characterized in terms of the result brought about we also define certain centred relations involving actions and movements. in ′1  we briefly discuss related work and the last section contains some conclusions and a preview of further research. 
1
　　 we do not assume  however  that an act has a unique content. in  israel and perry  1  israel and perry  1l   we develop a notion of content that allows an event  act  utterance  etc.  to have multiple contents. 
1
　　the result that is brought about need not be intended; we are using the term  accomplishment  in what might be called its wry sense  according to which one could focus on a quite unintended result  of someone's endeavors  and say   that's quite an accomplishment . 
	israel  perry  and futiya 	1 

1 	movements 
we take movements to be concrete particulars. they belong to various types  and are effected by agents at particular times  in particular places  and in specific circumstances. the results of a movement depend on the type of movement- effected  the agent  time  place and circumstances. our example focuses on a a certain coordinated movement of arm  hand and finger that  we call shall  flicking . as we have noted  the same type of movement can be used to do different things by differ-
ent agents  in different circumstances  at different times. thus it is natural to associate relations between circumstances and results with types of movements. we call these relations the meanings of the movement types. 
   the movement types with which we associate mean nigs involve the whole body and all its effectors. con sider again john s flicking in the immediate neighborhood of the light  switch. when we said that that type of action in that  circumstance would have- as a result that the light gets turned on  we didift really just imagine john flicking. we imagined him nicking while standing still. if he had moved his feet so as to take a full step backward  while his right  arm went forwards and upwards  he would not have turned the light on  but would merely have pawed the air ineffectually if he had moved his feet so as to take a full step forward  he would not have turned the light on  but merely have hanged his knuckle against the wall. 
   when a person flicks  his arm and hand move as a part of an ensemble of movements and non-movements of other bodily parts. the movements that we deal with m this essay are complex movements of the whole body people often think of partial movements  and movement types   and 'flicking' can be thought of as a label for such a partial type. in so thinking  they are focusing on a  perhaps  complex partial movement and ignoring the movements  or non-movements  of the rest of his body these latter form the movement contest for the salient partial movement. the flicking is salient because it constitutes the increment  given the movement context and the wider circumstances  necessary for turning on the light. in a more complete account  we would need to be able to keep track of these other movements; to have a theory of movements of persons and other systems  we need to relate it to a theory of the movements of their parts. for our purpose in this paper  however  a very simple conception will suffice. 
1 	meanings 
let us suppose that  john executed the flicking movement and turned on the light  intentionally. we can imagine him realizing that he was standing right in front of and in easy arm's reach of a switch that he believed was connected in the appropriate way to the light. why does he effect the movement that  he does'/ 
   we might represent what john knows about movements that explains his doing what  he did  as a generalization about  i  movements of the body   ii  complex types of movement  iii  circumstances in which those movements occur  and  iv  results. 
1 	philosophical foundations 
 1  if j effect a movement of the flicking type  while otherwise standing still  in circumstances in which i am standing directly in front of and within easy arm's reach of a light switch of a certain kind that is in on the 1 position and which is correctly connected up to a functioning light  then a result of such a movement will he that the light so connected will get turned on. moreover  if 1 simply stand still  then  in those very same circumstances  the light will not get  turned on. 
   the second sentence should not. be interpreted as saying that there is no other way  in those circumstances  for john to bring it about that  the light is turned on. it simply says that if john's total body movement is a sufficient condition  in the circumstances  of the light  being turned on  then his flicking movement  1 particular  is a necessary part of that sufficient condition. 
bet us now attempt to generalize and abstract  by way 
of the following generalization over movements  m  involving parameters for total movement types  m   cir cumstanees  c  plus auxiliary parameters for objects and relations involved in  1   and results  p  plus auxiliary parameters . 
 *  any movement in that is of type a/  that is effected in circumstances of type will have 
as a result that  
    oven  *   we can associate a relation between  types of  circumstance  and  types of  results with the movement type m. we call this its meaning and denote it  as thus we say 
1 	actions 
we distinguish two categories of actions  executions and accomplishments. 
1 	executions 
executions are actions defined simply by the types of movements executed. we use    as short for  executes 

1 a executes m at / 
1. m is of type m 
   we assume that the results of a movement of type a/ occurring are identical with that of an agent  executing a. movement of type a/. someone interested in the theory of dance  for example  might he interested primarily in executions; typically  however  both as agents and theorists  we are not primarily interested in executions  but in accomplishments. 
1
　　 note that c is not quite a property or type of circumstance  and /' is not quite a proposition. they are what might he called parametric properties and propositions. 

1 	a c c o m p l i s h m e n t s 
accomplishments are actions defined by results; they can be reported by way of a certain canonical form:  brings it about that p. we use bp as short for  brings it about that  later  in we shall introduce a formal language within which to model some of the logic of accomplishments; in this section  as in the previous sections  our treatment is informal. 

1 	t h e way of relation 
our account allows us to analyze various important relations between actions. 
   consider the following piece of practical advice or expression of commonsense know-how: 
 1  flipping the light switch to the on. position is a way of turning on the light  to which the switch is connected in the appropriate way . 
   what  do we mean when we say that  flipping the switch to the on position is a way of turning on the light1 there is a relativity to circumstance that is suppressed. we re ally mean that flipping the switch to the on position is a way of turning on the light in certain circumstances c 
   when the wiring is installed  the fuse is not blown  the power is on  etc. on the view sketched so far  any case  act   in which an agent flips the switch will involve that agent's executing a movement type that  in the given circumstances  has as a result that the switch is flipped. the same is true for any case of an agent's turning on the light. when we say that accomplishing the first is a way of accomplishing the second  we are claiming that however  in those fixed circumstances  you bring about the first  you will have brought about the second. 
   it will help to introduce the concept of an execution being a mode of an accomplishment in a circumstance: 

now let   ' be fixed as above. in  '  bringing it  about that the switch is flipped to the on position is a way of bringing it about that the light is on iff any type of  total body  movement m which is a mode of bringing it about that the switch is flipped to the on position is a 
mode of bringing it about the light  to which the switch is connected  is turned on. more generally  we define a. family of two place way of   w o   relations between accomplishments parameterized by c: 

　　we have in mind cases in which the relevant causal chain does not involve the beliefs  desires  and intentions of another agent. we do ultimately intend to accomodate cases  e.g.  in which one person brings something about hy convincing another to perform do something  but the intuitions we rely on here pertain to the simpler cases. 
   these relations are pre-orders; they are reflexive and transitive. reflexivify is a mildly and innocuously counterintuitive property: in c  bringing it about that the switch is hipped is a way of bring it about that switch is flipped. transitivity is central to means end reasoning. what of symmetry and antisymmetry  in the circum-
stances c  bringing it  about that  the light is turned on is not  a way of bringing it about the switch is flipped to the on position  but nothing in our account  rules out cases m winch  relative to some circumstance c   bringing it about that  the light is turned on is a way of bringing it about that switch is hipped to the on position and vice-versa. plausible examples of symmetry  though  are hard to come by. we preempt the search for such cases by declaring in advance our readiness to accept  the antisymmetry of the wo relations  and thus  our acceptance of the claim that  given a jutd circumstance   '  accomplishments form a partial order. 
1 	t h e vo and per relations 
in the foregoing  we defined two temporal properties of agents   i  that of an agent executing a movement  of a type at a time  and  ii  that  of an agent bringing it about that p at  a time. we also introduced relations among action properties and circumstances:  i  the relation of a movement execution property being a mode of accomplishing a proposition in a type of circumstance and  ii  the relation of one accomplishment property being a way of for another accomplishment  property  in a type of circumstance. we now bring these together in an analysis of the by relation. we do things by doing other things; that is  we perform some actions by performing others. our analysis of actions involves two categories: executions and accomplishments. so  too our analysis of the by relation involves two subrelations. consider: 
 1  john flipped the switch to the on position by moving by flicking. 
 1  . john turned on the light by flipping the switch to the on position. 
   we offer definitions of two relations involving agents and times  that of an agent bringing it about  that p by executing a movement of a certain type in a circum-
stance at a time  and that of an agent  at a time  bringing if about that p by bringing it about that q  in a circumstance. these two relations together comprise our analysis of the by relation we use the notation vo  to suggest  in virtue of  for the first and per. for the second. 

thus  1  is true iff  roughly : 
 1'  john effected a movement of the flicking type  in circumstances such that any movement of that  type  in that kind of circumstance  would have as a result that the switch directly in front of which that 
	israel  perry  and tutiya 	1 
