 
this is a connected scries of arguments concerning paraconsistent logic. it is argued first that paraconsistency is an option worth pursuing in automated reasoning  then that the most popular paraconsistent logic  fde  is inadequate for the reconstruction of essential first order arguments. after a case is made for regarding quantifiers as dyadic rather than monadic operators  it is shown that the addition of such quantifiers to fde allows an implication connective to be defined yielding the known logic bn1. refining the treatment of implication in a manner similar to that found in intuitionist logic leads to the more interesting system bn. 
1 paraconsistency 
so many authors recently have speculated on the advantages of paraconsistent reasoning for the inference 
engines of intelligent systems managing large bodies of data that one hesitates to enter the lists again in support of the idea. prominent among its champions are belnap  dunn  sylvan  da costa  arruda  priest  brady  mortensen  urbas and patel-schneider.1 
　briefly  paraconsistent logic is motivated by distress at the classically valid form of inference 

given an inconsistent database and a classical logic for deducing information from it  inference might go anywhere. classical logic is supposed to be the maximal system  closed as a logic should be under uniform substitution for its variables  in which inference always preserves truth. the claim that classically valid inference does preserve truth is already suspect on many grounds- for example such inferences as that from a to that from and that from to can be assessed for truth-preservation only on the 
 
   see the bibliography below. speculation is all that any of the rioted authors has achieved  for despite the rash of papers extolling the virtues of such reasoning the great paraconsistent database manager has yet to be written. 
1 	philosophical foundations 
basis of some theory as to what the arrow means  and the opponents of classical logic are not about to accept its theories of meaning without argument but in any case in the canvassed uses of logic truth preservation by itself is not really enough  because the presented information need not be truth-like. especially  it need not be consistent. when we ask what pronouncements should be made by a mechanical reasoner  we typically have in mind a system on whom the world  everything that is the case  impinges not directly  for it has no senses or like means of immediate access  but indirectly through what it has been told. and of course what  it has been told is not constrained to be verisimilar  especially if it gets its tellings from many independent sources. 
   so even if it is necessary that the world be closed under classical logic  the best reasoning stratregy for beings like ourselves with access only to a corrupt and patchy version of it may well be to shy from the blithe thought that since inconsistency is impossible it does not matter what conclusions we draw from a contradiction. moreover  even if we have the wisdom to be as gods  either never having inconsistent belief sets or at least never deducing too much silliness from them  the same is not true of our machines. outside science fiction  automated reasoners hick the nous to recognise silliness when it happens. now some fast and dirty checks for grossly contradictory data can usually be applied  and in current database technology  without really intelligent manage ment systems  these suffice to keep things clean. where the user interface at the input end is something as sophisticated and flexible as first order logical notation  however  they certainly will not. even in fragments of the language for which consistency is decidable the complexity of known decision methods is exponential  so it is not generally feasible to perform a full consistency check for a large body of information. this is especially so where the information tends to change over a short span  so that the life of data in the record may be shorter than the duration of a consistency check. so where there is little control over the format in which data might be entered  and where the roll-over time for data is short  inconsistency must be treated just like any other falsehood: we do not want it  and if we discover it we shall isolate or eliminate it  but in the meantime we must continue to reason in the hope that it does not lead to too 

many wrong predictions. and there's the rub. what we want overwhelmingly is that our automatic reasoner shall give us predictions  strong and useful ones at that  and also that the claims it makes be true. these desiderata are in evident conflict. the sufficient strength re luirernent cannot be compromised very radically  or our system ceases to be useful  so we have no option but to weaken the second desdideratum to an attainable goal such as that nearly all of the predictions be true. since inconsistency is widespread  undetectable and dangerous i.o this weaker goal  it seems prudent to base inference on a fault-tolerant logic in which the odd contradiction is allowed to occur without rendering the data totally corrupt. 
1 	f i r s t d e g r e e e n t a i l m e n t s 
there are many pararonsisfent logical systems on the menu  but for the remainder of this paper we shall concentrate on the suggestion  emanating from work of smiby's dated around i1  first given its paraconsistent interpretation by dunn and taken seriously by belnap  sylvan  priest  levesque and patel schneider among others  that we liberate truth table reasoning minimally by allowing statements to take not just truth values but sets of truth values. there are evidently four such sets: 

that is  a statement can be true  false  both or neither. 
to assist readability  these four cases will be abbreviated to the single letters t  f  b and n respectively. now conjunction  disjunction and negation  are easily seen to correspond to functions on these four cases: 

 the relation of material implication also extends in the obvious way from truth values to sets of truth values; formula a materially implies formula. b iff in passing from a to b we neither lose truth nor gain falsehood  these two conditions are of course independent . they induce an implication order on the sets of values thus: 

that is  f implies everything; everything implies t; b and n imply themselves but not each other. 
　the logic determined by the four-point structure is the system fde of relevant first degree entailments  sometimes called  tautological entailments . as is well known 1 the alarming inference from an arbitrary contradiction to all points west is avoided by fde  but as is again well known this avoidance comes at a price. the price is the invalidity of resolution in the form 

and of its special case in which c is null  the disjunctive syllogism 

gven the disjunctive syllogism  we could argue thus: 

after the. shock and horror at the thought of rejecting those principles has begun to subside it usually crystallises into two lines of opposition to this kind of paraconsistent logic. the first is that the disjunctive syllogism at least  and maybe resolution also  is just obviously good reasoning. this is usually said in a special voice reserved for that emphasis needed in philosophy when labouring the obvious in the face of some paradoxer inclined to point out that arguments in favour of the obvious are a little hard to come by. the second is that without resolution and material detachment reasoning would be hamstrung. this second claim deserves to be taken seriously  and is undecided in the present state of the research program. the present paper is motivated by the need to take it seriously  and will address parts of it below  but first it is necessary to say something in response to the former objection. 
　the simplest response is to challenge the claim of obviousness head-on. given the need to reason under inconsistent assumptions  it just is not obvious that the disjunctive syllogism  for example  is applicable. what underlies the apparent naturalness of that argument form is perhaps some such thought as this: we are given that one of the disjuncts  either a or b  is the case  and we are given that it is not b; so what  can it be but a  that is  a disjunction cannot  be barely true  for its truth must arise out of that  of one of its disjuncts. so where we have assumed enough to make the disjunction true we must have assumed enough to make it appropriate to go on with one disjunct or the other. now if  also holds under our assumptions  it can't be b that underpins the disjunction  on pain of inconsistency  so it must be a. now the difficulty i find with this thought is not that the implied argument is circular  appealing precisely to the disjunctive syllogism in the metalogic  but that the claim that  it can't be b that underpins  is in the disputed case plain false. look at the displayed derivation: the disjunction does come from b  in the grossest and most blatant way  and if this fact causes us to incur the pain of inconsistency then such a pain we must bear. 
1 sec for example  belnap  1 . 
	slaney 	1 

　there is a slightly deeper point to be made here  about the nature of logical theory. the starting point of all logic is the question of which are the valid  perfect  reliable  necessarily rational  forms of argument. what we do in answer to this question is to think up some argument forms which seem good to us  isolate what we take to be the logical constants involved  formulate rules of inference to govern the behaviour of these and thus arrive at a formal calculus. it is usually after this that we devise a semantic story suited to the inferences we find acceptable. what  we thus produce is a theory sufficing to catalogue the allowable argument  forms across the chosen range. we somehow have the impression that our logic is inexorable  so that to question it is not even intelligible. ligible. clearly this inexorability is an illusion. the formed theory goes a long way beyond the intuitive reflections that gave rise to it  so that it. applies to many arguments 
of sorts not considered at all when we so readily assented to the rules. when we accepted modus ponens as part 
of the meaning of 'if we may have been unable to imagine what a counter-example could possibly be like; but later we come across the sorites paradox or the semantic antinomies and perhaps our imagination is expanded to encompass such a thing at least we might well come t.o the view that the orthodox formulations of modus ponens miss some of the subtleties of the rules which really are or ought to be parts of the meaning of 'if. similarly  when we considered resolution or the disjunctive syllogism we may have thought: yes  1 reason like that; 1 would re-
gard it  as quite irrational not to. but of course we were not. then thinking of reasoning situations that involve taking inconsistent assumptions seriously. when we do confront the problem of the logic of inconsistent theories  such as large unstructured databases  we find our intuitions less than ideally firm. it is disquieting t.o have our logic challenged  but the mature philosophy of logic should start from tin.' reflection that logical theories  like any theories  are perpetually open to challenge and that logic can no more be shielded from the hard questions in its domain of application than can any other study. 
　so much for the assertion of obviousness. the other major objection to paraconsistent logic in the presently canvassed style is that. it.  s too weak to allow reconstruction of standard reasonings whether their premises be consistent or inconsistent. weak it is  and its weakness i.s of two sorts. firstly it omits many of the classically valid inferences  such as the noted resolution and disjunctive syllogism  which turn just on the properties of the extensional connectives. it remains to be seen whether the omitted principles really pay their way in classical logic or whether anything they are good for can be achieved paraconsistenfly by some other means. this paper is not really about weakness in that sense. the second sense in which fde is weak is slightly less obvious but none the less important. it  is weak in that it is fragmentary. classically  all the other connectives needed for truth-table reasoning can be defined in terms of negation and either conjunction or disjunction  so once the logic of these connectives is settled there is no more to be said  but this is not the case once we move to fde. crucially  the operation of material implication is inexpressible in 
1 	philosophical foundations 
terms of the given extensional connectives. true  we can define a connective in the classical way 

but this is no sort of implication in the present context as it fails to satisfy any suitable principle of detachment. so the language stands in need of enrichment in places where that of classical logic does not. 
　this need for enrichment is even more obvious at the quantiiicational level. clearly we can add quantifiers of the usual classical sort  but the effects of so doing are not the usual classical effects. with a model we may associate a nonempty domain of individuals  letting an interpretation assign to each predicate symbol two subsets of the relevant power of the domain: positively  those n-tuples that satisfy the predicate  and negatively those that dissatisfy it. then an atomic formula 

is true for the interpretation iff the tuple consisting of the individuals assigned to terms t1 . . .tn is in the positive set assigned to f  and false iff that tuple is in the negative set assigned to f. truth and falsehood for com pounds built up with connectives is as before  and the clauses for quantifiers are that  is true iff a is true for all v-variants of the given interpretation and false iff a is false for some invariant  while the existential a is true iff a is true for some invariant and false iff a is false for all of them. this is fine as far a s it goes but it does not go far enough. most of the important forms of quantificafional argument are not captured by this logic because they are not even expressible. in order to validate 
all footballers are bipeds 
socrates is a footballer 
so socrates is a biped 
-an argument commonly supposed to be of an acceptable form we need to be able to say not only that everything is bipedal but that all footballers are. that is  we cannot get by for perfectly ordinary reasoning purposes without restricted quantifiers. now classically there is a familiar trick available to get us out of this problem: we can re-express 'every footballer is a biped' as 'everything is if~a-footballer-then-a-biped'.the latter we can express using the conditional connective and an unrestricted quantifier. but where no genuine conditional is available there is no such trick available either. 
1 	q u a n t i f i e r s 
the simple quantiiicational devices we were all taught in our first  year of learning logic are quite inadequate to express most of the quantifiers used in reasoning. even in classical logic  where many conceptually distinct notions are collapsed together in order to allow a poor base vocabulary to give rough and ready expression to as wide a range of constructions as possible  we have no means of proving logically valid such simple arguments as 
most logicians are animals 
most logicians are underpaid 
therefore some animals are underpaid 

and no convenient way of bringing out the ambiguity of a sentence like 
most students are smarter than most wombats. 
nor are we given a logical form  identical up to variations in the quantity indicator  for examples like 
all fs are gs 
several fs are gs 
at least six fs are gs 
hardly any fs are gs 
finitely many fs are gs 
we are unlikely to want to investigate the logic of many such quantifiers: in the case of vague quantifiers like 'several'  'few' and 'hardly any* it is insufficiently interesting to repay the effort  while for such examples as 'finitely many* and 'most' it is inconvenient because not compact. nonetheless  we should give thought to their logical form  if only because the general form of the quantifiers we do need to investigate also underlies the others.1 
　so the least we need in the way of notation for quantifiers q is a tripartite structure 

where q is a quantity indicator  'all*  'some'  'most'  'thirteen*  etc.   v is the variable  or in the more general case the several variables  bound by the quantifier  and r is a formula specifying the subset of the domain over which the quantifier ranges. thus we might represent tor every student  x' as   and write 'all students are more intelligent than some wombats' 

that is  for every thing  x  such that x is a student  for some thing  y  such that y is a wombat  x is more intelligent than y. this connective-free notation for restricted quantifiers can easily accomodate the  non-standard  
examples above: given a notation m for 'most' we can write 

as in 'most students  even some logic 1 students  are smarter than most wombats'  and distinguish it  from 

as in 'most students are smarter than most wombats; that's even true of willie the wonder wombat'. 
　so we have some notation for quantifiers which does not depend on the connectives in our logic. now in the cases of the usual quantifiers to which logical theory applies  the universal and existential ones  we need to ask what inferences a decent logic should validate. in the classical case the answer is easy. for the universal quantifier we want premises v to entail  if b can be deduced from t and a taken together without cheating. cheating here is appealing to free occurrences of v 
　　1 see belnap's paper  belnap  1  on restricted quantification for a start on some of the issues. the line taken here is rather different though not completely incompatible. 
in the premises p. conversely  we want the above argument form about socrates the footballer: for any term t 1 
from and we can deduce .. the existential quantifier is governed by the dual principles. for any t  b follows from and     and conversely we want the rule of choice: from b we can get from whatever follows from a and li  again without cheating  in this case  no free v in the conclusion or in any side premises appealed to . semantically  the universal 
 b is true iff whatever individual i from the domain is assigned to v  a materially implies b while the existential b is true iff the assignment of some individual to v satisfies both a and b. 
　for the four-valued paraconsistent logic we can keep the classical truth conditions  making b true for v iff for every v-variant v' of v 

where the order is the relation of material implication as specified earlier. for the existential we may take b to be true iff for some v variant v of v 

however  we also need falsehood conditions  and these are less clearly dictated by the need to capture simple syllogistic inferences. the most  natural condition under which a universal claim is to be denied is the existence of a counter-example to it. that is is in ifr there is some v-variant v of v  such that 

for the nonexistence of an a that is b the expected condition would surely be that it be false of everything in the domain that it is an a which is b 'thai is  i  is in  iff for every v- variant v 

the upshot of all this is that the existential quantifier  just as classically  is equivalent to the unrestricted form w i t h a connective  conjunction . 

the universal quantifier  however  is something new. 
1 	i m p l i c a t i o n : b n 1 a n d b e y o n d 
one oddity of classical logic  retained by some authors in order to smooth the definition of 'formula1 and the statements of axioms or rules  removed by others in the interests if intelligibility is the vacuous quantifier. a formula such as 

is either nonsense or merely a long-winded way of saving 

　　1 strictly  t must he free for v in a. the same applies to the introduction rule for the existential quantifier. technical detail in these matters is not appropriate to this sketch  however. 
	sidney 	1 
now when quantifiers are correctly construed as being of the type to make two predicates into a sentence  vacuous quantification is no longer just circumlocutionary. consider the existential quantifier first. what does mean where x does not occur free in a or b'i well it is true iff some x-variant makes both a and b true  and false iff they all make a or b false; but since x does not occur in either formula what holds for one x variant holds for all of them. in other words   is exactly equivalent in the vacuous case to a & b. since no connectives are needed to define the dyadic existential quantifier  any logic with such a quantifier does not need a primitive conjunction: the connective & is definable in terms of the quantifier. this is so classically and remains so in our present paraconsistent logic- as it does  in fact  over a very wide range of first order systems. 
　the universal quantifier is even more interesting in this regard. like the existential one it defines a connective which we can easily calculate to correspond to the following table of values: 

unlike conjunction  this connective is not definable in terms of the usual extensional ones. it is however familiar  at least to the vast and happy readership of  meyer et a/.  1   as the implication matrix of the logic i1. let us fix it as a properly defined connective  then  by the usual trick of letting w be the first variable in the standard enumeration of variables which does not occur in a or b. then 
and it will readily be seen that b is equivalent to so the classical move of confining attention to unrestricted quantifiers is still available except in some vacuous cases. once again  the connective lias been defined using quantification  so not only conjunction but also implication is redundant in a logic with dyadic quantifiers. clearly  if we were to go on with the other aristotelian primitive 'no s is p' we should be able to define negation as well  and thus arrive at a logic in which the only undefined constants are quantifiers. it is amusing to note that aristotle was so close to an adequate logical vocabulary and theory: only the fact that he tried to manage without variables prevented him from completely anticipating frege. it is also worth noting that conjunction  implication and negation continue to be definable in the present way over a wide range of logics  from all of the anderson-belnap relevant systems to lukasiewicz many-valued ones. the motivational significance of this fact is considerable  since the intuitions regarding universality are much more firmly rooted than those regarding implication  to the extent that while one still hears complaints that the logic of implication is esoteric and contrived  superfluous to requirements or even downright incomprehensible  no-one dare say such things about the logic of 'all'. 
1 	philosophical foundations 
　b n 1 may be a known logic  but it is not the end of the journey. while its underlying four-point lattice is as a de morgan lattice polynomially free  so that it tells the whole story about first degree entailments  the same is not obviously true of its theory of implication. such strange theorems as 

are brought about not by any offered insight into the nature of reasoning but simply by the lack of different places to put b. these reflect the fact that the impli cation of bn1 is a material implication. while this is not necessarily a bad thing  and indeed b n 1 is an interesting logic  there are related systems which are prooftheoretically more elegant and philosophically more satisfactory. hence we move on towards a more refined account of implication. 
　the simplest way to loosen up bn1  giving it a minimally intensional implication operator  is by basing models not on a single assignment of values but on a partially ordered set of them. this idea is familiar from intuition ist logic: the values being epistemic rather than ontic  the  truth  at any stage is partial. the reasoner should therefore take account not only of the values of propositions as they are given but. also of the values as they might be on receipt of more information. for this purpose deletions from the data are not considered  though if we wished to investigate a non-nionotonic construal of logic they could be. possible extensions to the data  being sets  are partially ordered by inclusion  inducing a natural partial order on the associated valuations. there should be a matching inclusion requirement on the domains of individuals as in the intuitionist case. since there is addition only -never subtraction we should expect that for any atomic formula p  if p is true at a valuation point it remains true at all greater points  and if it is false it remains false. after all  one can hardly lose a warrant  for assertion or denial as more information comes in. the clauses for evaluating compounds should be so formulated that this heredity fact extends from the atomic case to all formulae. 
　the extensional connectives  defined if we like in terms of the existential quantifier and negation  behave in just the b n 1 way at each individual evaluation point. the conditional  however  like the universal quantifier in terms of which it may be presented  is an inference ticket. as such it requires us to look beyond the presently given state of information to its possible extensions. it assures us of the availability of an inference from its antecedent to its consequent  or from the denial of its consequent  to that of its antecedent. hence we must demand appropriate closure not only at the valuation point in question but at all its extensions: 
is the partial order of material 
implication on the four sets of values as for bn1. on the other side of the street  we may take an implication to be deniable just when there is a concrete counter-example to it. that is 


in this way we arrive at another known logic  the system bn  without the  1  since it is no longer 1-valued . 
　for the formal investigation of bn and its many splendid properties i can do no better than to advertise  slaney et al  1 .1 what is worth remarking here is that we have come to bn not in order to secure those formal properties but as the result of a chain of philosophical reflections in which they played no part. we were led here specifically by consideration of the need for paraconsistency  then of the expressive weakness of certain paraconsistent logics and finally of the desirability  where our notions of truth and falsehood are epistemieally based  of looking beyond the given state of information in order to determine implication. what has not been shown is that bn is the one true logic the reader seeking demonstrations that this is the only way to go will seek in vain: as an honest logician 1 can merely indicate that this is a good way to go. nor  having got this far  can we rest content. at least  given the motivation in terms of automated reasoning  there must be some attempt to apply the ideas empirically;1 and to invite such empirical testing is to give hostages to fortune. so be it then: having long urged that logic become an empirical science  1 am in no position to flinch from such a thought. 
 meyer ct al  1  robert k. meyer  s. g iambrone & ross t. brady. where gamma fails. studia logica  1-1. 
 patel-schncider  1l  peter f. patel-schneider. a decidable first-order logic for knowledge representation  journal of automated reasoning  forthcoming. 
 priest  1  graham g. priest. sense  truth and modus ponens. journal of philosophical logic  1 1  1. 
 slaney et al  1  john slaney  timothy surendonk & roderic girle. time  truth and logic. technical report tr-arp-1  automated reasoning project  australian national university  canberra  1. 
 urbas  1  igor f. urbas. paraconsistency. studies in soviet thought  1 1  1. 

r e f e r e n c e s 
 belnap  1  nuel d. belnap. restricted quantification and conditional assertion. in h. leblanc  editor  truth  syntax and modality  pages xx-xx. amsterdam  1. 
i belnap  1  nuel i . belnap. a useful four-valued logic  in j.m. dunn & g. epstein  editors  modcm uses of multiple- valued logics  pages 1. dor-
drecht  1. 
 dunn  1a  j. michael dunn. intuitive semantics for first-degree entailments and ucoupled irecs . philosophical studies  1 1  1. 
 dunn  1b  j. michael dunn. a kripkt-style semantics for r-mingle using a binary accessibility relation. studia logtca  1 1  1. 
 levesque  1  hector j. levesque. a fundamental tradeoff in knowledge representation and reasoning. flair technical report 1  fairchild laboratory for al research  ontario  1. 
　　1 it will be evident that dunn's semantics in  dunn  1b  for the semi-relevant logic r.m provided input to the present reflections. thanks should be recorded to dunn and to the co-authors of  slaney ct al.  1  for many illuminating conversations on these matters as well as for their published formal work. 
1
　　r.a. girle ha s produced tableau-based theorem provers for bn and some related systems. these are a good start  but clearly must be taken much further and applied to some realistic examples. the automated reasoning group in canberra intends to produce workable software embodying some of the above ideas. 

slaney 	1 
