 
reification of propositions expressing states  events  and properties has been widely advocated as a means of handling temporal reasoning in ai. the author proposes that such reification is both philosophically suspect and technically unnecessary. the reified theories of allen and shoham are examined and it is shown how they can be unreified. the resulting loss of expressive power can be rectified by adopting davidson's theory in which event tokens  rather than event types  are reified. this procedure is illustrated by means of kowalski and sergot's event calculus  the additional type-reification of the latter system being excised by means of a general procedure proposed by the author for converting type-reification into token-reification. some examples are given to demonstrate the expressive power of the resulting theory. 
1 	introduction 
there is now a broad consensus within the ai community that a wide range of tasks such as planning  explanation  diagnosis  and narrative understanding cannot be adequately accomplished without some form of temporal reasoning capability. there is much less agreement as to what form this capability should take. even amongst those who would advocate some form of logic for this purpose  there are disagreements as to the syntactic form required of such a logic  let alone the way in which it is to be interpreted. 
　increasingly  however  there has been a move towards what are known as reified temporal logics  shoham  1 . syntactically  a reified temporal logic is distinguished by the fact that expressions which we would ordinarily regard as propositional in nature  e.g. kiss john  mary  or in john  london   acquire the status of terms in a first-order theory. thus where a non-reified temporal logic might express the fact that john kissed mary on monday in a form such as1 k%1s{john  mary  monday  or  using a modal operator r in the style of rescher and urquhart   
          kt1 john  mary    a reified logic will introduce a term kiss john  mary  which can serve as an argument to a predicate such as occur: 
	occur kiss{john  mary   monday . 	 1  
　semantically  to reify a concept is to accord it full ontological status  so that it becomes an entity we can ascribe properties to and  in principle  quantify over. in general  the ontology of a first-order theory is the domain of its intended interpretation  i.e.  the set of entities which can be referents of terms in the theory. 
　in this paper i argue that much of the reification that has been proposed is both technically unnecessary and philosophically suspect  and shall propose a general procedure for excising such reification from a temporal theory. 
1 	allen's theory 
in the reified theory of allen f 1   we can write formulae such as  1  above1 or 
	holds in john  	london   monday . 	 1  
in order to apply to formulae  1  and  1  the standard modeltheoretic semantics of first-order logic  we must postulate a domain which includes not only people  referents of john and mary   places  referent of london   and times  referent of monday   but also entities to be the referents of the complex terms kiss john  mary  and in john  london . moreover  the predicates holds and occurs must be mapped onto relations between the referents of these complex terms and times. to be specific  formula  1  states that the entity denoted by the term kiss john  mary  stands in the relation of occurrence to the time denoted by monday; and  1  likewise states that the entity denoted by in  john  london  stands in the relation of holding to the time denoted by mondat . 
　what are the entities referred to by these complex terms  for allen  a term such as kiss john  mary   which can occur as the first argument of the occur predicate  denotes an 
   1 actually   1  for allen would imply that the kiss lasted all day. in the terminology of galton   allen's predicate occur is 
occurs-on  whereas the occur of  1  is occurs-in. for simplicity of exposition i write as if allen's predicate was also occurs-in  since this is closer to the way in which we usually ascribe events to times in ordinary language. the resulting slight discrepancy with allen's actual theory in no way invalidates what i say about it  which would apply equally to either interpretation of occur. 
   1 of course  the word 'monday' normally refers to all the days of a certain class  not just to one particular day: for simplicity  though  i assume that the term monday is mapped onto one particular monday. 
	galton 	1 'event*  whereas a term such as in john  london   which can occur as the first argument of the holds predicate  denotes a 'property'. beyond this  allen does not give an explicit semantics  but a plausible clue comes from mcdermott   whose system has many points in common with allen's and has often been compared with it. mcdermott says 'we will take a fact to be a set of states  intuitively those in which it is true'. a state for mcdermott is 'an instantaneous snapshot of the universe'; the set of all states is partially ordered  and there is a mapping d from the states to real numbers  giving the date at which each state obtains1. mcdermott goes on to define an event as 'a set of intervals  intuitively those intervals over which the event happens once  with no time  left over  on either side.' 
　these ideas can be applied  after suitable modification  to allen's theory. allen does not have mcdermott's notion of a state; instead  he makes his holds predicate map properties  the analogue of mcdermott's facts  directly onto times-this is possible for allen as he does not model alternative possible futures in his system. so the obvious semantics to give to allen's formulae of type  1  above is as follows: in johny london  denotes a set of intervals. 
holds in john  london   monday  is true iff the interval denoted by monday is a member of the set of intervals denoted by in john  london . 
and for formulae of type  1   
occur kiss john  mary   monday  is true iff the interval denoted by monday is a member of the set of intervals denoted by kiss john  mary . 
the difference  for allen  between properties and events is captured by his axioms 

which imply that  in shoham's terminology  shoham 1   properties are downward-hereditary  i.e.  a property holds on any subinterval of an interval on which it holds  whereas events are gestalt  i.e.  an event does not occur on any proper subinterval of an interval on which it occurs 1. semantically  this means that for the set of intervals / associated with a property  whenever whereas for the set of intervals associated with an event  the conjunction of never occurs. 
1 	unreifying allen's theory 
a non-reified way of writing  1  and  1  would be 
kiss john  mary  monday  ln john  london  monday . 
why doesn't allen do this  the semantics for these formulae would be isomorphic to the semantics suggested above for 
     1 note that  contrary to what is often stated  mcdermott's system does not use branching time: time itself is represented by the linear ordering of the real numbers; branching only occurs with respect to the totality of possible states ordered by date. 
1
　　axiom  ol  only holds when occur is understood to mean occurs-on; but it is easily modified to apply to occurs-in 

the reified syntax that allen actually uses. thus the predicate kiss would be mapped onto a relation between pairs of people and times  so that  in particular  the one-place predicate kiss john  mary    would correspond to a set of times  i.e.  the set of times which stand in the aforementioned relation to the referents of john and mary. hence the predicate kiss john  mary    naturally acquires an interpretation identical to what  in our plausible construction for the semantics of allen's system  is ascribed to the term kiss john  mary . a similar reduction holds for terms denoting properties. 
　the non-reified system is less artificial than the reified one  since the allocation of the predicate kiss john  mary    to a set of intervals comes out naturally as a consequence of the usual rules for specifying the semantics of a first-order language  whereas the mapping of the term kiss john  mary  onto a set of intervals has to be postulated ad hoc  there being nothing in first-order logic which constrains terms to be mapped onto sets of domain elements. 
　since the non-reified version of allen's notation has the advantages of greater simplicity and naturalness  allen must have cogent reasons for not using it. his choice of representation might be justified if it enabled us to express important ideas which cannot be expressed without some unacceptable cost in a non-reified notation. the most plausible candidate for such a justification is allen's handling of causation. allen introduces a predicate ecause  for event causation-i.e.  one event causing another   with syntax ecause e1 t1 e1 t1 . the intended meaning is that the occurrence of event e  at time t1 causes the occurrence of e1 at t1  as  for example  in 
	ecause kiss john  mary   i  hit  mary  john   i + 	1 . 
the fundamental axiom governing ecause is 

　to express these propositions in our suggested non-reified replacement for allen's system  we should have to postulate something like a binary operator ecause which forms a proposition out of two propositions  giving 
 ecause kiss john  mary  i   hit  mary  john  i + 1    and 

but this new operator is not truth-functional  and hence cannot be accommodated within first-order logic-in fact the semantics of ecause becomes altogether problematic in this treatment  and this  surely  amounts to an unacceptable cost of unreification. 
the solution to this problem lies  in fact  in unreifying 
allen's theory in a different way from what was suggested above. before looking at this  though  we shall examine another attempt at providing a reified temporal theory. 
1 	shoham's theory 
shoham   1 1  is more hospitable to higher-order and modal logics than allen is. he has criticised allen's approach on the grounds that 
... the set of properties looks suspiciously like the set of first order formulas. if that is the case  then not only have we not given precise syntax and semantics for the new language  but in fact we have given up the off-the-shelf fopc and the associated model theory. 
  shoham 1   p. 1  
what shoham doesn't like about allen's properties is that allen wants to allow them to have all the structural complexity of first order formulae  so that he can say  for example  
here we should have to construe 
　　　as denoting  base-level  functions which map objects onto ''properties   as a higher-order function which maps base-level functions onto properties  and holds as a predicate which maps property-interval pairs onto truth-values  though as shoham notes  allen does not  in fact  give precise semantics for these expressions. 
　shoham's approach is to introduce a set of primitive propositions and a predicate true which is in some ways analogous to allen's holds; his atomic formulae are of the form where denote instants  and the whole says that the primitive proposition p is true with respect to the interval . unlike allen  however  shoham does not allow the propositional argument of true to be logically complex. he does  to be sure  allow one to write things like but this is just  syntactic sugar  for 

bacchus et al.  have proposed a way to unreify 
shoham's logic in a manner exactly parallel to the treatment of allen's system suggested above: instead of 
they write  semantically  p must get mapped onto a function from pairs of times to truth-values  or  equivalently  onto a set of pairs of times  i.e.  the set of pairs of times which get mapped onto 'true' . 
　in shoham's notation  the primitive propositional term p must be mapped onto some sort of object  while the predicate true is mapped onto a ternary relation between pairs of times and these ''propositional  objects. unlike allen  shoham is explicit about the formal semantics of his logic: the  propositional  objects onto which he maps his primitive propositions are in fact sets of pairs of times. the predicate true then gets mapped onto the membership relation  i.e.   is 
true just so long as the pair of times denoted by t  and h belongs to the set of pairs of times denoted by p. in other words  the semantics shoham gives for his reified theory is precisely analogous to the natural semantics that one would give for the unreified theory proposed by bacchus et al.. at the semantic level  then  reification would appear to carry no advantages. 
　in  shoham  1   the reified logic is used to support inferences about causation. unlike allen  shoham is quite happy to make use of modal operators1. he gives an example about what can cause the motor of a car to start  and what can prevent it from starting. he writes down axioms such as 


1 	some ontological considerations 
let us take stock of our results so far. we have noted that both allen's and shoham's reified theories can readily be unreified  but that in allen's case there appears to be a price to pay  namely that in order to adapt the language he uses for modelling causal statements it is necessary to employ syntactic devices that go beyond the limits of first-order logic. in shoham's case  this is not important  since he is in any case already committed to the use of modal operators in his analysis of causality. 
　philosophically  the artificial and ad hoc nature of terms with propositional content  such as appear in the reified theories  is unacceptable; on the other hand  there is a clear need  both for philosophy and for al  to express the causal notions discussed by allen and shoham. our problem is how to do this without  a  philosophically dubious reification or  b  stepping outside the bounds of first-order logic. 
　we attack this problem by describing the semantics of expressions like occur kiss john mary  monday  in intuitive rather than formal  model-theoretic terms. formally  the term kiss john  mary  is  as we have seen  mapped onto a set of intervals; but intuitively this bears no relation to the meaning of an expression such as 'john kisses mary'. intuitively  this expression  refers to an event ; it docs so in a generic way  i.e.  what it picks out is an event-type  which abstracts a common core of meaning from the details which differentiate the numerous possible and actual occurrences of john's kissing mary. the formula occur kiss john  mary   monday  says that this event-type stands in a particular relation  that of occurrence  to the interval monday-so that the generic event-type is  if you will  instantiated by a particular occurrence  an event-token which takes place on monday. 
	galton 	1 
　we are thus led to consider the distinction between eventtypes and event-tokens. the former  we might say  are universals  the latter are particulars. now  if you had to choose between populating your ontology with event-types or eventtokens  which would you go for  unless you are an out-andout platonist  you will surely choose event-tokens  exactly as  given the choice between species  such as lion  tiger  horse  and specimens  this lion  that tiger  these horses   none but a platonist would choose the former. and yet the curious thing about the ontology implicit in allen's theory is that while it includes state and event types  it has no place for state and event tokens. 
　thus  taking allen's formal language at face value  we find that he admits into his ontology the general event of john's kissing mary  but not the particular instances of this event which are what actually occur. in order to state that john kissed mary on monday  allen has to assert that a certain relationship  the relationship of occurrence  holds between the general john-kissing-mary event and  a certain subinterval of  the interval monday. and to state that there is a causal connection between two particular event occurrences  say john's kissing mary at t and mary's hitting john at i + 1  he has to introduce a four-place relation between the two event-types in question and the times at which the particular tokens of those types that we are interested in occur. it must be admitted that  presented in this way  allen's theory takes on a rather bizarre appearance. 
1 	reification of state and event tokens 
an obvious alternative to reifying state and event types is to reify state and event tokens. this would have a much less platonist feel to it  since we can with greater justice claim that individual occurrences are particulars  i.e.  things in the world  than that general types of occurrence are. so on this scheme  we could have a term referring to a particular kissing of mary by john  but not to the notion of john's kissing mary taken in its full generality. our sentence 1john kissed mary on monday' now receives a representation such as 

 ignoring for now the complication about monday not being a single day . 
　this kind of analysis was first proposed by the philosopher donald davidson  davidson  1 . davidson's primary motivation was to give an account in first-order logic of inferences such as that from john kissed mary in the kitchen on monday to john kissed mary on monday. in davidson's analysis  the inference becomes trivial: for 

logically implies 

note in passing that neither allen nor shoham has anything to say about inferences of this kind  and it is not immediately clear how their systems would handle them. 
　if we drop the existential quantifiers  in effect  skolemizing   we obtain 

which is essentially the kind of representation adopted by kowalski and sergot in the earlier part of their exposition of the event calculus  kowalski and sergot 1 . 
　with a notation such as this  we can now paraphrase allen's predicate ecause strictly within the confines of first-order logic. where allen writes ecause we can write 

the key idea here is that the causal relation holds between event-tokens  not event-types. that is why allen introduced times as arguments of ecause  because it was only by doing so that he was able to secure reference to individual occurrences of his event-types. 
　of course  one might wish to argue that a causal connection between event tokens depends on the existence of a general law connecting their respective types  and that the ecause relation should therefore be between event-types rather than event-tokens. john's kissing mary on this occasion caused mary to hit john just because some causal law holds to the effect that whenever john kisses mary she hits him1: 

here it is worth noting that there is no explicit mention of cause at all; the causal relation has been reduced to  'humean'  invariable succession. we can still define ecause as a relation between event-tokens  treating ecause e   e1  as an abbreviation for any formula of the form 

1 	state types in the event calculus 
although kowalski and sergot base their event calculus on an ontology of event-tokens rather than event-types  they still succumb to the temptation of reification. what they reify  though  is not event-types but state-types. initially  they allow rules such as 

which says that if e is an event of john's travelling to london  then there is an interval after e   starting immediately after the time of e  during which it is true that john is in london. in short  the event of john's travelling to london initiates a period characterised by the holding of the state of john's being in london. they then go on to note that an event may initiate more than one state; for example  a particular occasion of john's travelling to london may also be an occasion of his travelling to england  e.g.  he may be flying in from america . thus we also have 

where e can refer to the same event token as in the previous formula. but now what interval does after e  refer to  is it the interval during which john is in london  or the interval 

during which he is in england  the former may be a proper subinterval of the latter. 
　in order to resolve this difficulty  kowalski and sergot complicate their function symbol after by adding an extra argument to specify the state  initiated by the event  with which the interval is to be associated. this allows a general rule to be stated as follows 

with instances of 'initiation' given by rules such as 

here kowalski and sergot have reified states  as  for example  with the term in john  london   which refers to the state of john's being in london. moreover  it is slate-types that are here reified. 
1 a procedure for unreifying reified types 
in the same spirit of anti-platonism that we have applied to 
allen and shoham's theories  can we unreify kowalski and 
sergot's state-types  following the lead of davidson  i wish to propose a very general strategy for avoiding philosophically unsound reification. specifically  it is the reification of types that we want to avoid: we want the terms of our formal theory  as far as possible  only to refer to entities that can reasonably be regarded as individuals: individual physical objects  people  places  times  events  but not types of these things. 
　suppose we have a theory containing a class t of terms whose intended referents are types. we want to replace it by a theory in which no such terms occur. let us introduce instead a class v of terms whose intended referents are the particular instances of the types denoted by elements of t. let p be a predicate in the original theory which applies to terms of type t. then in the new theory we treat p as applying instead to terms of type   and in addition  for each element a in t  we introduce a new predicate a which applies to terms of category . if a has the form where / is a function symbol and are terms of a category allowed in the new theory  this is done by replacing / by a predicate f  of arity n + 1   whose first n argument places correspond to those of f  and whose  n + l th argument place is for a term 
of type  
we now replace a formula of the form 
p x  . this is just what we did to allen's theory when we rewrote 
	occur kiss john  	mary   monday  
as 

the term s here plays a role somewhat similar to that of a situation in the situation calculus  mccarthy and hayes 1   the difference being that a situation is supposed to incorporate the complete state of the world at a given time  whereas our s just refers to  for example  the circumstance of a particular person's being in a particular place over a particular period. it refers  in other words  to a state-token. 
　unfortunately  there are problems about how to understand the notion of a state-token. event-tokens are discrete  unitary individuals  each occupying a definite place and time; they are pretty well-individuated1. states  on the other hand  are much less clearly individuated cf.  galton  1   ch.1 . for example  is the circumstance of john's being in london on monday the same as the circumstance of his being in england on monday  and if john is in london all day on monday  how many individual state-tokens must we admit into our ontology  just one  or infinitely many  corresponding to all the subintervals of monday-each of which is  of course  a time of john's being in london  
　i propose that we aim to make our ontology as sparse as possible. thus we only posit state tokens to correspond to maximal stretches of a given state of affairs holding. by 'a given state of affairs' i mean an assignment of properties or relationships to a collection of objects. what we are allowed to count as a state of affairs is limited only by our ability to pick out a stretch of the history of some object or objects by means of some  possibly very complex  predicate which applies throughout that stretch. given a state-token s  we define an interval time s  which is the full temporal extent of s. in addition  we define a predicate holds  relating statetokens to times  in such a way that 

note that  ii  is not the same as allen's  hi   since the former deals with state-tokens whereas the latter deals with statetypes  'properties' . note also a certain symmetry between states and events. we can equally well apply the functor time to yield the interval over which an event happens; and our axiom for the predicate occurs then ensures that the time of an event-token is minimal in just the way that  ii  above ensures that the time of a state-token is maximal: 
note that  ii  implies that occurs is occurs-in rather than 
occurs-on. 
　it might be argued that we do not really need to treat statetokens and event-tokens as separate categories. instead  suppose we have a single class  of tokens. a token is specified by picking out the content of some chunk of space-time; we can be very liberal about what chunks of space-time are allowed-anything is in principle allowed  the only limitation is our ability to single out a particular chunk by means of some description that applies uniquely to it1. then any token can  
　　but see  davidson  1   for a discussion of some of the problems. 
　　1 this is not to say  of course  that the world is not itself intrinsically structured: some chunks may be more naturally picked out than others. 
	gallon 	1 

in principle  be treated either as an event-token or as a statetoken  according as we apply to it the predicate holds or the predicate occurs. some tokens would more naturally lend themselves to being treated as states  e.g.  an object's being in a certain position for a given period of time   others as events  e.g.  an object's changing from one specified position to another over a period of time ; some  which correspond to the problematic category of processes  lend themselves equally well to being treated as states or as events  e.g.  an object's rotating about an axis over a period of time . 
   the system proposed here bears some resemblance to that of hobbs . in both systems  there are terms denoting state and event tokens  following davidson . however  hobbs and i reach this position from radically different ontological perspectives. my aim has been to purge some existing theories of excessive ontological liberality-my state and event tokens are ontologically more modest than the state and event types they are designed to replace. hobbs  on the other hand  throws all ontological scruples to the winds   allowing as an entity everything that can be referred to by a noun phrase . as a result  he is prepared to countenance terms denoting such etherial entities as the quickness of the building of a boat. this is neither a state-token nor an event-token  and in particular it cannot be identified with a chunk of space-time. hobbs introduces terms like this in order to handle reference in intensional contexts  a problem which i have not attempted to address in this paper. thus the apparent similarity between hobbs' system and mine is only skin-deep. 
　we conclude this section with some examples of propositions which we can express using state and event tokens  but no types: 

i do not claim that these formulae capture the meanings of the 
english sentences exactly-just sufficiently closely to indicate the expressive potential of the formal language. 
1 	concluding remarks 
in conclusion  then  what has been achieved  first  we showed how a reified temporal theory of the kind advocated by allen can be unreified  admittedly with some loss of expressive power. we then noted that shoham's attempt to purge allen's theory of what he saw as its undesirable features resulted in a theory which  though it uses reified notation  is not really reified at all  the desired expressive power coming not from reification but from the use of modal operators. next  we found that some of this expressive power can be recovered in a first-order framework by using davidson's device of event-token reification rather than event-type reification  as exemplified by part of kowalski and seigot's event calculus. this led us to propose a general method for converting typereification into token-reification  a result deemed philosophically desirable since tokens just are more suitable candidates for full ontological status than types. finally we applied this procedure to the reified state-types which kowalski and sergot introduce into the event calculus  to yield a theory based on state and event tokens only. the expressive power of this theory was illustrated by means of a number of examples. 
