 
most work in visual recognition by computer has focused on recognizing objects by their geometric shape  or by the presence or absence of some prespecified collection of locally measurable attributes  e.g.  spectral reflectance  texture  or distinguished markings . on the other hand  most entities in the natural world defy compact description of their shapes  and have no characteristic features with discriminatory power. as a result  image-understanding research has achieved little success toward recognition in natural scenes. we offer a fundamentally new approach t.o visual recognition that avoids these limitations and has been used to recognize trees  bushes  grass  and trails in ground-level scenes of a natural environment. 
1 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
the key scientific question addressed by our research has been the design of a computer vision system that  can approach human level performance in the interpretation of natural scenes such as that shown in figure 1. we offer a. new paradigm for the design of computer vision systems that holds promise for achieving near-human competence  and report the experimental results of a system implementing that theory which demonstrates its recognition abilities in a natural domain of limited geographic extent . the purpose of this paper is t.o review the key ideas underlying our approach  discussed in detail in previous publications  1  1   and to focus on the results of an ongoing experimental evaluation of these ideas as embodied in an implemented system called condor. 
　when examining the reasons why the traditional approaches to computer vision fail in the interpretation of ground-level scenes of the natural world  four fundamental problems become apparent: 
universal partitioning - most scene-understanding systems begin with the segmentation of an image 
   * supported by the defense advanced research projects agency under contracts daca1g-1-c-u1  daca1-
c-1  and 1.1 
vision 

figure 1: a natural outdoor scene of the experimentation site. 
into homogeneous regions using a single partition ing algorithm applied to the entire image. if that partitioning is wrong  then the interpretation must also be wrong  no matter how a system assigns semantic labels to those regions. unfortunately  universal partitioning algorithms are notoriously poor delineators of natural objects in ground-level scenes. 
shape - many man-made artifacts can be recognized by matching a 1d geometric model with features extracted from an image  l  1  1  1  1  1  1   but most natural objects cannot be so recognized. nat ural objects are assigned names on the basis of their setting  appearance  and context  rather than their possession of any particular shape. 
computational complexity the object recognition problem is np-hard . as a result  computation time must increase exponentially as additional classes are added to the recognition vocabulary  unless a strategy to avoid the combinatoric behavior is 

figure 1: conceptual architecture of condor. 
incorporated. such provisions are a necessary component of any recognition system that can be scaled to embrace a real domain. 
contextual knowledge - despite general agreement that recognition is an intelligent process requiring the application of stored knowledge  1  1  1   computer vision researchers typically use artificial intelligence techniques only at the highest levels of reasoning. the design of an approach that  allows stored knowledge to control the lower levels of image processing has proved elusive. 
　except for the continuing work at the university of massachusetts   the understanding of natural scenes has received surprisingly little attention in the last decade. 
1 	approach 
a new paradigm for computer vision systems has been developed  which addresses all four of the problems described above. the key provision of this novel approach is a mechanism for the application of stored knowledge at all levels of visual processing. a context set  wliich explicitly specifies the conditions and assumptions necessary for successful invocation  is associated with every procedure employed by the recognition system. 
　the architecture is organized into three modules as depicted in figure 1 and described below  a more complete description is also available  : 
candidate generation - 
hypotheses concerning the presence in a scene of specific categories of objects are generated by delineating regions in an image using special-purpose operators whose invocation is controlled by context sets  thereby avoiding the need for universal partitioning algorithms. the employment of large numbers of operators ensures that quality hypotheses can be generated in nearly every context and provides redundancy that decreases the reliance on the success of any individual operator. 
candidate comparison - hypotheses are accepted only if they are consistent with all other members of a clique  consistent subset . candidate hypotheses for each label are ranked so that the best candidates for each label can be considered before the others. ranking the candidates ensures that  the largest cliques can be found early in the search  thereby limiting the computational complexity of the entire paradigm to a linear growth as the recognition vocabulary is expanded. by constructing only a small number of cliques for each image  the approach loses any guarantee of finding the largest clique  but assures the availability of a credible answer compatible with the computational resources of the system. 
clique formation - consistency is enforced by procedures  controlled by context sets  that detect and reject physically impossible combinations of hypotheses. the clique that most completely explains the available data is offered as the interpretation of an image. thus  individual objects are labeled on the basis of their role in the context  of the complete clique  rather than solely on the basis of individual merit. 
　the invocation of all processing elements throughout the system is governed by context. all processing actions are controlled by context sets  and are invoked only when their context sets are satisfied. thus  the actual sequence of computations  and the labeling decisions that are made  are influenced by contextual information  which is represented by prior knowledge about the environment and by the computational state of the system. 
definition: a context set  c'sk  is a collection of context  elements that are sufficient for inferring some relation or carrying out some operation on an image. 
syntactically  a context set is embedded in a context rule denoted by 

where l is the name of the class associated with the context set  a is an action to be performed  and the c  comprise a set of conditions that define a context. 
example: the context rule 
sky : {sky is-clear  camera is-horizontal rgb-is-availablf } =  blue-regions 
defines a set of conditions under which it is appropriate to use the operator blue-reg ions to delineate candidate sky hypotheses. 
　there is a collection of context rules for every class in the recognition vocabulary  and each collection contains rules of three types: candidate generation  candidate comparison  and consistency determination. in theory  condor performs the actions a that are associated with every satisfied context  set. 
	strat and fischler 	1 
figure 1: result  of analyzing figure 1. 
1 	the recognition process 
for each label in the active recognition vocabulary  all candidate-generation context sets are evaluated. the operators associated with those that are satisfied are executed  producing candidates for each class. the candidate-comparison context sets that are satisfied are then used to evaluate each candidate for a class  and if all such evaluators prefer one candidate over another  a preference ordering is established between them. these preference relations are assembled to form part.ial orders over the candidates  one partial order for each class. next  a search for mutually coherent  sets of candidates is conducted by incrementally building cliques of consistent candidates  beginning with empty cliques. a candidate is nominated for inclusion into a clique by choosing one of the candidates at the top of one of the partial orders. consistency-determination context sets that are satisfied are used to test the consistency of a nominee with can didat.es already in the clique. a consistent nominee is added to the clique; an inconsistent one is removed from further consideration with that clique. further candidates are added to the clique until none remain. additional cliques are generated in a similar fashion as computational resources permit. ultimately  one clique is selected as the best semantic labeling of the image on the basis of the portion of the image that is explained and the reliability of the operators that contributed to the clique. 
　the interaction among context sets is significant. 'the addition of a candidate to a clique may provide context that could trigger a previously unsatisfied context set to generate new candidates or establish new preference orderings. for example  once one bush has been recog-
vision 

figure 1: a perspective view of the 1d model produced from the analysis of the image shown in figure 1. 
nized  it. is a good idea to look specifically for similar bushes in the image. this tactic is implemented by a candidate-generation context set that includes a context element that  is satisfied only when a bush is in a clique. 
1 	evaluation scenario 
the approach has been implemented in the form of a complete end-to-end vision system  known as condor. images that are monochromatic or color  monocular or stereo  provide the input to the system  along with a terrain database containing prior knowledge about the environment. condor produces a 1d model of the environment labeled with terms from its recognition vocabulary which is stored in the core knowledge structure  cks   1  1  and can be superimposed on the input  image  figure 1  or viewed from another perspective  figure 1 . the model is used to update the terrain database for use by condor during the analysis of subsequent imagery. 
　to evaluate the condor approach  we selected a twosquare-mile region of foothills immediately south of the stanford university campus as our site for experimentation. this area contains a mixture of oak forest and widely scattered oak trees distributed across an expanse of gently rolling  grass-covered hills and is criss-crossed by a network of trails. 
　we chose 1 classes for the recognition vocabulary on the basis of their prevalence in the experimentation site and their importance for navigation. these terms are: 
　{sky  ground  geometric-horizon  foliage  bush  tree-trunk  tree-crown  trail  skyline  raised-object  
complete-sky  complete-ground  grass  tree} 
　procedures have been devised to extract  evaluate  and check the consistency of candidates for each of these classes. context sets have been constructed to control the invocation of each of those procedures. currently the knowledge base contains 1 procedures whose invocation is governed by 1 context sets. all the results described in this paper have been generated using this knowledge base. 


figure 1: the composite model resulting from the anal ysis of the image sequence in figure 1. 
them. no trunk was detectable in the foliage to the left of the image  so condor labeled it as bush. 
image 1 - the texture in the lower corners of the sixth image was found to more closely resemble foliage than grass  so these regions were erroneously identified as bushes. beause they are very near the camera  they occupy a significant part  of the image  but the 1d model created for them reveals that they are less than 1 feet. tall. 
image 1 - several more trees  grass areas  and part of the trail are recognized in the seventh image. 
image 1 the primary tree is recognized despite the strong shadows  but the lower portion of the trunk was missed by all the trunk operators. most  of the tree crown operators were unable to provide a decent candidate because of the overhanging branches in the upper-right  corner -＊ the only operator that succeeded was the one that predicts the crown based on the size and location of the trunk. the combined effects of the incomplete trunk  the nearness of the tree  and the lack of range data account for poor extraction of the tree crown. 
　this experiment  illustrates how condor is able to use the results of analyzing one image to assist the analy sis of other images. although some trees and parts of the trail were missed in several images  the 1d model that results is nearly complete. figure 1 shows an aerial view of the composite model contained in the cks after processing all eight  images. for comparison  figure 1 portrays a model of the objects actually present on the ground  which was constructed by physically measuring the locations and sizes of the individual objects. note that all of the trees that were visible in at least one image have been correctly labeled  although some of them were misplaced. most of the trail has been detected  enough to allow a spatial reasoning process to link the portions 

figure 1: the ground-truth database. 
into a single continuous trail. furthermore  everything that was labeled tree actually is a tree. 
1 	experiment 1 
regardless of the architecture  know ledge-based vision systems are difficult  to build. if the programmer needed to specify in advance all the information necessary for successful recognition  his task would be hopeless. therefore  it is essential that a vision system have the ability to improve its competence autonomously  thereby learning through experience how to recognize the objects in its environment.. 
assertion 1 using context allows condor to learn how to recognize natural objects  
　to test the validity of this assertion  we return to the first image of the sequence used in experiment 1  figure 1 . when originally analyzed  condor recognized the trail and part of the grass  but not the trees. 
　condor was tasked to reanalyze the first image  this time making use of the contents of the entire database constructed during the analysis of the sequence of eight images. the resulting interpretation is depicted in figure 1. 
　two trees that could not be extracted on the first pass are now identified. condor employed a tree-trunk operator whose context  set. requires knowledge of the approximate location of a tree in the field of view. the operator projects a deformable 1d model of the trunk onto the image  and optimizes its fit to extract  the trunk. this operator successfully identified two of the trees without contradicting any of the original recognition results. 
　this experiment  along with others not. described here  illustrates that the ability to use prior recognition results as context while interpreting subsequent images 
enables condor to improve its performance as its exposure to its environment increases. 
	strat and fischler 	1 


figure 1: the results of analyzing the first image from figure 1 with and without the information extracted from subsequent images. 
1 	conclusion 
in its present embodiment  condor is still a demonstration system that should be evaluated primarily in terms of its architectural design and innovative mechanisms  rattier than its absolute performance. wliile condor has demonstrated a recognition ability approaching humanlevel performance on some natural scenes  it is still performing at a level considerably short of its ultimate potential  even for the stanford experimentation site . the knowledge acquisition mechanisms  which are a key aspect of the architecture  should allow continued improvement in performance with exposure to additional site imagery. 
   a new paradigm for image understanding has been proposed  and used to recognize natural features in ground-level scenes of a geographically limited environment. this context based approach is exciting because it deemphasizes the role of image partitioning and emphasizes the recognition context in a way that has not been attempted before. this new focus could lead to the construction of vision systems that are significantly more capable than those available today. 
1 	acknowledgment 
condor includes soft ware provided by many present and former members of the perception croup at sri. in addition  marty tenenbaum  jean-claude latombe  and lynn quam have contributed to the research reported here. 
