 
     the paper addresses the referential properties of definite nps and introduces a homogeneous framework for coping with ambiguities in reference and with the generic/specific and referential/attributive dichotomies. the basic assumption is that an ambiguous  logical form  is the most reasonable tool for carrying out the interpretation process without propagating existing ambiguities in unnecessary ways. 
     the ambiguities in reference arc shown to be analyzable perspicuously in terms of three independent parameters: the context  the world  and the time in which the sentence is used. different readings of nps arise from the fixing of one or more of these parameters  going from the most general  the  intension  or  concept   where nothing is fixed  to the least general  the usual  definite specific  reading  where all the parameters are fixed . 
     beyond the ambiguities in reference  the distinction between collective and distributive readings and the one between the readings we call relational and non relational arc analyzed and the relationships among the different kinds of ambiguities arc examined. 
1 	introduction 
   this paper is concerned with the meaning of definite noun-phrases. the basic assumption of our work is that a context-independent semantic representation of nl sentences can be provided and that such a representation must be the basis for further contextual processing. the basic problem with this approach is that some semantic ambiguities can be resolved only by taking into account the context where the ambiguous expression occurs. since the basic goal of a 
   semantic formalism is to provide a tool for representing disambiguated meanings  such that logical inferences can be made   it seems that the delaying of the intervention of the context cannot be attained. in some cases  however  it is the subsequent context that provides the understander with the required information. in these cases  multiple alternatives should be carried about  until the required information is made available. in principle  if a single ambiguous expression is embedded in a very complex sentence  the whole propositional content must be duplicated in order to have two  or more  alternative well-formed representations. 
   in  di eugenio & lesmo 1   it has been argued that it is reasonable to maintain ambiguity as locally as possible. in the network-based formalism proposed therein for representing the meaning of italian sentences  expressions featuring referential ambiguity are represented via groups of nodes called  reference ambiguity spaces   ras . the propositional content of a sentence is represented in three spaces: the content plane  cp  contains the information about the main predication and the descriptions used for the participants in the event  the arguments of the predicate ; the reference plane  rp  contains the ras's that make explicit the ambiguities in referring; the semantic plane  sp  contains the domain theory expressed as a terminological semantic net. 
the use of an ambiguous logical form  see also  hobbs 
1   should not be taken as a statement of scquentiality in the processing: first semantic interpretation  then contextual disambiguation. we believe that all processes  including syntactic analysis  must be strongly interleaved and that the higher levels must provide a feedback to constrain the lower ones. what we believe is that the proposed representation may constitute an  interlingua  that allows the processes to communicate with each oilier. 
   while the overall architecture has largely remained unchanged  only  a fourth plane  the temporal plane  has been added to represent temporal information  grasso ct al. 1    further studies have shown that the internal structure of the ras's is partially inadequate to handle the full range of semantic ambiguities involved in definite descriptions. 
1 	descriptions and reference 
   the role of a definite noun phrase in a sentence is to identify an entity  or a group of entities  about which a predication is made. on the other hand  it seems that such a construct can be used to denote very different things  as shown by the following examples: 
1  the triangle is the poligon with three sides 
1  the bear hibernates in winter 
1  the dog is eating in the garden 
1  the murderer  whoever he is  is insane 
1  the winner will go to hong kong 
1  the temperature is rising 
1  the bear is dying out 
	ardissono  et al. 	1 

1  the dog is a mammal 
1  the president changes every seven years 
1  your 	apartment 	keeps 	getting 	bigger 	and bigger 
1  in ancient times  the dog was wild 
moreover the role the denotation has in the predication may vary: 
1  the men ran very fast 
1  the men lifted the piano 
   many of the examples above have been carefully analyzed from different points of view. montague's position was that a definite description is in principle able to denote the full intension of the associated common noun  but in some cases the linguistic context can constrain it to the extension at the current index. one of the problems with the 
montagovian approach is that the distinction intension/extension does not seem to be fine-grained enough. for instance  to rise  see ex.1  is considered as an intcnsional predicate. clearly  the extension of temperature is not sufficient to verify the truth value of the proposition  but it seems that its intension includes much information mat is completely irrelevant  since what is needed is just the temperature in the current world and location in immediately previous and successive times. 
   the problem of definite descriptions in which the referent seems to be fixed by the context  but his/her  identity  is not known  ex.1  has been discussed in  donnellan 1   kronfeld 1 . in this case it is not possible to say that a particular individual is selected by the description  but only that some of his/her relevant features  relevant as regards the whole predication  are included in the description. in reality  epistemology seems to creep in: actually  the description selects one and just one precise individual  but  as a matter of fact  the speaker is not able to specify who s/he is. this kind of use is called  attributive  by donncllan  since  as stated above  the description must be an  attribute  of the referent that  in some sense  is relevant in the predication; in ex.1 the hearer feels that the referent  whoever s/he is  is insane because s/he is the author of such a horrible crime  see also  barwise & perry 1  . donnellan's analysis is very appealing  but it is not very clear how it can be integrated in a more general framework. a first answer to this problem comes from the work by fauconnier . 
   fauconnier analyses in great depth the non referential reading of definite descriptions. he introduces the informal notion of  role : the  roles  represent not only the  classical  attributive readings  ex.1   but also the readings in which the identity of the referred individual  the  role filler   varies depending on the time  such as in the preferred reading of ex.1 and ex.1. 
   the readings we considered so far are specific  referential or non referential   i.e. predications about a contextually defined individual or set of individuals. a different case is the one where the assertion is  generic   in the sense that it applies to a class  ex. 1  or to all the members of a class  ex. 1 . lyons  suggests that there is not a unique kind of  generic  propositions  and defines the subclass of  essential  propositions  which are to be interpreted as stating the necessary and sufficient conditions which characterise the membership in a given class  ex. 1 . in general   generic  propositions are not so strong  and assert a  typical  or  general  characteristic of the given class which must not necessarily hold for each individual of the class1 or at every time  ex. 1 . 
   a final problem that we arc going to deal with is not really concerned with ambiguities in reference  but it appears to be at least partially connected with it  since it involves the use that is made of the set of entities identified by the description. in fact  a singular definite reference to a class or a plural definite description  ex. 1  introduce a further ambiguity  depending on whether the assertion applies to each one of the individuals constituting the class  set  referred to  distributive reading  or to the class  set  considered as a whole  collective reading   webber 1 . 
1 	treatment of definite noun phrases 
   our goal is to specify a representation formalism and to develop an interpretation process able to cope with the problems about reference. according to the program presented in the introduction  the formalism must deal with ambiguity locally  in the sense that ambiguities should not cause the duplication of non-ambiguous components of the proposition. though the obtained representation can not be assimilated to an unambiguous logical form  it provides the understander with a tool that can be worked upon by contextual disambiguating processes that could finally produce the chosen reading. 
   some of the representation formalisms that have been proposed in the literature deal  at least partially  with such phenomena  but they do not stress enough the way the representation is built. for example  webber's logical formalism  webber 1   is able to represent definite and indefinite nps  collective and distributive readings  generic sets; on the other hand  her aim is to derive entity descriptions that allow her to solve subsequent anaphoras  so that she generates such descriptions from sentences that have already been translated into a logical formalism  but the way she represents the np appearing in the sentence while the sentence itself is processed is not clear. 
   other approaches adopt the strict compositionality proposed by montague  consider for example  carlson 1    but this move forces the introduction of syntactic ambiguities in many cases where only a semantic ambiguity is perceived. moreover  the existence of one basic reading that has to be modified in special cases  see  for instance  the gn operator in  carlson  1   seems to increase the complexity of the interpretation process. 
our present analysis extends the proposal presented in 
|di eugenio & lesmo 1  and assumes that the phenomena discussed can be dealt with perspicuously by distinguishing three different levels of ambiguity  which  of course  interact with each other: 
- the basic reference of the np  that is the specific/generic and the referential/ role  dichotomies 
the inadequacy of the universal quantifier for representing 
 generics  has been pointed out by many authors. some recent proposals involve the introduction of non standard quantifiers  barwise & cooper 1  or of a kind-forming operator  schubert & pclletier 1 . 

- the relational/non-relational ambiguity  which concerns sentences like ex.1 
- the distributive/collective ambiguity. 
   note that it is the first level that must specify which are the actual entities involved in the predication  while the other ones say different things: the second level says whether the evaluation of the truth value of the proposition is  local   in a sense to be specified  or not  while the third level says how the predicate must apply to the selected entities. thus  the ras is concerned with the first level only. the other ambiguities must be handled elsewhere. 
   in the intensional logic of montague  the extension is picked from the intension by fixing the value of an index on possible worlds. it is well known that indices on worlds can be split in subcomponents  in order that each subcomponent is related to a characteristic of the context where an utterance is made that is salient to the interpretation of the utterance itself   lewis 1  proposes eight such subindices and leaves open the possibility of introducing other ones . in principle  the extension of a definite noun phrase refers to a contextually determined group of individuals  because the  global  index must be able to specify at the finest level of detail the context. but it seems that generic propositions work in exactly the opposite way: some contextual features  for instance  who is the speaker  or where the utterance is made  are completely irrelevant to the truth of the proposition. thus  we need at least three levels of detail: 
- the proposition is independent of the index; its truth value depends neither on the world nor on the specific situation. thus  it must be evaluated with respect to all the entities that satisfy the description in all worlds. these are lyons'  essential  propositions. 
- the proposition is partially dependent on the index; its truth value depends on the status of the  world   in a non technical sense   but not on the situation; the predication is assumed to apply to ail the entities that  in the current world  satisfy the description. these arc generic proposition that are not essential. 
- the proposition is fully dependent on the index: the world and the situation must be known in order for the truth value to be determined. these are the specific referential readings of the np. 
   a place for roles can be found in this picture  if we consider that there is another route to go from the most general  intension  to the most specific  individual : we could fix the situation and let the world vary. thus  we assume there is a situation where a murder happened in a certain place  and consider all the worlds compatible with this event: in all these worlds  we can say  the murderer is insane; whoever he is  of course  since in different possible worlds the individual which is  the murderer  can be different. now  if we also fix the world  we have fixed the whole index  so that the specific referential reading of  the murderer  comes about. 
there are a lot of things to be careful about  however. 
the most important of them is the trans-world correspondence. what does it mean that the context is maintained fixed  but the world may change  what does it mean that different individuals  existing in the current world   may fill the role of murderer  the problem is too complex to be assessed here  but we can try to present some ideas about it. first  different worlds are different in different ways. some of them arc worlds of fiction and imagination. some of them are possible states of the real world. in the latter case we are faced with cpistemic issues: the current world is one and the same  but our knowledge about it is incomplete. as far as a speaker may know different actualities may realize. in these  epistemically possible  worlds  some kind of trans-world identification of individuals must hold: do real individuals continue to exist across possible worlds  sec  kripke 1  for an in depth discussion about this issue   we believe that people assume that the world is made of a fixed set of individuals  but that different descriptions could not be able to pick out the same individual  even if they  refer  to the same one  because of lack of knowledge. this does not mean that fictitious  or  countcrfaclual   worlds should not be taken into account  but only that in these cases some explicit clue about such a change of perspective must be provided. in this framework  taking the  possible cpistemic world  as the component of the index  of which the  attributive reading  is independent seems perfectly reasonable. 
but there is another parameter that deserves attention: the 
 time . in the epistemic view introduced above  it is clear that a  possible world  is just a possible  current  worldd. thus  changes of denotation across time must be dealt with separately. and  in fact  there are cases where the denotation of a definite description seems to consist in the set of individuals that have filled a given role in different times. if 1 say: 
1  the presidents of italy have been 1 
what 1 mean is that  in the actual world  there have been in the past years a fixed number of changes of the president. this is not a property of the current president  whoever he is  nor a generic characteristic of italian presidents  but a matter of fact concerning what has happened in the  real  world. thus wc believe our formalism should be able to account also for a third component: the time. now  there is a an undeniable connection between possible worlds and future times  especially if we maintain the epistemic point of view outlined above: future is epistemically undcrdctermined  so that no definite description involved in a 
predication extending in the future can be assumed to refer to a fixed set of individuals. for this reason  wc are forced to admit a limited view of time independence: a predication is independent only of time  and not of the world  if it refers to a set of individuals filling a given role in the past. this is clearly problematic  since the actual set to consider depends on what is  past   i.e. on the time of utterance  but its import will become clear in the discussion that follows. 
   therefore  the parameters wc consider as basic in determining the reference of a definite noun phrase are three: the world  w   the context  c   and the time  t . the denotation of a definite np may be independent of none  one  or more of them  thus giving rise to different readings. the ambiguity structure  the ras  must consequently be extended according to these three parameters. the internal structure of the new ras's is shown in fig.l. 
   let us sec now in more detail the meaning of the nodes in the ras. 
	ardissono  et al. 	1 


fig. 1 - basic ambiguous representation of the reference of definite np's. t c  and w represent the time  context and world indices respectively  and a node marked by some of these labels represents the reading where the corresponding indices are fixed. 
* concept: the referent of die np does not depend on the world  context and time of the utterance  intension . ex:  the triangle is the polygon with 
three sides  
w actualized concept: the referent of the np depends only on the world. ex:  the dog has always 
been and will forever be the best friend of the man  
c office: the referent of the np depends only on the context. ex:  the president is elected by the parliament  
t #: the referent of the np depends only on the time. this kind of reference is not allowed. see below. 
wt extension: the referent of the np depends on world and time. ex:  the bear is dying out  
wc temporal extension: the referent of the np depends on context and world. ex:  the president has always been a white man  
ct attributive: the referent of the np depends on context and time. ex:  the murderer is insane  
wct specific: the referent of the np is determined at a given world  context and time. ex:  the dog is running in me garden  
   intuitively  the upper side of the  cube  in fig.l formalises the generic readings and the lower side represents the individual readings. in particular  the c  wc and ct nodes collect the informal notion of  role  proposed by fauconnier and the ct node represents the  classical  notion of attributive reading. 
   note that  basically  all the readings arc available for each np  the only exception being the t reading. maybe  we have not been able to find a good example  but it seems problematic to fix the time and let all other things vary  since the relativization to a particular time seems to involve a contingency that is in contradiction with the generality of world and context independence. 
relational/non-relational and distributive/collective 
   so far  we considered the basic referential properties of definite np  and we defined the ras's accordingly. but the structure proposed is not concerned with examples as ex.1  1  1  in which the  relational  reading is involved  and ex.1 and 1  in which the distributive/collective ambiguity must be considered. 
   the basic problem with relational readings is that a predication about an individual involves a comparison and thus something which can act as second term of the comparison must be identified. this difficulty forced montague to consider predicates as  to rise  as intensional: the whole intension of the subject appears in the resulting formula. it is clear that these predicates are not limited to specific readings  as  the temperature  in ex.1   but can also apply to attributives: 1  the murderer has become more insane to extensions  ex.1   offices  ex.1   and so on. it is evident that the other comparison term need not be outside the denotation. in particular  most comparisons involve a change over time  so that when the denotation is independent of t all required data are already available. but this docs not affect the overall picture: in order to determine the truth value of the sentence  you must apply the predicate to all individuals in the denotation; in case of relational predicates this involves taking into account  for each individual  another individual to carry out the comparison and the fact that this latter also happens to be in the denotation is irrelevant. 
   actually  the discussion above is slightly inaccurate: we have talked about different individuals to compare  but  relational  readings involve an intrinsic ambiguity: is the referent of the np or a property of the referent  uniquely determined at an index  that must be evaluated more than once  this ambiguity emerges clearly from ex.1. is the size of your current apartment or the size of different apartments  that belong to you at different times  which must evaluated at different time indexes and then compared  in both cases we take the predication to be relational  but in the former case it is only a property  the size  that is involved in being evaluated at different times  while in the latter one it is the identity of the referred individual that changes. this ambiguity is dealt with on the basis of our explicit representation of properties and will not be analyzed in further detail here. 
   the distributive/collective ambiguity arises whenever a  generic or specific  set of referents is determined by the np. this dichotomy has been carefully analyzed in the literature  webber 1  and we do not have anything new to say about it  except pointing out again that it applies to most of the different denotations of a definite np  if it includes more than one member  and that it is compatible both with relational and non-relational readings. thus  ex.1 is an example of   relational  collective  reading  while ex.1 features a  specific  nonrelational  collective reading. 
   other examples may be found  but the main point of this section is the independence of the relational/non-relational and the collective/distributive dichotomies of the basic reference. thus  the dichotomies discussed in this section are orthogonal to the referential distinctions  and must be dealt with at a different level. the dras  distributive/collective relational/non-relational mbiguity space  is introduced in the sp in order to represent such semantic ambiguity. it contains four nodes: dn  distributive non-relational reading   dr  distributive relational reading   cn  collective non-relational reading  cr  collective relational reading . see  as an example  dras1 in fig.1. 
1 	interpretation process and disambiguation 
   when a np head is met  a dras on the content plan  cp  and a ras on the rp arc created. all the nodes in the dras and ras are marked as active  in order to represent the fact that all the readings are available. ras's and dras's embody the ambiguities internally  and hide them from the other components of the representation. if the ambiguity can be solved at the syntactic and semantic level  the contents of these ambiguity spaces are modified in order to convey this information without affecting the other parts of the sentence; otherwise  the still ambiguous  or partially ambiguous  spaces will be passed to the process that accesses the pragmatic knowledge and/or the discourse context. 
   in some cases  the kind of predication determines the correct reading  but mis is not always true. the  relational  reading is forced by the explicit presence in the input sentence of relational indicators  such as verbs like change  be or become + comparatives  increase  diminish etc.  and some stative predicates  such as be rare i common i widespread admit only a collective reading  carlson 1   however  in most cases  the task of disambiguating among the different interpretations of a np is not easy and cannot be fully dealt with without taking into account world knowledge and the discourse history. however  some useful syntactic and semantic criteria do exist  and they have been implemented in the gull system as disambiguation rules. what follows is a very sketchy discussion of some of the features that have been taken into account. 
1 	tense  aspect and actionality 
   tense  past  present or future  and aspect  perfective  progressive or habitual  have a strong impact on the ambiguities above. in particular  the tense plus the perfective and progressive aspect allow to fix the time index  reichenbach 1   and usually force a specific reading  however  see  schubert & pelletier 1    while with the habitual aspect also the generic reading is available: 
1  the dog eats meat 
   as regards the actionality of the sentence  i.e. its being stative/non-stativc  telic/atclic  instantaneous/durative   there arc some interesting connections between  telicity   dowty 1  and distributivity. for example  while the  telic   that is   having a goal   sentence 
1  the men were writing a letter 
admits both a distributive and a collective reading  in which the men were co-operating in order to reach the goal   the 
 atelic  sentence 
1  the men were hiccuping 
hardly features the collective reading. of course  also the determination of the telic/atelic character of sentences constitutes a very difficult task  grasso et al. 1 . 
1 	np specifications 
   in most cases  a possessive adjective  especially in the first or second person  makes a generic reading impossible  note that in italian the possessive adjective does not  include  the article  as it does in english  
1  ii tuo cane mangia sempre la came -  the  your dog always cats meat -
   moreover  the  role  reading is made quite probable by the presence of a possessive adjective or by a relative clause which  in some sense  is causally related to the main assertion  as in 
1  the man who killed mr. smith so brutally is insane. 
1 	mutual influence of np interpretations 
   a global generic or specific interpretation seems to be preferred over one where some nps are specific and others generic. in particular  the np head cannot be given one interpretation  specific/generic  and its specification the 
other  generic/specific : 
1  la donna con la gonna e' molto elegante -
     the woman with the skirt is very elegant may be generic or specific  while 
1  la donna con la tua gonna e' molto elegante 
     - the woman with  the  your skirt is very elegant can only be specific. the same consideration holds for different complements of the same verb  although the disambiguation of one complement by means of another is not certain  because counterexamples do exist  as in: 
1  ii cane di giorgio mangia le aringhe - the dog of giorgio eats  the  herrings 
where  although  the dog of giorgio  refers to a specific entity  the sentence does not refer to a specific set of herrings  but to a habit of that dog. 
1 	an example 
   the disambiguation rules apply to an ambiguous representation  drass and rass  and limit the range of possible alternatives by reducing the number of active nodes inside the appropriate ambiguity spaces. for example  let us 
briefly consider the semantic interpretation of the sentence 
1  the murderer is trembling 
after the analysis of the np  a ras and a dras are instantiated  and all internal nodes are marked as active. the present progressive has a double effect 
1  it makes the generic reading implausible  actually  counterexamples do exist  but our rules are  preferential  in that the most common readings are chosen  unless other 
information contrast it  
1  it fixes the time dependency of the sentence on the time 
of the utterance 
the corresponding disambiguation rule copes with these effects by 
la  disabling all the nodes in the ras which represent generic readings  this amounts in disabling the upper side of the  cube   i.e. the *  w  t  wt nodes  
1a  disabling all the nodes in the ras which represent readings in which the time index is not fixed  i.e. the c and wc nodes  
finally  la  together with the fact that the np head is singular  activates a further disambiguation rule  stating that the collective reading is not available  this is obtained by disactivating the cr and cn nodes in the dras . at the end of the analysis  another disambiguation rule is triggered 
	ardissono  et al. 	1 
by the absence of any indicator of relationality in the input sentence  and it disables the still active nodes representing 

fig.1 - final  ambiguous  representation of the sentence 'the murderer is trembling . the same and relation arcs connects the nodes of the cp to the corresponding referential structures of the rp  and the semref arcs link the latter to the concepts in the sp  see  di eugenio & lesmo 1j. bold nodes represent active nodes in the ambiguity structures. 
relational readings  in our case  the node dr . the final representation of the sentence is shown in figure 1. 
   note that the sentence is still ambiguous  since both an attributive  ct  and individual  wct  readings are available. in this case  the partially ambiguous space will be passed to the processes that access the pragmatic knowledge and/or me discourse context. 
1 	conclusions 
   the paper has presented a formalism for representing the different readings featured by definite noun phrases. the distinctive feature of the proposed approach is that the representation maintains the ambiguity involved in definite np until the information needed for the disambiguation is made available. many examples have been presented and discussed in order to demonstrate the complexity of the problem and the suitability of our approach. the careful reader could have noted  however  that most examples include singular definite np and that only their occurrence in the subject position has been analyzed. 
   as regards plurals  they are currently handled by using the extended ras's presented in the paper: no extra difficulty has been found  except that some appropriate disambiguation rules have been introduced. the situation with cases different from the subject is a bit more complex; in ex.1  the only possible referent for the poligon with three sides is the concept  but this causes some problems  since what is staled by the sentence is that  each triangle is a poligon with three sides   and vice-versa . this is not immediately clear if we simply represent it as identity between the two concepts  as we currently do. 
   however  it seems that the extended ras in die current version covers a vast range of phenomena and that it provides us with a reasonable basis for facing the problems mentioned above and for more substantial extensions of coverage  as mass nouns and indefinite descriptions . 
   the current version of the interpretation system is implemented in lisp an runs on sun workstations under the unix operating system. 
references 
 barwise & cooper 1  j. barwise  r. cooper: generalized quantifiers in natural language. linguistics and philosophy 1  1   1. 
 barwise & perry 1  j. barwise  j. perry: situations and attitudes. mit press  cambridge  ma  1 . 
 carlson 1  g. carlson: 