 
this paper describes a logic for reasoning in a multi-source environment and a theorem prover for this logic. we assume the existence of several sources of information  data/knowledge bases   each of them providing information. the main problem dealt with here is the problem of the consistency of the information : even if each separate source is consistent  the global set of information may be inconsistent. in our approach  we assume that the different sources are totally ordered  according to their reliability. this order is then used in order to avoid inconsistency. the logic we define for reasoning in this case is based on a classical logic augmented with pseudo-modalities. its semantic is first detailed. then a sound and complete axiomatic is given. finally  a theorem prover is specified at the meta-level. we prove that it is correct with regard to the logic. we then implement it in a pro log-like language. 
1 	introduction 
more and more  computer science applications need to use information which is not provided by a single source 
of information but by several. 
   this is the case  for instance  when one wants to use several expert systems  each of them dealing with a particular part of the global problem to be solved. in this case  the knowledge coming from each expert system must be combined. this combination is not necessarily physical and the knowledge may remain distributed among the different systems. however  the set of knowledge necessary to solve the global problem is obtained by virtually grouping the knowledge of the different systems. it is also the case of distributed databases. each database stores information concerning a particular application domain. when considering a larger domain  one has to federate different databases. here again  the grouping is virtual since  very often  the differentdatabases are locally managed by other people. another 
   *this work has been financed by the cnrs and the french ministry of research 
1 	automated reasoning 
case of collection of information provided by different sources can be found in the grouping of beliefs. the classic example is that of a police inspector  c baral and subrahmanian  1  who questions different witnesses. each witness has his own beliefs concerning the crime and the inspector has to collect all of them in order to find the clue. 
   several problems arise when merging different information sources  cholvy  1a . first of all  there are problems of language : the sources do not necessarily share a common language for describing information. in databases for instance  this happens when the different databases to be merged do not have the same schema. in such a case  translations are necessary  elmagarmid and pu   . there also are problems of redundancy : a source may provide information which subsumes other information provided elsewhere. in this case  pruning is necessary. finally  there are problems of consistency. even if each source is consistent  the global set of information may be contradictory. this is augmented by the delocalised management of the different information sources. people who need to gather information are not those who manage the different bases and  due to the distribution  the different sources are managed by different people. so the notion of global consistency does not exist  since the sources are independently develope-
d. however  when grouping all of them  the problem of consistency arises. 
   our work concerns the last problem : we are interested in defining a logical framework which allows us to reason with information provided by difterent sources and which does not collapse in case of inconsistency. classical logic cannot be used directly in this case since everything is deducible from a contradiction  one can say it collapses in case of inconsistency . in the next section  we will present different studies which dealt with this problem. we will also present our approach. in section 1  we will present the logic we have defined in order to reason in a multi-source environment. in section 1  we define a theorem prover which implements our approach. it is described as a meta-program and we run it under a prolog-like language. correctness of the theorem prover is proved. 
1 some related work and our proposals 
work dealing with the problem of reasoning in the presence of inconsistency can be divided into two groups. 
  in the first group  we find studies which use classical logics but which eliminate inconsistency in order not to collapse. the main way to discard inconsistency is to manage maximal consistent subsets. work by  c baral and subrahmanian  1  belongs to this group. they define several types of theory combinations  mainly based on the maximal consistent subsets of the global theory. our past work  cholvy  1    bauval and cholvy  1   also belongs to this group. in the related domain of database updates  work by  fagin et al.  1  and  kupper et al.  1  also privilege maximal consistent subsets  
as do  gardenfors  1    nebel  1  in belief revision area  and  ginsberg and smith  1  in the problem of reasoning about actions. 
  in the second group  we find studies which do not use classical logics. for instance  paraconsistent logics are defined in such a way that some classical theorems  which allow us to derive everything from a contradiction  are not deducible in these logics 
 besnard  1 . for example   is 
not a theorem in paraconsistent. logics. so a contradiction  say a  a  cannot be used to derive anything  say b. another example of non-classical logic which can manage with inconsistency is the modal logic for reasoning about updates defined in 
 cerro and herzig  1  and  farinas and herzig  1 . even if the update is contradictory with the current database  the logic does not collapse. 
　besides this classification  another classification could be made : indeed  in each previous group  most of researchers have studied two cases. in a first step  they consider that all the data are equal with regard to the problem of inconsistency. in a second step  they studied the case where data are associated with extrainformation  tags  labels  degrees of priority  actions to be performed ...  which are used to restore consistency. for instance   fagin et al  1    c baral and subrahmanian  1    besnard  1    d. dubois and prades  1    gabbay and hunter  1  present different types of extra-information. 
　finally  the previous works could be grouped according to another classification : most of them adopt a constructive approach in the sense that avoiding inconsistency leads to construct a new consistent base. only work by  cerro and herzig  1  and  farinas and herzig  1  adopts a hypothetical approach : the logic they define  called assume  allows us to reason with hypothetical updates. the user can then deduce theorems of the form : such a formula will be true if i assume such other formula. the state after the update is never constructed. 
　as for us  we have defined two logics for reasoning in a multi-source environment which do not collapse under inconsistency   cholvy  1a   cholvy  1b . both of them allow the user to assume that the different sources of information are totally ordered according to their reliability. our approach is then a hypothetical one. the two logics differ on the attitude they modelize : 
  the first logic  called fusion-s  modelizes a sus-picious attitude : it consists in suspecting all the information provided by a source if this source contradicts a more reliable source. 
  the second logic  called fusion-t  modelizes a trusting attitude : if an information source contradicts a more reliable source  only the smallest set of contradictory information is suspected. 
　let us take the example of a police inspector who questions witnesses. assume that a first witness  bill  said that he saw a black car  while a second  john  said that he saw two men in a white car. an order may reflect the fact that the inspector himself has some conviction  which cannot be denied  or possesses some information which is true : for instance  he went to the meteorological station and he is sure that the crime was committed on a foggy day. so  he can assume that john is less reliable than bill  since john was standing too far away from the scene of the crime and  because of the fog  he could not see well. so  the inspector may trust him less. 
in this case  the inspector will consider that : inspector 
　if the inspector adopts the suspiscious attitude  he will conclude only that the car was black  i.e.  he suspects all the information provided by john because john contradicts a more reliable witness. if he adopts the trusting attitude  he will conclude that they were two men in a black car. in fact  concerning the colour of the car  he trusts bill more than john  so he can assume that the colour is black. concerning the number of persons  john provides new information that does not contradict bill's account. 
　in the rest of this paper  we focus on the trusting attitude. the next section describes the logic which modelizes it. 
　remark 1. as said previously  the trusting attitude suspects the smallest set of information which contradicts more reliable information. in this paper  smallest contradictory sets are pairs of literals : 1 and - 1. 
　we can imagine a more  application-adapted  approach in which the notion of topics of information  cazalens  1   cazalens and demolombe  1   is taken into account in order to characterize the minimality. for example  assume a meeting in which a person listens to two people. the first is a teacher of logic  the second is a student. the conversation is technical. implicitely  the person who listens trusts the teacher more than the student. assume that during the conversation  the student affirms that  the first order logic is decidable . immediately  the teacher denies it and reminds the student of the main result of undecidability of the first order logic. for the person  it is clear that the student is not reliable concerning the first order logic. if  later on  the student makes another affirmation about the first order logic  it is quite sure that the listener will not trust him. indeed  because of the contradiction 
	cholvy 	1 

about the decidability  he rejects any affirmation of the student which  is about  the first order logic. in this case  works previously cited which try to formalize the notion of  is-about   could be used in order to reject a smallest set of information  defined by the domain of the first order logic. an attempt to use the notion of topics of information for a syntactical characterization 
of updates can be found in  cholvy  1 . 
　remark 1. in this paper  we assume the existence of a unique order on the different sources of information. again  we can imagine a more  application-adapted  approach in which the sources are ordered according to several orders which are topic-dependent. 
　let us take the previous example and consider that the teacher of logic  who is an old-fashioned man  and the student are now speaking about pop music. it is quite sure that  regarding  pop music   he will trust the student more than the teacher  i.e.  the student will be considered as more reliable than the teacher. so there will be two orders  one for the  logics  topic and one for the  pop music  topic. 
　an attempt at a formalization of this idea can be found in  cholvy  1 . 
1 a logic for reasoning in a multi-source environment 
in this section  we present a logic which implements the trusting attitude previously introduced. 
1 the language 
we assume that our language l is a finite set of propositional variables : p1  p1  ... pl- we note 1.. n the n information sources we reason with. we will also say the databases to be merged. we assume that the sources  or databases  are finite  satisfiable but not necessarily complete  sets of literals of l. 
　the logic we define  called fusion-t l..n   is obtained from the propositional logic  augmented with pseudo-modalities i.e.  marks on formulas. these pseudo-modalities are : 
         f will mean that  when considering the total order on 	f is true in the database obtained by virtually merging database i1 and .. database im. 
　notice that the general form of these pseudomodalities allows us to represent the particular case :  i  f  i=l..n  which means that f is true in database i. 
1 semantics 
the semantics of fusion-t l.n  is the following : a model of fusion-t l.n  is a pair :  where : 
  w is the finite set of all the interpretations of the underlying propositional language l 
  r is a finite set of equivalence relations between in-terpretations in w. 
1 	automated reasoning 


	cholvy 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 

by merging the information coming from the different sources is never construted. the user only assumes the order of the sources and tries to derive true formula in this assumed database. as far as we know  only the work cited in section 1 for database updates adopts such a hypothetical approach. 
   the semantics we have attached to this attitude is in terms of possible models and is an extension of the semantics defined for belief base updates. the notion of  nearest  models is defined in terms of complementary literals. the semantics is appropriate even if information is extended to clauses  cholvy  1 . unfortunately  the axiomatics we have given  and the theorem prover we have defined  are only adequate for literal information. 
   in addition  one can wonder what happens if the order on the sources is not total. in this case  we find again the problem of reasoning with inconsistency with no extrainformation to restore consistency. solutions briefly described in section 1 could be adapted here leading to a formalism which mixes our logics and a mechanism to avoid inconsistency  management of maximal consistent subsets for instance . but this needs to be studied more carefully. 
   finally  in section 1  we have shown that another semantics could be attached to the reasoning in a multisource environment. it consists in taking into account notions like topics of information. this applicationoriented notion could be used to give a new definition of minimality as well as an extension to several orders on sources of information. 
