 
we consider the computational complexity of evaluating nested counterfactuals over a propositional knowledge base. counterfactual implication models a statement  if p  then q   where p is known or expected to be false  and is different from material implication  a nested counterfactual is a counterfactual statement where the conclusion q is a  possibly negated  counterfactual. statements of 
the form  intuitively correspond to hypothetical queries involving a sequence of revisions. we show that evaluating such statements is complete  and that this task becomes pspace-cornplete if negation is allowed in the nesting. we also consider nesting a counterfactual in the premise  i.e.  and show that evaluating such statements is most likely much harder than evaluating 
1 introduction 
a counterfactual is a conditional statement  if p  then q  where the premise p is either known or expected to be false  ginsberg  1   e.g.  if the electricity hadn't failed  dinner would have been ready on time . this is customarily written as to distinguish it from material implication which is trivially true if p is false in the current context. the evaluation of a counterfactual in a certain context  which is described by a knowledge base  can be done using the ramsey test  which roughly states that  is true if the minimal change to accept p requires accepting q. counterfactual reasoning is nonmonotonic in the sense that by augmenting the knowledge base a previously valid counterfactual may become false. the relevance of counterfactual reasoning to a number of ai applications was first demonstrated in  ginsberg  1   to which  and to  gardenfors  1; nebel  1; grahne  1   the reader is referred for a background. 
　in this paper we mainly deal with nested counterfactuals  i.e.  counterfactuals where the conclusion can be a counterfactual itself instead of a plain propositional 
   *this is a short version containing only proof sketches. an extended report containing full proofs and more results is in preparation. 
1 	knowledge representation 
sentence. nested counterfactuals are often used in reallife contexts and are an important principle of commonsense reasoning. 
example 1: the statement  if you would have bought a painting by botticelli from john and you would notice it is a fake  you would still remain a client of john  
corresponds to a nesting of counterfactuals of the form 

the value of this counterfactual depends  of course  on the given knowledge base. it is intuitively clear that the counterfactual will evaluate to false on a large number of reasonable knowledge bases. according to ramsey's rule  the evaluation of this nested counterfactual over a given knowledge base t amounts to check whether  t' o buy-botticelli from-john  o fake   client-of-john 
for a suitable revision operator  o . this example also shows that nesting a counterfactual in the conclusion is different from strengthening the premise  i.e.  
r   is different from  indeed  the conjunction of buy-botticelli-from john and fake  is semantically incon-
sistent  because a botticelli is not a fake   and therefore the sentence would be vacuously true for each knowledge base. d 
more generally  a nested counterfactual of the form is true over a knowiff t revised 
by p   revised by p1  revised by p1 etc. implies q. for this reason  the complexity results we will derive for nested counterfactuals are equally relevant to the problem of inferencing after iterated knowledge base revisions. 
　the complexity of evaluating unnested counterfactuals over propositional knowledge bases  i.e. finite propositional theories  was considered in  nebel  1; grahne  1; eiter and gottlob  1 . in this paper  we deal with evaluating nested counterfactuals based on ginsberg's approach  ginsberg  1  which uses the method by fagin  ullman and vardi  fagin et al.  1  for incorporating changes to a knowledge base. such statements intuitively correspond to hypothetical queries involving a sequence of revisions  and are naturally relevant to planning and reasoning about actions  cf.  ginsberg and smith  1; winslett  1    for instance. 

　our study also includes allowing negation in nesting counterfactuals  i.e. statements like is motivated by natural relevance. 
example 1: imagine a two person game and that player one wants to know whether every possible choice for his next move  m1  does not result in a forced win for player two  i.e. player two does not win regardless of his next  this question amounts to m   
　the alternative to nesting counterfactuals into the consequence is nesting into the premise  i.e. a nesting  p   q    r. intuitively   p   q    r means  would r be true in the closest context where p   q is true . note this is different from  if then r   which is true if is false. n e s t i n g s a r e relevant to practice  as the following example shows. 
example 1: imagine a system is error detecting if the occurrence of an error  e  is displayed  d  on some special device. the question whether a module m must occur in the system if its current state is changed to be error detecting amounts to 
　the complexity of evaluating a single counterfactual in the propositional case was studied in  nebel  1; eiter and gottlob  1   where it was shown that this problem is ilp1-complete. in the present paper we study the complexity of checking nested counterfactuals over propositional knowledge bases. our main results are summarized as follows. first  we show that deciding nested counterfactuals of the form 
q         is iip1-complete. this is rather surprising and can be viewed as a positive result. it has an interesting conse-
quence for the two basic approaches to cope with iterated kb-revisions. the first incorporates each revision into the kb and needs in general exponential space and time  while the second stores the initial kb and the syntactic 
sequence  p1 p1 .... pn  of revisions separately and accounts for it in query answering. our result guarantees that the second approach does not get substantially  i.e. exponentially  harder when the sequence of revisions increases  which strongly favors this approach. second  we show that things get more complicated  pspacecomplete  if negated counterfactuals can appear in ne-
stings  see example 1 . third  we consider nested counterfactuals of type  p   q    r  i.e. the nesting occurs in the premise  and show that checking validity of such 
formulas is -complete. 
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 introduces concepts and reviews previous results. in sections 1 and 1 investigate into the complexity of evaluating counterfactuals nested in the conclusion without and with negation  respectively  while section 1 deals with nesting in the premise. section 1 gives some conclusions. due to space limitations  we provide here for some results merely detailed proof sketches. 
1 definitions and previous results 
we assume that the reader knows about the basic concepts of np-completeness  the polynomial hierarchy  and pspace  rf.  garey and johnson  1 . briefly  
	eiter and gottlob 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	eiter and gottlob 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

knowledge base is given by a set of models and updates are performed according to winslett's method  winslett  1 . in particular   grahne and mendelzon  1  corollary 1  implies that evaluating nested counterfactuals under this update semantics is pspace-complete. 
   our work contributes to the recent effort in giving a precise complexity characterization of nonmonotonic reasoning in the full propositional context  cf.  niemela  
1; winslett  1; nebel  1; rutenburg  1; eiter and gottlob  1; stillman  1   see  cadoli and schaerf  1  for an overview   extending previous results for restricted contexts  e.g.  kautz and selman  1; stillman  1; selman and levesque  1; cadoli and lenzerini  1; provan  1 . such a characterization supports a better understanding of the computational relationships between various forms of nonmonotonic reasoning  e.g. efficient intertranslatability. furthermore  the precise complexity of a problem gives us a clue of its computational difficulty and may provide insight to sources of complexity. for counterfactuals  these sources are classical inference and the many knowledge bases that are possible after incorporating a change. fortunately  a sequence of changes is not a source of complexity. since ---complete problems are most likely much harder than np-compiete problems  our results suggest that methods such as gsat  selman et al.  1  for efficient handling of np-complete problems are most likely not applicable to nested counterfactuals. however  gsat can be fruitfully applied for proving if all propositional formulas are horn clauses. 
acknowledgments 
the authors would like to thank two referees for their valuable comments. 
