 
an extension of the concept description language acc used in kl-one-like terminological reasoning is presented. the extension includes multi-modal operators that can either stand for the usual role quantifications or for modalities such as belief  time etc. the modal operators can be used at all levels of the concept terms  and they can be used to modify both concepts and roles. this is an instance of a new kind of combination of modal logics where the modal operators of one logic may operate directly on the operators of the other logic. 
1 	introduction 
knowledge representation languages in the style of klone   so-called terminological kr languages  can be used to define the relevant concepts of a problem domain and the interaction between these concepts. to this purpose  complex concepts are constructed out of atomic concepts  i.e.  unary predicates  and roles  i.e.  binary predicates  with the help of the language constructs provided by the particular terminological language. various such languages have been considered in the literature and are used in kr systems  see  e.g.   1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  . 
　they have in common that they are only suitable for representing objective  time-independent facts about the world. notions like belief  intentions  time-which are essential for systems that model aspects of intelligent agents-can only be represented in a very limited way. suppose that a terminological system should representthat the agent john believes that new cars have catalytic converters whereas tom believes that they don't. one possibility-which has  e.g.  been used in sb-one - is that the system keeps two separate terminologies  one for john's belief context and one for tom's belief context: 

   things become more complex if the application requires the use of modalities inside of concept expressions as well assume that we want to express that a potential customer  for a car salesman  is an adult who eventually wants to own a car. in a traditional terminological language a definition of this concept could be 

where eventually-wants-own is a new role different to the roles own and wants-own. but then there would be no interaction between these roles  whereas one would expect that wants-own implies eventually-wants-own. again  modal operators with an appropriate modal theory of time and belief can be used to capture such interactions. in our example  we get the definition 

intuitively  the role-fillers for own now also depend on the point in time and on the intentional world  and not only on the object. the prefix  want  means that one takes only those objects that are role-fillers in all accessible intentional worlds  and the prefix  future  says that this has to be evaluated at some future time point. 
　in this example  the modal operators modify the ownrole. of course  there are also cases where one would like 

1
 the standard modal operators are usually written  and 
 in a multi-modal logic with different modal operators referring to different accessibility relations we write  p  and *this work was supported by the esprit project 1  p  for the parameterized box and diamond operators. these medlar  and the bmft projects logo  its 1  and operators can be interpreted as 'believes ' 'knows ' 'wants ' 
tacos  itw 1  	'always'  in the future or past  and the like. 
1 	knowledge representation 

to modify concepts in this way. in the definition 	1 	syntax and semantics of m-acc 
an environment freak is defined as a person that wants to own only things that are believed to be environment friendly. in this case the  belief -operator modifies the concept en vironmen t-friendly. 
   we have motivated by examples that it  is desirable to extend terminological languages by various types of modal operators  for time  belief  want  etc.   which 
should be applicable to definitions as well as inside of concept terms  and there to modify both concepts and roles. our approach to achieve this goal is based on an 
observation by schild  that the terminological language acc is just a syntactic variant of the multi-modal logic km   where m is the number of different box operators. the reason is that quantifications over roles can 
just be seen as applications of parametrized modal operators to concepts. thus we propose to treat roles and modalities in a symmetric way by using a multi-modal logic where both role names and modalities such as belief can be used as parameters in boxes and diamonds. to distinguish between roles  which operate on objects  and modalities operating  e.g.  on time points or intentional worlds  we shall equip each modal operator with a type  or dimension  such as 'object  time-point'etc.. 
   however  the requirement that it should be possible to modify roles by modal operators is not yet captured by this approach. until now  the parametrized modal operators are atomic in the sense that  the boxes and diamonds may only contain parameter names like own  future  or belief. applying modal operators to roles means 
that one obtains complex terms inside boxes and diamonds. for example  in the definition of environrncntfre&k we thus get the modal prefix   want own  where the complex  role  term  want own occurs inside a box-
operator. 
   our new approach for integrating modalities into terminological kr languages  called m-acc in the following  thus extends the prototypical terminological language acc in two respects. first  'roles' may have different types that express in what dimension  e.g.  objectdimension  time-point-dimension  they operate. in addition  one can apply role quantification not only to concepts but also to roles  which provides for a very expres-
sive language for building role terms. the expressive power of this language is  for example  demonstrated by the fact that general concept equations  see  e.g.    can be expressed  even if one has only one dimension. this shows that the important inference problems  such as satisfiability of concept terms  must be of very high complexity for our language.1 for this reason we shall impose additional restrictions on the syntactic form of certain role terms to get a practical algorithm for satisfiability of concept terms. 
1
　　satisfiability modulo concept equations is known to be exp-time complete; this is an easy consequence of a result by fischer and ladner . 
	ohlbach and baader 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

	ohlbach and baader 	1 


figure 1: transformation rules of the satisfiability algorithm for m-acc. 
　in  it is shown that for constraint systems generated by the algorithm the depth function is always uniquely 
defined  i.e.  independent of the selection function . in addition  the depth of all points and labels is bounded by a positive integer m c   which depends linearly on the size of the input term c. it should be noted that both properties strongly depend on our restriction that  ... -operators are not allowed at the role term level. the fact that labels are of bounded depth plays an important role in the proof of termination. 
t h e o r e m 1 the satisfiability algorithm described above terminates for all restricted serial m -acc concept terms. if tt returns unsatisfiable then the input term is in fact unsatisfiable. 
   a proof can be found in . unfortunately  we did not succeed in showing the opposite direction of the second statement  but we strongly conjecture that it holds. since subsumption is reduced to unsatisfiability this means that we have presented a sound  but possibly incomplete  algorithm for subsumption in m-acc. 
   the semantics of m-acc allows for a straightforward translation of concept terms into first-order predicate logic. but the translated versions of even small concept terms may already become very complicated. the formulae one gets do not seem to fall into one of the known decidable subclasses of first-order logic. this is in contrast to acc where concept terms can be translated into formulae of the godel class. decidability of the satisfiability problem in m-acc is still an open problem. 
1 	knowledge representation 

1 	summary and open problems 
the present paper is a first investigation of a new kind of multi-dimensional modal logic. the logic m - a c c is a combination of modal logics k m   but the combination is of an unusual type. the modal operators of the component logics do not only operate on the formulae in the combined logic  but also directly on the operators of the other logics. as we have seen  this gives rise to quite complicated interactions between the component logics. this kind of logic was motivated by applications in the area of kl-one-like knowledge representation systems  and in particular by the need of modelling the knowl-
edge of intelligent agents. 
   in this paper  we have only worked out the basic framework  and have defined a calculus based on the idea of labelled deductive systems. there are various interesting questions that remain open. 
   first  of course  is the question whether the algorithm is also complete for unsatisfiability. if the answer is yes  this would show decidability of the satisfiability problem for restricted serial m - a c c terms. if the answer is no  decidability remains an open question. 
   more generally  one can ask whether the methods described above can be adapted to the case where arbitrary  .. -operators are allowed at the role term level. related is the question whether satisfiability for arbitrary m-
acc terms is decidable1 
   an adequate representation of modalities such as know  belief  or time require component logics that are stronger than km; for example s1 for knowledge  linear structures for time etc. more generally  one can ask whether it is possible to modify the satisfiability algorithm such that it can take additional modal axioms into account. a possible way of attacking this problem could be to translate the modal axiom schemas into properties of the accessibility relations  see   complex correlations between different modal operators can thus be investigated  and turned into additional rules of the satisfiability algorithm however  without additional restrictions  the rule set one thus obtains will usually not be terminating. 
   as already mentioned  a flexible treatment of t-box axioms would be desirable. can such axioms be handled by a satisfiability algorithm  also  the interaction with a-boxes has not yet been considered. in this context  is it possible to parameterize the role terms with a-box elements or concept terms  e.g.  by writing  know john   or  believe car-salesmen    
