 
a student model description language and its synthesis method are presented. the language called smdl is based on a logic programming language taking 1 truth values such as true  false  unknown and fail. a modeling method called hsmis is a new nonmonotonic model inference system and has the following major characteristics:  1  model inference of logic program taking 1 truth values   1 treatment of nonmonotonicity of both student's belief and inference process itself. hsmis incorporates de kleer's atms as a vehicle for formulating the nonmonotonicity. both smdl interpreter and hsmis have been implemented in common esp extended self-contained prolog  and incorporated into a framework for its  called fits. 
1 	introduction 
student modeling is one of the most important topics of its research  because the behavior of an its largely depends on a student model  which represents the snapshot of student's knowledge. this is a reason why many efforts concerning student modeling have been made  for instance  overlay model  buggy model  perturbation model  etc. wenger  1 . most of the conventional modeling methods have simple pragmatic structures and have been incorporated into many its's. however  all the methods have some limitations and no complete and sound inference procedure for the models is obtained yet. in this paper  we formalize a student modeling problem as an inductive inference problem  that is  a problem to construct a model explaining observed data. in our case  data are student's answers and the model is student's knowledge. 
　in order to make its's intelligent  student models have to satisfy the following requirements: 
1. accuracy-cost tradeoff: in general  the more accurate the student model becomes  the more effective the behavior of the system becomes. however  there exists trade-off between accuracy of the model and cost to construct it. from a pragmatic viewpoint  we must set up an appropriate representation scheme for student models by taking the trade-off into considerations. 
1. nonmonotonicity: tutoring is to guide students toward better understanding of teaching material. this means that the learning process is essentially attained with change of their minds and hence the consistency of student's answers can be easily lost. therefore  student modeling methods should be able to automatically manage the consistency of student's answers in order to follow the student's mind. however  there is very few attempts to formulate the nonmonotonicity of student modeling process burton  1  huang et al.  1a . 1. unknown assertions: when a student fails to deduce her own solution for a problem  she would say to her teacher  i could not solve the problem . needless to say  this assertion does not mean she does not have any knowledge. the student model module should use this assertion as informative data about her knowledge and construct a model which explains why she cannot deduce the answer from her own knowledge. this requires student model to deduce  unknown  assertions. 
1. theoretical foundation: domain-independent and theoretical foundation for the student modeling mechanism should be defined. it contributes to both clarification of the inherent property of student modeling problem and to articulation of the scalability and reusability of the proposed mechanism. 
　to meet these requirements  we have developed a student model description language smdl and a hypothetical student model inference system hsmis. smdl is an extended version of prolog and takes four truth values including  unknown  to model the student precisely. hsmis  an extended version of shapiro's mls shapiro  
1   is an inductive inference system for smdl. the second requirement mentioned above suggests that the inference procedure should cope with nonmonotonic modeling process. in hsmis  atms: assumption-based truth maintenance system  de kleer  1  is employed for this purpose. hsmis has been implemented in common esp extcnded self-contained prolog  on sparc station. 
1 smdl : a student model description language 
in addition to the above requirements  a student model is required to represent not only students but also sysikeda  kono  and mizoguchi 1 





ikeda  kono  and mizoguchi 


figure 1: examples of the top-level trace and the refutation for a clause. 



ikeda  kono  and mizoguchi 




1 	concluding remarks 
both smdl interpreter and hsmis have been implemented in common esp extended self-contained prolog  and incorporated in a framework for its  called fits mizoguchi and ikeda  1l . hsmis can cope with a variety of teaching materials as far as it can be represented in prolog. therefore  the authors think that the generality of hsmis is relatively high. 
　two its's have been built using fits  one is on geography and the other is on chemical reactions. simple examination of both systems shows they run in real time if the oracle contradiction does not occur. when the oracle contradiction occurs and there is no heuristics for its resolution  we find that the cost to resolve the contradiction is very expensive. 
　the current implementation of contradiction resolution is based on a somewhat brute-force method using domain-independent heuristics. to improve the efficiency  more powerful domain-dependent heuristics should be employed. it seems promising to adopt a belief revision mechanism developed by x. huang et.al  which provides efficient  minimal revision of belief bases by using attention focus  in the belief space huang et al  1b . 
　we have discussed mechanisms to avoid inconsistency in model inference in this paper. however  there exist such students who have contradictions in their head. to cope with modeling of such students  the system may not avoid the inconsistency but has to model inconsistent knowledge as it is. this issue will involve the development of more sophisticated control mechanism for student modeling. we are currently engaging in the issue  where student's inconsistent knowledge is modeled in multiple worlds which are again supported by atms kono et al  1 . 
a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s : the authors are grateful to reviewers for their valuable comments. 
