 
in this paper  we give a logic system - w based on the view of shared common knowledge  and 
prove some properties of w. by w  we effectively describe and solve the conway paradox  the typical multi-agent problem involving common knowledge. 
keywords: common knowledge  agent  proof  logic  reasoning. 
1. introduction 
undoubtedly  the representation of and reasoning of common knowledge is a typical problem in kr  knowledge representation and reasoning  research; it is typical because it plays an important role in multi-agent reasoning  communication  distributed computing system  etc.. but what is common knowledge  how do we use common knowledge  just as knowledge  there are different opinions about these questions among different people. but everyone agree that the representation of and reasoning of common knowledge depends on the representation of and reasoning of knowledge in which common knowledge exists. to put it briefly  there arc three opinions about common knowledge  barwise 1 . one is  infinite level  or  iterate level  opinion  lewis 1  
say is common knowledge for the agent group g  if 
1. each agent in group g knows ; 1. each agent in group g knows the fact   1   ; 
n+1. each agent in group g knows the fact  n ; 
it is shown that  halpern & moses 1   this kind of knowledge can not be gained in a synchronous and most distributed processing systems. 
1 	distributed al 
the second is the so called  fixed point  opinions  harman 
1 . by introducing an operator cg  we get a complete axiomatization to express the common knowledge's properties. the axioms and inference rules involved are follows  halpern and moses 1 : 

c1 is called cg's fixed point axiom  and rc1 is the common knowledge inductive inference rule. obviously  this opinion of common knowledge characterizes the properties of common knowledge  but it gives no hint on how to use it. the last is the shared environment common knowledge opinion where every knowledge is associated itself with a situation and each situation is also every agents' cognizable object  clark and marshall 1 . for example  let p  q be two agents  we have three statements under situation s: 
then is p and q's common knowledge. this opinion of common knowledge leads to the outcome of prosit system  nakashima  et al 1 . undoubtedly  situation logic can express and apply common knowledge effectively; can other logics  for example classical modal logic  express and apply the shared common knowledge effectively  in this paper  the answer is  yes . 
the paper is organized as follows: in section 1  we discuss the characteristics of logic under the shared common knowledge  we introduce the conception of  common knowledge agent   we simply call it fool reasoner . subsequently  an axiom logic system w based on knowledge language is given  it characterizes the multi-agent reasoning system based on shared common knowledge. in section 1  we briefly describe the proof properties of w  and conclude that: w is monotonic  

powerful and can do common sense reasoning; w has four levels of contradictions. this means that local contradiction can not spread into global contradiction  one agent's contradiction can not lead other agents to be contradictive. in section 1  we prove that conway paradox can be easily solved in w. at last we give the future work under development. 
1. logic under shared common knowledge views 
in order to express shared common knowledge in logic  one of the obvious methods is to introduce a  virtual agent  in logic. this agent's knowledge is common knowledge  so it is also be called  fool reasoner  this agent must have following properties: 
   1. common knowledge agent  denoted by 1  must believe all tautology instance statement. 
   1.if 1 believes p  then 1 also believes that every agent believes p here 'believe' has the same meaning as 'know'. 
   1. if 1 believes p  then p must necessarily be true. 
   1. if kip is common knowledge  then p is also common knowledge. 
   1. how to use 1's knowledge is also common knowledge. for example   if agent i believes p and is common knowledge  then agent i believes q  is also common knowledge. 
every agent can have his own axioms and inference rules. 
the inference rules can be nonmonotonic  wang 1  wang and chen 1 . in this paper  we only consider the simple case where every agent  apart from 1 agent  are same  they have no local axioms and inference rules. we especially consider how common knowledge can be used by each agent. considering the logic be constructed for multi-agent reasoning system  we do not need the knowledge axiom: i definition 1. let f1 be basic proposition set  is die set of agents in which 1 is called common knowledge agent  then the well-founded formula based on f1 and ag is defined as follows: a. basic formula 
　1. if p  f1  then p is basic formula. 
　1. if p  q arc basic formulas  then p & q  formulas. 
b. formula 
　1. basic formula is formula. 
　1. if p and q are formulas  then here i=1 l ...n. 
	wang et al. 	1 

1 	distributed al 

	wang et al. 	1 

1. as regards to 1  a view can not be basically contradictive caused by local contradiction 
though with such features  w is still an initial logic system  there are many unsolved aspects  including: 
1. w's model theory. 
1. w's consistence. 
1. w's effective proof algorithms. 
all these three aspects are very important. the results presented in this paper can serve as a standpoint for the research on common knowledge. further research work on the formalism of common knowledge is expected to enrich our understanding of common knowledge and to obtain more fruitful results. 
acknowledgements 
this research was partly supported by chinese nsf contract 
no. 1 and chinese high. tech. program contract no 1d. thanks to members of chinese kr&r research group for their helpful discussion  and to the anonymous ijcai reviewers for comments and criticism. 
reference 
 barwise  1  barwise  j. 1. three views of common knowledge. tark'1  pp. 1. 
 clark and marshall  1  clark  h and marshall  c  1. definite reference and mutual knowledge  in elements of 
discourse understanding  pp. 1 ed. a joshi  b. webber and j. sag  cambridge un. press. 
ifagin and halpcrn 1  r. fag in and d. y. halpero  
reasoning about knowledge and probability: preliminary report  tark'1  pp. 1. 
 harman  1  harman  g.  1. review of linguistic behavior. edt. by jonathan bennett  language 1-1. 
 halpern and moses  1  halpern  j y. and moses  y.  
1. knowledge and common knowledge in distributed environment. in proc 1rd a c m symp. on principle of distributed computing. pp1 
 halpern and moses  1  halpern  j.y. and moses  y   1. a guide to the modal logic of knowledge and belief. ijcaf1  pp. 1. 
 konolige  1  konolige  k.  1 circumscriptive ignorance. aaai-1  pp. 1. 
 lewis  1  lewis  d.  1. convention. a philosophical study  harvard v press. 
1 	distributed al 
 nakashima  et al  1  nakashima  h.  peter  s. and schutze  ii.  1. communication and inference through situations. 
ijcaf1 pp. 1. 
 schiffer  1  schiffer  s.  1. meaning. oxford un. press. 
 wang  1  xianchang wang  1. a multi-reasoner reasoning system logic - mrsl.   k n o w l e d g e engineering advance in china 1 1     china un. of geoscience press. 
 wang and chen  1  xianchang wang and huowang chen  1. on assumption reasoning in multi reasoner system. proc. of pricai'1  nagoya  japan. 
 wang  1  xianchang wang  1. knowledge / common knowledge : their representation and reasoning. workshop on the representation and reasoning about common knowledge  sponsored by chinese high. tech. expert 
committee on intelligence computer system 
