 
a path-based inheritance logic is proposed for handling nonmonotonic inheritance structures. the formalism is called exceptional inheritance logic  eil . exceptional information which is nevertheless inheritable is encapsulated in a class  called an exceptional class. eil also takes into account a difference between acquired and inheritable properties. the paper describes ways in which exceptional classes are identified and subsequently located in inheritance structures. the on-path versus off-path debate is reassessed using eil. 
1 	introduction 
a major problem for network representations of defeasible and default knowledge  called 'nonmonotonic inheritance structures'  concerns the use of 'redundant' links. whilst the use of shortest-path algorithms for deriving network conclusions returns the  intuitively  correct result in many cases  in many other cases it does not  touretzky  1 . one obvious answer is to assert 'redundant' links explicitly into the network representation so that shortest-path algorithms continue to work correctly. such links represent binary assertions which explicitly relate by one link two nodes which previously were related by two or more intervening links. but the introduction of such 'redundant links' can make previously non-problematic network structures problematic: unambiguous structures can become ambiguous  and there may be side-effects in other parts of the network not involved with the redundant link. 
¡¡touretzky  describes a formal mechanism called on-path preemption which comes into play when a re-
dundant link causes such problems. the general idea is that where there is a redundant link  another path can override paths containing the redundant link  as will be described later . the effect is to implement formally the basic requirement that  despite the presence of redundant links  more general information should be overridden by more specific  i.e. that information from more specific superclasses should take precedence over information from more general superclasses in cases of conflict. however  sandewall  notes that touretzky's definitions do not take into account cases where the re-
1 	knowledge representation 
dundant link is itself interrupted by another node  i.e. where a redundant link contains two or more sublinks . in such cases  exemplified by the so-called clyde- african.elephant structure  counterintuitive results are sometimes returned. sandewall proposes off-path preemption   where the idea that more explicit information should win in cases of conflict. touretzky  horty and thomason  present a structure  called the 'george-marine' example  in which off-path preemption also returns counterintuitive results. unfortunately  in the 'george-marine' example chosen by touretzky et al. and which will be examined later  the intuitive interpretation is only obtained by allowing more general information to override more specific information - - a point often overlooked. this raises the question of how general the on-path preemption principle  that more specific information overrides more general  really is. whilst touretzky et al. argue that on-path preemption is more intuitive than off-path preemption  some  e.g.  etherington  1   remain neutral  whilst others  e.g.  neufeld  1   prefer the more permissive off-path preemption approach. 
1 	exceptional inheritance reasoning 
this paper proposes a way of representing and handling nonmonotonic inheritance structures which supports the principles of both on-path and off-path preemption  that more general information is overridden by more specific  and explicit information overrides derived . the formalism is called exceptional inheritance logic  eil   alasady and narayanan  1 . exceptional inheritance reasoning depends on distinguishing between  a  typical and exceptional classes  and  b  inherited and acquired properties. 
1 	typical and exceptional classes 
a typical class is one which passes information to its subclasses or instances by default  as is the case with standard class specialization. if the inheritance structure consists solely of typical classes linked by isa links  there is little problem in identifying the typical properties to be inherited by instances. but a class may also be typical by virtue of providing exceptions to more general typical classes. such a class is an exceptional class. 
¡¡in the network depicted in figure 1  clyde  whilst elephant  through two isa  -   links   is royal.elephant 


figure 1: the clyde-royal elephant network 
and so  typically  not grey. in this example elephant is a typical class in that elephants typically are grey. royal.elephant  though  contains an exception to the typical class to which it belongs  elephant . the e1l interpretation here is that royal.elephant inherits the property of typical non-greyness from an exceptional class  for which non-greyness is typical. information which is exceptional to the typical class and which belongs to the exceptional class is inherited as typical by subclasses and instances of the exceptional class  unless overridden. 
   the reasoning behind this interpretation is as follows. in the current literature the tsa links are used to specify superclass relationships as well as infer inheritance relationships in the typical class case. in exceptional cases the not-isa link specifies a non-superclass relationship but nevertheless requires a property to be inherited  namely  the opposite of what would be typically inherited. this is questionable: if isa is used to specify class relationships as well as to infer inheritance relationships  then not-isa should be used for explicitly ruling out certain class relationships  therefore stronger than no links at all  as well as prohibiting inheritance of any sort. however  not-isa is usually used to convey the information that the negation of the property referred to by a class name is to be inherited. the proposed exceptional class  is meant to address this point explicitly  by allowing the opposite or negation of what would be typically inherited to be inheritable in its own right. this would leave not-isa to perform the simple but important task of explicitly ruling out certain subclass/superclass relationships  without necessarily being involved in aspects of inheritance. 
   eil's approach here is to create an exceptional class which can be inserted into the structure so that the following new path results: 

where  is the exceptional class which is just like the elephant class  except that it is a subclass to a class  non-grey things  which stands for the opposite of what elephants typically are a subclass of  grey things . mechanisms for locating in inheritance structures will be provided later. 
1 	a c q u i r e d a n d i n h e r i t a b l e properties 
there is also a distinction between acquired properties  which are properties that an object picks up from the environment  and inheritable properties  which are properties that an object can inherit from its class es . the underlying rationale is that an inheritable property has the same meaning no matter by what or whom it is inherited  whereas an acquired property  since it is acquired by an object or class from the environment  cannot be passed by inheritance to other objects/classes without assuming that those objects/classes have also acquired this property from the environment. since this assumption cannot always be guaranteed to hold  acquired properties can only be attached to objects/classes if it is asserted that they have acquired that property from the environment. 
1 conceptual foundations of multiple inheritance with exceptions 
the following definitions will make the assumptions and motives of eil clear. first  multiple inheritance  and inheritable and acquired properties  are defined. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 multiple inheritance is the heredity of one or more properties by an individual or by a class  from two or more classes  either of which can be typical or exceptional. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 an inheritable property is a property that may pass via a class to a subclass or individual. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 an acquired property is a property derived from experience and training or as a result of interaction with the environment. this kind of property cannot be inherited by subclasses or individuals of a class which has an acquired property. 
next  exceptional class is defined. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 an exceptional class  called   for an individual or class x is a typical superclass  if x is a class  or typical class  if x is an individual  created in order to explain inconsistencies  involving inheritable properties only  arising from multiple inheritance with exceptions. it is similar in all respects except one to another typical superclass or typical class  let us say y  of x. that is   carries with it everything that y does except that  m the case of one property that y carries   carries as inheritable the opposite of that property. 
the basic rule of inference in eil is defined as follows. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 given ; y and x  where x is a subclass of both and y  x will inherit from  rather than from y. also  subclasses of  and individuals belonging to  x will inherit from  rather than y. 
that is   has more explicit information than y. the exceptional information is more explicit because what was previously implicitly inherited by means of a not isa 
	al-asady and narayanan 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

	al-asady and narayanan 	1 
figure 1: inheritance network with redundancy 
node which occurs later in the same path {grey  and is of opposite polarity. royal.elephant and the information it contains is therefore more specific to clyde than the nodes which follow royal.elephant in path  c   i.e. elephant. also  path  b  is pruned because there is another path  path  a   in which there is a node  royal.elephant  - called an on-path intermediate - from which starts a subpath of opposite polarity to that of  b . since there is a link between the on-path intermediate and a node  elephant  in path  b   path  a  contains more specific information despite the redundant link which reduces both paths to equal length. path  b  is therefore pruned to leave path  a . however  the notion of on-path intermediate crucially depends on the existence of a redundant link which bypasses that on-path intermediate. sandewall  presents the structure shown in figure 1 to point out the shortcomings of on-
figure 1: clyde the royal  african.elephant 
path preemption. the redundant link in the structure in figure 1 between clyde and elephant is interrupted by the african.elephant node  thereby resulting formally in the loss of the redundant link. on-path preemption would then not be applicable  and given a skeptical approach nothing could be inferred about clyde's colour. 
1 	knowledge representation 


figure 1: the eil representation of the clyde- african.elephant structure 
class man. therefore  since the acquired property of drink1.beer is not associated with either chaplain or marine directly in this structure  nothing can be directly inferred about george. there are then options as to where drinks.beer should be linked in as an acquired property  dashed lines in figure 1 . the property of 
