 
most of the current nonmonotonic logics are limited to a propositional or a first-order language. this means that these formalisms cannot model an agent reasoning about the knowledge of other nonmonotonic agents  which limits the usefulness of such formalisms in modeling communication among agents. 
this paper follows the approach that one can extend some of the existing nonmonotonic logics to include modal operators to denote the knowledge of other agents. we use a theory of utterance understanding as the source of our intuitions on the properties that such extended logics should exhibit. the second part of this paper discusses a methodof extending any propositional preference logics into a corresponding extended logics that allows for a knowledge operator. 
	1 	introduction 
reasoning about other agents  and in particular reasoning about the beliefs of other agents  is of fundamental importance if an intelligent system is to deal with social situations. but the logics that have been created to deal with knowledge of more than one agent  for example  halpern and moses  1   have the limitation that the agents they model are rnonotonic. since it 
1 	distributed al 
is widely assumed that interesting forms of intelligence cannot be captured by monotonic forms of reasoning  these logics are very limited on their capacity of modeling interesting social behavior. 
   on the other hand  most of the existing nonmonotonic logics are limited to a first-order or a propositional language. that is  although these logics capture the nonmonotonicity of the agent's reasoning  they can only model the agent when it is reasoning about  things in the world   which can be expressed in either first-order or propositional languages. in particular  the existing nonmonotonic logics cannot model an agent reasoning about the knowledge of another agent. 
　summarizing  the existing formal devices either model many  uninteresting  agents  or they can model only a single interesting agent. this paper addresses this problem: it describe a nonmonotonic logic that can model an agent reasoning about the knowledge of other nonmonotonic agents. 
   the approach taken in this paper is to extend some of the existing nonmonotonic logics to include formulas that refer to another agent's knowledge. we call these logics epistemically extended. this involves extending the semantics of a nonmonotonic logics since most formalism  with the exception of default logic  are semantically limited to either propositional or first-order languages. this paper will also discuss the requirements that an epistemically extended logic should exhibit if it is to model the knowledge of other non-monotonic agents. 
　the paper is divided into two parts. the first part discusses the requirements 

that an epistemic extended logic should meet in the context of a model of communication  or at least a model of utterance understanding . section 1 describes a model of utterance understanding that solves some of the problems a naive theory would face  but this paper will not deal with the consequences of this model. instead  we use the model to motivate the need of an epistemically extended logic  and to find out what are the requirements that the logic should meet. the second part discusses a method of extending propositional preference logics into epistemic domains  and proves that the resulting logic meets the requirements put forth in the first part. 
1 	a model of communication 
mccarthy  suggested that one of the many uses of nonmonotonic logics is to model conventions in communication. for example  the default rule  birds usually fly  can be seen as stating that if in a conversation a bird is mentioned and nothing is said about its flying condition  then one can assume that it flies. more specifically  if s  for speaker  tells h  for hearer  about a bird  and s says nothing about the bird's ability to flight  then h should conclude that the bird flies. 
　mccarthy suggests that h's reasoning can be done entirely within a first-order framework. this is done by representing the content of s's assertion as a first-order formula in h's belief space  and combining it with h's beliefs about birds in general  and tweety in particular. h would then perform the following nonmonotonic inference: 
tweety is a bird 
usually  birds fly 
           tweety flies. which mccarthy implements using circumscription. 
　we will call this method of modeling h's reasoning the import-default method  because the content of the utterance is first imported into h's belief space  and only after that are the defaults inferred. the import-default method has many shortcomings. first  it does not allow for the 
modeling of s's beliefs and the mutual beliefs between s and h . a second shortcoming comes from the import process itself. if s's statement contradicts with h's beliefs  then h would not like to import it  and thus resulting in a contradictory knowledge base. also  h would not like to import the content of the utterance if h has reason to believe that s is lying  and that can only be concluded if we compare the content of the utterance with s's own knowledge and not h's . 
   although the previous two problems could be addressed by some extra-logic mechanism  for example by first checking the utterance against s's beliefs and only if it is not contradictory perform the import process   there is a third problem that undermines the assumption that the reasoning can be done in a first-order framework. for a class of utterances that we named epistemic cancellations  the speaker uses the epistemic possibility operator to cancel  or block  the defaults. for example  by uttering 
tweety is a bird  perhaps a penguin. 
 1  
the speaker blocks the default that tweety flies. the semantic content of the utterance  even after it is imported into h's belief space  still carries the modal operator. 
　these shortcomings suggest that a more elaborate method to model understanding of utterances should be pursued. this method is based on explicitly reasoning about the s's beliefs  followed by a transferring step  where h accepts s's beliefs  or what he thinks are s's beliefs  as his own. this method is called belief transfer and was first discussed in  perrault  1 . 
1 	t h e belief transfer m e t h o d 
like the import-default  the belief-transfer is a model of the hearer's reasoning process. but instead of importing the content of the utterance directly into the his own belief space and deriving the defaults in that space  h derives the defaults in s's belief space  or in his view of the s's belief space  and then transfer consistent beliefs from that space into his own. the belief transfer method is based on the following defaults. 
     the speaker usually believes in what she says. this is grice's maxim of quality   if the speaker believes that a default 
	wainer 	1 

quence relation to be able to perform the reasoning described in  1  and  1   one must extend the existing formalisms in at least two directions. the first one is to allow defaults inside a knowledge operator  which is exemplified by expression  1 . we call this extension i n t e r n a l default. be-
side the fact that the syntax of the logic should allow for a default rule inside the scope of the knowledge operator  which is a problem for default logic the application of a default rule should work normally inside the knowledge operator. that is  if from and p  one concludes q  then from and bp one should conclude b /. 
　the second direction in which the existing formalism must be extended is to allow for default rules whose arguments are modal formulas. we call this exten-
sion external default  and it is best illustrated when  1  is expressed as the application of a default rule: 
		 1  
the logic should allow for default rules to have one or more arguments that are modal formulas  and these default rules should derive the  expected  conclusions 
when they are applied. 
	1 	a s s u m p t i o n s 
in this paper we will follow simplifications below: 
   1  we will assume that the knowledge operator is a modal operator that follows the kd1  or weak s1  axioms. 
   1  we will restrict  the language to a propositional modal language. 
   1  we will not deal with multiple agents  besides the speaker and the hearer  and we will not deal with nested knowledge  that is  the speaker's belief about the hearer's beliefs  and so on. 
　we introduced this last simplification  which severely limits the applicability of 
the logics developed here in modeling communication  in order to avoid multimodalities. for example  having to repre-
sent nested beliefs would bring the need of a modal operator to represent the hearer's beliefs  which is done implicitly now  when it occurs within the scope of the speaker's beliefs  the speaker thinking about the hearer . we believe that this last simplification can be incremen-
1 	distributed al 


	wainer 	1 
that would otherwise be attributed to her. for example  if the speaker had uttered:  tweety is a bird.  and given the default that birds usually fly  the hearer should conclude that the speaker knows that tweety flies. episternic cancellation is a way of canceling this knowledge attribution by explicitly saying that the speaker believes it to be possible that the default would not hold in this case. thus by uttering  1  the speaker is explicitly saying that she considers it possible that tweety is a penguin and therefore that tweety cannot fly. this blocks the conclusion that  the speaker believes that tweety could fly. 
　but  although it is clear what should not be inferred about the speaker beliefs from  1   it is less clear what should be inferred about the speaker's beliefs about tweety flying abilities. here there is a clash of intuitions. one position is that nothing can be concluded from  1  since the speaker expressed her doubts about whether tweety is a penguin or not. we will follow a second position which states that the corresponding defaults do apply to each of the possibilities raised by the speaker. in the example above  the possibilities are that tweety is a penguin  and that tweety is a non-penguin bird for each of these possibilities the relevant defaults should apply. if tweety is a penguin  then it does not fly  and if tweety is a non-penguin bird then it should fly thus  this second view would claim that the conclusion one should derive from the utterance of  1  is that either tweety is a non-flying penguin  or tweety is a flying  non-penguin bird. 
   this motivates the last requirement on the logic   the strong episternic canc e l l a t i o n sec  it states: 
	1 	episternic extension of 
preference logics 
in this section we will describe the episternic extensions of propositional preference logics. or more precisely  we will describe a method of defining the episternic extension of any particular preference logic. the work described here is based on  wainer  1b   with some dif-
1 	distributed al 


1 	conclusions 
the author hopes this paper makes two important contributions. the first one is that it discusses some of the requirements that an epistemic nonmonotonic logic should meet. although we developed these requirements based on a theory of utterance understanding  we believe that they are general requirements and should be used to compare different proposals of epistemic nonmonotonic logics. 
　the second contribution is the epistemic extension of preference logics. we discussed a method of extending any propositional preference logic  and proved that the resulting logics satisfy all requirements. 
　the research reported here is being expanded in two directions. the first one is the development of the epistemic extension of other nonmonotonic logics  for example conditional logics. the second area of future research is the study of the requirements for multi-modal epistemic logics. 
