 
we introduce curbing  a new nonmonotonic technique of commonsense reasoning that is based on model minimality but unlike circumscription treats disjunction inclusively. a finitely axiomatized first-order theory t is transformed to a formula curb t  whose set of models is defined as the smallest collection of models which contains all minimal models of t and which is closed under formation of minimal upper bounds with respect to inclusion. we first give an intuitive definition of curb in third-order logic and then show how curb can be equivalently expressed in second-order logic. we study the complexity of inferencing from a curbed propositional theory and present a pspace algorithm for this problem. finally  we address different possibilities to approximate the curb of a theory. 
1 	introduction 
circumscription  mccarthy  1  looks to many as one of the most promising principles for formalizing commonsense reasoning. however  as recently pointed out by raymond reiter  reiter  1   it runs into problems in connection with disjunctive information. the minimality principle of circumscription often enforces the exclusive interpretation of a disjunction a v 1 by adopting the models in which either a or 1 is true but not both. there are situations in which an inclusive interpretation is desired and seems more natural. consider the following example due to reiter. suppose you throw a coin into an area which is divided into a black and a white field. circumscription applied to black-field coin  v white. ..field coin  
excludes that the coin falls into both fields and tells you that the coin is either in the white or in the black field. this is certainly not satisfactory. an extension of this example is even more impressive. imagine a handful of coins thrown onto a chessboard; circumscription tells us that no coin touches both a black and a white field. it is not clear whether any of the well-known variants of circumscription  cf.  etherington  1   can suitably handle inclusive disjunction of positive information. 
yuri gurevich 
electrical engineering and cs department 
university of michigan 
ann arbor  mi 1  usa 
　in this paper we suggest an approach to tackle the problem pointed out by reiter. we present the curb method  which is a generalization of circumscription able to handle inclusive disjunctions of positive information properly. our method relies on the new concept of minimal upper bound models. intuitively  a minimal upper bound model corresponds to a minimal model for the inclusive interpretation of disjuncts. using this concept  we develop the notion of a  good  model of a firstorder theory. although the concept is more involved than circumscription  we show that  good  models can be captured like circumscriptive models in second-order logic.1 furthermore  inferencing from the good models of a propositional sentence is feasible in quadratic space; we show that for a reasonable approximation of the good models this problem is no harder than inference from circumscriptive models. 
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. section 1 considers additional examples and introduces informally the concept of good models. section 1 provides a formal definition and a logical description. section 1 examines aspects of computational complexity  and section 1 addresses approximation issues. section 1 reviews related work and concludes the paper. 
1 	good models 
let us consider two additional scenarios in which an inclusive interpretation of disjunction is desirable. models are represented by their positive atoms. 
example 1: suppose there is a man in a room with a painting  which he hangs on the wall if he has a hammer and a nail. it is known that the man has a hammer or a 
nail or both. this scenario is represented by the theory t  in figure 1. the desired models are a  n  and hnp  which are encircled. circumscribing t  by minimizing all variables yields the two minimal models h and n  see figure 1 . since p is false in the minimal models  circumscription tells us that the man does not hang the painting up. one might argue that the variable p should not be minimized but fixed when applying circumscription. however  starting with the model of t1where h  n 

   *this is a short version not providing detailed proofs of all results. full proofs and more results will appear in an extended report. 
1 	knowledge representation 
　　1  by using a second-order predicate constant. however  it is quantification which counts for the order of a formula  van benthem and doets  1 . 


figure 1: the hammer-nail-painting example 
and p are all true and then circumscribing with respect to h and p while keeping p true  we obtain the models hp and rip  which are not very intuitive. if we allow p to vary in minimizing h and n  the outcome is the same as for minimizing all variables. on the other hand  the model hnp seems plausible. this model corresponds to the inclusive interpretation of the disjunction h v n. 
example 1: suppose you have invited some friends to a party. you know for certain that one of alice  bob  and chris will come  but you don't know whether doug will come. you know in addition the following habits of your friends. if alice and bob go to a party  then chris or doug will also come; if bob and chris go  then 
alice or doug will go. furthermore  if alice and chris go  then bob will also go. this is represented by theory t1 in figure 1. now what can you say about who will a minimal such model; in other words  m is a minimal upper bound  mub  for m  and m1. 
to illustrate  in example 1 hnp is a mub for h and n 
 notice that hn is not a model   and in example 1 abc is a mub for a and c; abd is another one  so several mub's can exist. in order to capture general inclusive interpretations  mub's of arbitrary collections m1  m 1   m 1  ... of minimal models are adopted. 
　it appears that in general not all  good  models are obtainable as rnub's of collections of minimal models. the good model abcd in example 1 shows this. it is  however  a mub of the good models a and bed  as well as of abe and abd . this suggests that not only mub's of collections of minimal models  but mub's of any collection of good models should also be good models. 
　our approach to extend circumscription for inclusive interpretation of disjunctions is thus the following: adopt as good models the least set of models which contains all circumscriptive  i.e. minimal  models and which is closed under including mub's. notice that this approach yields in examples 1 and 1 the sets of intuitively good models  which are encircled in figs. 1 and 1. 
	eiter  gottlob  and gurevich 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	eiter  gottlob  and gurevich 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


　theorem 1  which fails for arbitrary structures  implies a dichotomous result on the expressivity of k~ bounded disjuncts: either we get only the minimal models or all models obtainable by unbounded disjuncts. limiting simultaneously the number of disjuncts and and the depth in building minimal upper bounds can be used to cut down the set of good models. 
1 	related work and conclusion 
inclusive interpretation of disjunctive models has been investigated in logic programming  ross and topor  1; sakama  1; ross  1; chan  1 . 
　the disjunctive database rule  ddr   ross and topor  1  has been proposed to allow cautious derivation of negative literals from a disjunctive database. the ddr allows all models in examples 1 and 1  hence also the unintuitive ones. moreover  it depends on syntactical representation  chan  1   which however is customary for semantics of logic programming. thus  the ddr is basically different from our method. 
   a more sophisticated approach that allows also to deal with negative clauses was introduced in  sakama  1; chan  1  by the equivalent concepts  possible models semantics   pms  and  possible worlds semantics''  pws . this approach has recently been generalized to cover negation by failure  sakama and lnoue  1 . in examples 1 and 1  pms and pws coincide with curb. 
however  if the clause h v n v p is added to t1  which has no effect on the models  then pms and pws adopt all models. hence  pws and pms are syntax-dependent and basically differ from our method. 
   another approach to treat disjunction inclusively is the weak well-founded semantics  wwf  for disjunctive logic programs in  ross  1 . in case of negation free programs  this semantics coincides with the ddr  ross  1   which implies syntax-dependency of w w f . 
hence  w w f is basically different from curb. 
   in this paper we presented a new approach to nonmonotonic commonsense reasoning that seems to be more appropriate than circumscription in many cases  namely  when disjunction of positive information is naturally interpreted in an inclusive fashion. our method of curbing theories differs significantly from all previous approaches to treat disjunction inclusively. it is syntax independent and yields the more intuitive models. we have shown that curb is second-order definable and have derived some relevant complexity results. we also have fostered two ways of approximating the curb of a theory. 
   we believe that this new approach deserves further investigations. on the one hand  it is tempting to find new and better algorithms for inferencing under curb or its approximations. on the other hand  the inclusive interpretation of disjunction is not always desired. sometimes it seems that a hybrid approach which interprets certain predicates  or certain connectives  inclusively and others exclusively is more appropriate  cf.  ross  1: sakama  1; chan  1 . our ongoing research deals with all these topics. 
acknowledgments 
the authors thank c. sakama for clarifying comments. 