: 
we present a set of axioms that justify the use of belief functions to quantify the beliefs held by an agent y at time t and based on y's evidential corpus. it is essentially postulated that degrees of belief are quantified by a function in  1   that give the same degrees of beliefs to subsets that represent the same propositions according to y's evidential corpus. we derive the impact of the coarsening and the refinement of the frame on which the beliefs arc expressed. the conditioning process is also derived. we propose a closure axiom that asserts that any measure of beliefs can be derived from other measures of beliefs defined on less specific frames. 
1. 	introduction. 
uncertainty induces beliefs1  i.e. dispositions that guide our behaviour. it sounds natural to try and quantify them on a numerical scale. these quantified beliefs manifest themselves at two levels: the credal level where beliefs arc entertained and the pignistic level where beliefs are used to take decisions  pignus = a bet in latin  smith 1 . usually these two levels are not distinguished and probability functions are used to quantify beliefs at both levels. the justification is usually linked to  rational  agent behaviour within betting and decision contexts  degroot 1 . the bayesians have convincingly showed that if decisions must be  coherent   our beliefs over the various possible outcomes must be quantified by a probability function. this result is accepted here  except that such probability functions quantify our beliefs only when a decision is really involved. that beliefs are necessary ingredients for our decisions does not mean that beliefs cannot be entertained without any revealing behaviour manifestations  smith and jones  p. 1 . 
in this paper  we present a set of axioms that must be satisfied by the funcuon that should be used to quantify the beliefs held at the credal level. we call that function a 
credibility function. it will be shown that the credibility funcuon is a belief funcuon. the resulting model is the 
1
 research work has been partly supported by the belgian 
national incentive-program for fundamental research in ai and the esprit ii  basic research action 1  drums  funded by a grant from the commission of the european communities. 
1
  a belief is a proposition which you could doubt. here  it is endowed by a strength. 
1 	knowledge representation 
transferable belief model  smets and kennes  1  smcts  1a  smcts  1 .we accept all over that degrees of beliefs at both the credal and the pignistic levels are pointwisc defined  degrees of beliefs satisfying a total order. ail beliefs entertained by an agent y at time t and their degrees arc defined relative to a given evidential corpus  ecty  i.e.  the set of pieces of evidence in y's mind at time t. our approach is normative  the agent y is an ideal rational agent  the evidential corpus is deductively closed and it induces unique degrees of belief. one source of modification in ecty is updating: it results from the adjunction to the corpus of a new piece of evidence assumed to be true and compatible with ecty. the updating is similar to the expansion process considered in gardenfors  1 . only one agent y is considered in this paper  and time t is unique except when updating will be studied. 
this paper summarizes the major results. details and proofs are presented in smets  1b . we present successively the propositional space on which credibility functions ared defined  section 1   the principle axioms characterizing the credibility functions  section 1   the dynamic of the credibility functions after non-informative coarsening  section 1  and refinement  section 1  of the frame of discernment and adfter updating of the evidential corpus by an expansion process  section 1 . a closure property is presented that implies that credibility functions are belief functions  section 1 . 
lengthy discussions about the use and appropriateness of the belief functions to quantify beliefs can be found in two special issues of the international journal of approximate reasoning  volumes 1 : 1 and 1 : 1 . these problems are not tackled here. we only try to find axioms that justify the use of belief functions for quantifying beliefs. 
1. 	the propositional space  
this section defines the domain on which the agent y will express his beliefs at time t. these beliefs arc quantified by a function cr that we derive in this paper. 
our presentation is based on possible worlds  carnap  
1  1  ruspini  1  bradley and swartz   1 . let l be a finite propositional language. 
 be the set of worlds that correspond to the 


	smets 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

	smets 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


1: credibility functions that satisfy the minimal solution for conditioning and refinement arc belief functions. 1: credibility functions that satisfy the maximal solution for conditioning and refinement are plausibilty functions. 
1. 	conclusions. 
we have shown under which conditions beliefs arc quantified by belief functions at the credal level  i.e. where beliefs are entertained. these conditions seem acceptable  and therefore they provide a justification for the transferable belief model to quantify some one's beliefs  smels and kennes  1 . 
one might be tempted to consider some of the axioms as unreasonable. it happens most if not all that the axioms are satisfied in probability theory  except for the simultaneous satisfaction of the homomorphism and the preservation properties . therefore the rejection of our axioms might lead to a simultaneous rejection of probability theory! in fact probability functions are special cases of normalized belief functions. 
the nature and use of the transferable belief model is detailed in smets and kennes  1 . in smets  1b  we show and explain what is the probability function that must be used to make decisions given the beliefs entertained at the credal level. in smets  1a  we show what is the justification of the dempsters rule of combination  see also klawonn and schwecke  1  klawonn and smets  1 . the concept of distinctness is described in smets  1c . the meaning of  is analysed in smcts  1a . the combination of the belief functions induced by two nondistinct pieces of evidence are already tackled in kennes  1  and smcts  1 . 
