 
in multi-agent environments where agents independently generate and execute plans to satisfy their goals  the resulting plans may sometimes overlap. in this paper  we propose a collaboration mechanism using social law  through which rational agents can smoothly delegate and receive the execution of the overlapping parts of plans in order to reduce the cost of plan execution. also  we consider col laboration with agents that do not abide by social law  that is  self-centered agents. simulation results show that our mechanism also has the property of balancing t he cost of plan execution and shows flexibility towards selfcentered agents. 
1 	introduction 
in multi-agent environments where agents generate and execute plans which satisfy their own goals  plans are generated independently  thus two relationships  martial  1  exist among plans. the first is called a negative relationship and exists between plans which attempt 
to use the same resource at the same time. this relationship will cause conflicts. such conflicts must be avoided or resolved because they prevent actions from being properly executed. the other relation is called a positive relationship and exists between plans which include overlapping subplans  subplans consisting of both common actions and individual actions. when there is a positive relationship and one agent delegates the execution of the overlapping subplan to the other agent  it can reduce the cost of execution. 
1 	distributed ai    a lot of research has been done on negative relationships  such as conflict avoidance  by using a social law  shoham and tennenholtz  1  and conflict resolution based on game theory  zlotkin and rosenschein  1 . however  despite the importance of a positive relationship for the agents' effective execution of plans  not much has been made  foulser et al.  1  to utilize this  except to reduce costs by deleting the overlapping actions 

in a domain consisting of only one agent  hayes  1  and for multi-agent systems where irrational agents delegate and receive plans  martial  1  and for multi-agent systems where agents mutually construct a collaborative plan  osawa and tokoro  1l  . 
   in this paper we propose a collaboration mechanism by which rational agents can delegate and receive subplans in a positive relationship so that the cost of ex ecution is reduced. if an agent delegates its actions to the other agent  it can reduce the execution cost greatly and benefit from it. on the other hand  when an agent receives actions  the cost increases a little even though the reduction in the cost of the sender is larger than the gain in its own cost. as rational agents can delegate actions but may not be willing to receive  it is very hard to collaborate in a positive relationship. however  if an agent which receives actions is guaranteed to be able to delegate some actions in the future  then even a rational agent can collaborate in a positive relationship. we propose a mechanism based on a social law  the guarantee  in which agents must balance the costs of received actions. with this mechanism  rational agents can collab orate through the expected cost based on game theory. 
   moreover  there are two other benefits arising from this law:  1  just as agents can expect another agent's proposition  strategy  at negotiation on delegation  they can avoid conflicts of strategies and can collaborate smoothly; and  1  the macroscopic problem that arises when the load of the whole multi-agent system is concentrated on an irrational agent can be solved with this microscopic cost-balancing law. 
   although the image related to the benefit of such a law is implicit in many ai works  the social law was only recently formalized and discussed  shoham and tennenholtz  1 . however  this work does not consider agents which do not abide by the law. when treating a multi-agent environment as an open distributed environment  it is quite natural to think that such agents exist. therefore  our mechanism considers collaboration with self-centered agents. it is a very simple solution for agents to not collaborate with self-centered agents. nevertheless  it is problematic that an agent which exceptionally did not abide by the law for some reason  cannot collaborate any more  and that agents could benefit by collaborating with the self-centered agents. therefore  agents should collaborate in a more rational and fiexible way: they collaborate if they can benefit and do not collaborate when they cannot. our mechanism allows agents to collaborate in this way. 
   simulation results show that with our mechanism  rational agents can reduce their cost by delegating/receiving actions. the results also show that the mechanism has the important properties of flexibility and guarantee cost-balancing. 
   the outline of the rest of the paper is as follows. in the next section  some of the assumptions are presented before discussion. our mechanism is proposed in sections 1 and 1. in section 1  two evaluation functions are defined using the game theory. also  the social law and the model of agents are described. in section 1  the other part of our mechanism is described. in section 1  some examples are presented. experimental results are shown and discussed in sections 1 and 1  respectively. 
1 	assumptions 
assumptions on the agents' plans and actions are as follows: 
1. each agent has a plan to achieve its own goal  and doesn't know the plans of other agents'. 
1. subplans  plans which achieve sub goals  consist of sequences of actions. 
1. the meanings of actions and associated costs are predefined and common to all agents. 
   in order to concentrate on the algorithm of delegation/reception decision  we assume the following: 
1. agents can find which parts  subplans  of their plan can be delegated. 
1. agents can discover other agents with which to negotiate delegation. 
1. negotiation is carried out between two agents only. 
   positive relationship that is implicitly contained between plans is divided into two relationships1  martial  
1 : a subsumption relationship and a favor relation ship. 
   if the actions of an agent's plan are the same or subsume another agent's actions  the plans are in a subsumption relationship and one agent does not need to execute its plan if the other agent executes its own plan. if an agent's plan partially overlaps with another agent's plan and is not in a subsumption relationship  the plans are in a favor relationship. in this case  an agent does not need to execute its plan if another agent is willing to receive the plan and to execute its own plan together with the non-overlapping part of the received plan. 
now  we assume the following 1: 
1. agents collaborate when their plans are in a favor relationship. 
1
martial divided the relationships in more detail. 
1
　　it is not necessary for agents to collaborate in a subsumption relationship because it is enough for an agent to check whether its actions were already done after execution of the other agent's plan. 
1 	definitions 
1 	change of cost by delegation 
the change in agent a's subplan  which has a favor relationship to b's subplan and the associated cost through delegation/reception  is shown in figure 1 where some actions are indicated as circles. 
   for instance  if a subplan of agent a  a  consists of three actions:  go to store  then  buy food  and finally  come back   and that of agent b consists of:  go to store  then  buy juice  and finally  come back   then the subplans are in a favor relationship  partly overlapping . if a receives the execution of b's subplan  the replanned subplan  b  that a must execute is:  go to store  then  buy food  and  buy juice   b's action  and finally  come back  and  hand b juice   action to adjust a's initial plan . 

   in order to express costs  we use the following notation: 
  : a's cost for executing a subplan which has a favor relationship to b's subplan. 
  : the cost of a's actions when executed by b when delegated  e.g.   buy food  . 
  : the cost of a's additional actions in the case of delegation/reception  e.g.   hand b juice  . 
　if a receives the execution of b's actions  a's overall cost is the cost of its own actions plus the cost of the delegated actions from b and the cost of adjusting a plan to a new plan 
   on the other hand  if a delegates the execution of its subplan  the subplan will become  c . in this case  a's overall cost is only the cost of adjusting a plan 
1 	social law for delegation 
social law is formalized in  shoham and tennenholtz  
1  and is treated as the pair of actions and conditions about states that prohibit taking action. intuitively  social law / is the law by which agents must balance the costs of the individual received actions. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1  social law for delegation  social law l is defined to obey the next constraints. 
 a  if an agent receives more actions than the other agent  it cannot receive actions at the next negotiation. 
 b  if an agent delegates more actions than the other agent  it cannot delegate actions at the next negotiation. 
   when agents abide by this law  each agent can delegate actions and benefits in the future according to  a   even if it receives actions and loses by that. therefore  even a rational agent can propose the strategy  receive.  


1 	distributed al 



the costs for agent b are taken for the same table with 
b replacing a. however  the cost of the subplan  1  and the cost of the delegated part of the plan  1  was randomly selected and was not necessarily common to both agents. the results are the average of 1 simulations. 

         table 1: cost of actions for agent a 1 reduction of cost 
figure 1 shows the relation between the cost for executing a subplan and the frequency of negotiation for delegation. 

   curves in the figures are the result of the next conditions  except for  iii b  . 
 i  b does not exist  agent a has to execute the actions alone   
 ii  b uses our mechanism  
	 iii a  	b is self-centered  b's strategy is only  dele-
	 iii b  	b is self-centered 
 iv  	b is the same as  iii a  till the 1-th negotiation  after then  it is the same as  ii . 
   although the cost doesn't decrease when agent a executes the actions alone  i   a can reduce the cost when the other agent uses our mechanism  ii . when the other agent is self-centered  iii   the cost is at first a little bit more than when the other agent uses our mechanism from the start. this is caused by a decision made by both flipping a coin when strategies collide and usage of the  do nothing  strategy when a cannot benefit from it. however  when the delegation precedes with  a cost-consuming negotiation   as the agent using our mechanism does not come to collaborate with the selfcentered agent  the cost approaches the cost of  i . when 
1 	distributed al 
negotiation is not cost-consuming  cneg = 1   the agent continues to collaborate with the self-centered agent  because it can reduce its cost more than when doing it alone  i  but less than when in situation  ii . 
the cost of b 

the cost of a 
figure 1: sum of the cost of the plan received 
   in the case where the other agent changes its mind and decides to use our mechanism rather than being 
self-centered  iv   the same result obtained for the selfcentered agent is obtained at first. if the other agent has decided to use our mechanism  it returns the benefit obtained up till then in order to balance the individual received cost. therefore  the cost is extremely reduced at that time  and approaches the cost of  ii . 
　furthermore  we simulated the case when and are different from 1 and 1. with a less than 1  result  iii  presents the largest change among all simulations. the agent decides not to collaborate with the selfcentered agent earlier. if  is greater than 1  result  iv  represents the largest change. the cost when the other agent has come to use our mechanism is smaller. the reason for this is that as larger   larger so that the agent comes to collaborate earlier on the social law. but if  is smaller  the agent will propose the  do nothing  strategy so that the  delegate  strategy would be less used and the cost is not reduced. 
1 	cost balancing of received actions 
figure 1 shows the received cost of both agents. curves  ii - iv  in the figure are the same conditions as before. 
   when both agents use our mechanism  ii   the costs received are balanced. when the other agent is selfcentered  iii   the agent receives too many actions because of the flexibility of the mechanism. however  this loss cannot continue to increase because a does not get to participate in the negotiation on delegation if a thinks that it cannot benefit from it. also  in the case of the self-centered agent which changes its mind and decides to use our mechanism in the course of negotiation  the received costs are finally balanced  iv . 
1 	discussion 
we discuss some issues related to our mechanism. 
   the social law which guarantees that an agent can delegate its actions in the future even if it receives the actions of another agent  not only enables rational agents to reduce their cost by collaborating  but also enables our mechanism to have two important properties: a guarantee of balanced costs for individually received actions and an avoidance of conflicts in strategies. 
   as our microscopic law  defined between two agents  enables the agents to balance the received costs between them so that the costs are macroscopically balanced in a whole multi-agent system. with this law  an irrational agent that may receive too many actions would not be a bottleneck of the whole system if other agents thatdelegated tasks to it waited until they finished. 
with agents a and b abiding to this law  if a receives 
more than  a proposes  delegate  and b proposes  receive.  therefore  the strategies do not conflict  so that agents can easily reach an agreement. in  shoham and tennenholtz  1   social law is used to constrain actions to avoid conflicts. it became unnecessary for agents to negotiate for conflict resolution. however  agents must negotiate to exchange information about plans when they collaborate in a positive relationship. our mechanism used the law to con strain the strategy of negotiation so as to avoid conflict. 
   moreover  we considered self-centered agents  or agents that do not abide by the law. this is a case which is not considered in  shoharn and tennenholtz  1 . it is very simple for agents not to collaborate with self centered agents after they realize what kind of agents they are dealing with. however  it is problematical that an agent which exceptionally does not abide by the law for some reason  cannot collaborate any more. also  problematical is the fact that agents do not col laborate with self-centered agents even when benefit can be obtained. our mechanism is flexible: reliability p1 is gradually decreased every time the strategies conflict  so that the chance to collaborate with a real self-centered agent is decreased and agents collaborate only if they can benefit from it. however  agents with our mechanism may receive a little more action than a self-centered agent because of this flexibility. 
   here  we consider the situation where the bank and post office are in the same direction and both agents plan to go to both places. because their plans are  go to bank  and  go to post office  and  return   the re-
sulting plan of our mechanism is that one agent goes to both places. nevertheless  if the places are in different directions  the resulting plans are that each agent goes to a different place. the latter result is obtained through two negotiations because their plans are  go to bank  and  return  and  go to post office  and  return.  our mechanism also provides such an optimal solution. 
   in  zlotkin and rosenschein  1   flipping a coin is used to resolve conflicts  but the purpose for our work is to avoid conflict. since the mentioned work is designed for collaboration in negative relationships  the conflict in goals must be resolved. on the other hand  as our work is directed to positive relationships  the conflicts are not 
necessarily resolved  in this case  agents cannot reduce costs . 
   in a related piece of research  martial  1   the proposed algorithm focuses on the optimization of plans of agents. therefore  agents are willing to receive the actions even if they cannot benefit from them  and the received costs would not be balanced. our mechanism does not require such irrational agents; each agent can rationally and flexibly select its own strategies. 
1 	conclusion 
the utilization of positive relationships has not received much attention in dai. we proposed a mechanism using a social law by which rational agents can reduce the cost of their execution by delegating and receiving actions. with this law  agents can avoid conflicts of strategies in a negotiation and reach an agreement easily. furthermore  we considered the case in which agents do not abide by the law  self-centered agents  and the case in which agents that are self-centered at first come to abide by the law eventually. simulation results show that by using our mechanism  rational and flexible collaboration is possible with these kinds of agents. 
   we intend to use a more complex model of agents  and consider communication costs and collaboration with multiple agents by introducing market mechanisms. also  we will introduce a mechanism based on incomplete information for more detail  as stated in  kakehi and tokoro  1 . 
acknowledgments 
we would like to thank t. hirotsu  r. kakehi  v. vasconcelos and i. satoh for their helpful comments. 
