 
this paper describes a general framework for the formalization of monotonic reasoning about belief in a multiagent environment. the agents* beliefs are modeled as logical theories. the reasoning about their beliefs is formalized in still another theory  which we call the theory of the computer. the framework is used to model non-omniscient belief and shown to have many advantages. for instance  it allows for an exhaustive classification of the  basic  forms of non logical omniscience and for their  composition  into the structure of the system modeling multiagent omniscient belief. 
1 the approach 
this paper describes a general framework for the formalization of monotonic reasoning about belief in a multiagent environment. the most common solution is to take a first order  propositional  theory  to extend it using a set of modal operators  and to take  as meaning that an agent believes a  see for instance  halpern and moses  1  . there is only one theory of the world  however this theory proves facts about the agents' beliefs. according to a first interpretation  this theory is taken to model things how they really are. it is therefore a finite  and possibly incomplete  presentation of what is true in the world  and the fact that bi a is a theorem means that it is  in fact  the case that ai believes a. according to another interpretation  this theory is taken to be the perspective that a generic reasoner has of the world. it is therefore a finite presentation of the reasoner's beliefs  and the fact that a is a theorem means that the reasoner believes that believes a. 
   once one accepts the second interpretation  as we do   a mechanized theory is naturally taken as representing the beliefs of the computer where it is implemented. moreover  in the case of multiagent belief  a further step is to have  together with the theory of the computer  one theory  at least  see later  for each agent. 
   *alessandro cimatti and kurt konolige have provided very useful feedback and suggestions. the work at irst has been done as part of the maia project. this paper is a short version of the irst technical report #1. 
the theory of the computer plays the same role as the unique theory in the modal logics approach. the agents' theories are the  mental  representations that the computer has of the agents themselves. the computer has beliefs about the beliefs of the agents not because  as it happens in the single theory approaches  it  simulates  them in its own theory but  rather  because it can infer  say  bi  a   from the fact that a is a theorem in the a i 's theory.  in this framework  theories are called  contexts  and the formal systems  which are basically defined as sets of contexts  are called multicontext systems  mc systems  and  sometimes  multtlanguage systems   m l systems   giunchiglia  1; 
giunchiglia  1 .  
   all the previous work on the formalization of propositional attitudes  namely modal logics and the syntactic approach  where belief is a first order predicate  see for instance  konolige  1   makes use of a single theory. however  ideas similar to ours  which suggest the use of multiple distinct theories  have been exploited in much applied work in computational linguistics and ai  see for instance  wilks and biem  1; giunchiglia and weyhrauch  1  . there are in fact many irnplementational advantages  all deriving from the fact that reasoning becomes intrinsically localized  giunchiglia  1   for instance: the modularization of the knowledge base  computational efficiency ~ due to the division of the search space in smaller search spaces - and the possibility of parallelization of the reasoning process . our formalism seems quite close  arguably closer than the previous approaches  to the current practice in the more applied irnplementational work. indeed this is one of the main motivations underlying our work and mc systems have been implemented inside the getfol system   giunchiglia  1  an extension of a reimplementation of the fol system  weyhrauch  1 . however in this paper we focus on the representational issues and argue that our approach allows for more natural and more intuitive formalizations  see also  dinsmore  1  . 
   in  giunchiglia and serafini  1  we have described and motivated the basic system  which models logically omniscient agents. in this paper we take a step further and treat the problem of non saturated belief  that is the fact that real agents never believe all the logical consequences of their basic beliefs. our treatment 


	giunchiglia et al. 	1 
figure 1: mbie - ideal and real reasoner 


¡¡definition 1 generalizes definition 1 of mbie in the sense that e has been substituted with n frames. 
¡¡notice that  starting from the intuition that a reasoner can be modeled as a logical theory  we have introduced various forms of non logical omniscience and associated them to a particular structural part of e. the resulting system mbie n  models all of them. this process is exhaustive in the sense that all the structural subparts of e have been considered  that is its language  its theorems and e itself . if one accepts the abstract characterization 
	giunchiglia et al. 	1 




	giunchiglia et al. 	1 


figure 1: a proof in mbif  1  

	and p. maes  editors  	meta-level 	architectures and re-
flection  pages 1. north holland  1. 
 ciunchiglia et al.  1  f. ciunchiglia  l. serafini  and a. simpson. hierarchical meta-iogics: intuitions  proof theory and semantics. in proc. meta1  workshop on metaprogramming in logic  number 1 in lncs  pages 1  uppsala  sweden  1. springer verlag. 
 ciunchiglia  1  f. giiunchiglia. multilanguage systems. in proc. of aaai spring symposium on logical formalizations of commonscnse reasoning  1. 
 ciunchiglia  1  f. ciunchiglia. the getfol manual - getfol version 1. technical report 1  dist university of cenova  genoa  italy  1. 
 ciunchiglia  1  f. ciunchiglia. contextual reasoning. epistemologia  special issue on i linguaggi e le macchine  xvi.1  1. short version in proc. ijcai'1 workshop on using knowledge in its context  chambery  france  1. 
 halpern and moses  1  j.y. halpern and y. moses. a guide to the modal logics of knowledge and belief: 
s1 	knowledge representation 
preliminary draft. in proc. of the 1th international joint conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  los angeles  ca  1. morgan kaufmann publ. 
inc. 
 konolige  1  k. konolige. a first-order formalisation of knowledge and action for a multi-agent planning system. in machine intelligence 1  1 
 konolige  1  k. konolige. a deduction model of belief and its logics. phd thesis  stanford university ca  1. 
 levesque  1  ii. levesque. a logic of implicit and explicit belief. in aaal-1 pages 1  1. 
 stalnaker  1  r.c. stalnaker. inquiry  m i t press  cambridge  ma  1. 
 weyhranch  1  r.w. wryhranch. prolegomena to a theory of mechanized formal reasoning. artif. intell.  1 :1  1. 
 wilks and biem  1  y. wilks and j. biem. speech acts and multiple environments. in proc. of the 1th international joint conference on artificial intelligence  1. 
1 	knowledge representation 



1 	knowledge representation 







1 	knowledge representation 

1 	knowledge representation 

1 	knowledge representation 













