 
　　　　we have written a prototype computer program called trendx for automated trend detection during process monitoring. the program uses a representation called trend templates that define disorders as typical patterns of relevant variables. these patterns consist of a partially ordered set of temporal intervals with uncertain endpoints. bound to each temporal interval arc value constraints on real-valued functions of measurable parameters. 
　　　　trendx has been used to diagnose trends in growth patterns from examining heights  weights and other parameters of pediatric patients. as trendx analyzes successive data points  the program updates its hypotheses about which stage of the growth process each data point belongs to. we present an example of trendx reaching temporally plausible diagnoses for an actual patient with delayed growth currently being seen at boston children's hospital.1 
1 introduction 
　　　　this work is part of the growing body of artificial intelligence  ai  research on diagnostic process monitoring. we wish to automatically detect trends  defined thusly: 
  a trend is a clinically significant pattern in a sequence of time-ordered data. 
these trends may be multivariate  and may consist of several distinct phases. our trend detection program  called trendx  can identify a trend and give a chronology of which data were in each phase. 
　　　　we are particularly motivated by application domains where there is no reliable structure-function model because the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. our application domain  pediatric growth  is such an area. 
physicians recognize many hormonal  nutritional and genetic factors for growth  but cannot predict quantitative effects on height or weight from changes to any of these fac-
1. this work has been supported  in part  by niii grant r1 lm 
1  nichhd 1 hd1  and by a u. s. office of naval research graduate fellowship. isaac s. kohane 
children's hospital  harvard medical school 
1 x  longwood avenue 
　boston  ma 1 gasp medg.lcs.mit.edu 
tors. therefore in this domain the recent ai work in monitoring using semi-qualitative simulation  dvorak and kuipers 1  or bayesian networks  berzuini  bellazzi et al. 1  may be insufficient. 
　　　　time-series analysis techniques  avent and charlton 1   when used with a curve-fitting model of process disorders  are potentially useful for trend detection as we have described it. however  most curve-fitting models of pediatric growth  e.g. thissen and bock 1  do not accurately match data of most new individuals and also contain many parameters that cannot be interpreted biologically. furthermore  statistical models usually describe patterns after a fixed time point  while our goal includes detecting trends that may occur at any point in time. 
　　　　even in applications characterized by incomplete understanding of mechanism  domain experts can accurately detect trends. furthermore they can verbally describe prototypical trends consisting of constraints that restrict certain values of variables over time. 
　　　　we have written a prototype program called trendx for automated trend detection. the program uses a representation called trend templates that define disorders as typical patterns of relevant variables. these patterns consist of a partially ordered set of temporal intervals with uncertain endpoints. bound to each temporal interval are value constraints on real-valued functions of measurable parameters. as trendx interprets data points of a process  the flexible temporal constraints allow alternate hypotheses of how that process has varied over time. 
1 pediatric growth monitoring 
　　　　our initial application domain for automated trend detection is pediatric growth monitoring. the principal tool pediatricians use to monitor the growth of their patients is the growth chart. figure 1 shows the height of a child with age. a set of curves representing standard deviations  -1  -1  + 1  +1  and the mean for heights of male children studied by the national center for health statistics  nchs   hamil  drizd et al. 1  are pre-plotted on the chart. each standard deviation  sd  curve describes the proportion of the male children in the u.s.a. of the same age who arc taller or shorter than children whose height falls on that curve. for 
　　　　
1 	automated reasoning 
　　　　
instance  as calculated from the normal distribution  all children whose height is on the - 1 sd curve arc taller than 1% of male children in the u.s.a. of the same age. pediatricians often use centiles rather than their corresponding standard deviations. 

figure 1 growth chart height points of patient described throughout this article. triangle shows hone age of x at chronological age of 1. 
　　　　as a process monitoring application  pediatric growth is distinct in at least two ways. first  growth data is relatively clean; carefully measured heights are usually accurate within three millimeters. second  although a child's height and weight are measured as infrequently as once per year  this sampling rate is frequent enough for expert pediatric endocrinologists to identify potential growth disorders. as we shall see  our program trendx does not require the monitored data to be sampled regularly or frequently. 
1 an example case 
　　　　the height points illustrated in figure 1 are from the growth chart of a patient at the endocrinology clinic at boston children's hospital. this patient  whom we shall refer to as patient 1  was brought into the endocrine clinic at age 1 for consultation about possible growth disorders. the patient's general pediatrician had noticed a particularly sharp drop against the nchs standards at age 1. this was of concern as children with a normal tempo of growth tend to grow on or parallel to the standard curves. the endocrinologists at children's hospital agreed that patient 1 did not appear to exhibit an average growth pattern  and that one of the likely hypotheses was constitutional delay of growth  a nonnal variant of growth marked by delayed puberty and bone maturity well behind the patient's chronological age. 
1 clinically significant patterns: 
　　　　from consulting clinical literature and experts in pediatric endocrinology  we are acquiring text descriptions of patterns followed by children with normal and abnormal growth. two of these patterns  related to patient 1  are described here. the descriptions use centiles rather than standard deviations. 
　　　　the text description of average nonnal growth in boys  before puberty  consists of four general constraints: 
  from birth until age 1 - 1 years  the patient establishes his or her centiles for height and weight. during this time height and weight centiles should vary in the same way from their original centiles. 
  from then until the onset of puberty  the patient stays close to the same centiles in height and weight  with respect to the population of children having puberty at the average age. 
  from birth until puberty  bone age is approximately equal to chronological age 
  puberty begins between age 1 and age 1  and is measured by when the qualitative testicular stage of the boy changes from stage 1 to stage 1. 
　　　　the text description of constitutional delay of growth in boys differs only in that puberty begins between age 1 and 1  that the bone age is delayed 1 to 1 years behind chronological age  and that the reference population for height centiles is children having delayed puberty rather than puberty at the average age. these alternate reference populations were presented in  tanner and davies 1 . 
　　　　notice that the text descriptions above are characterized by uncertainty both in the value of relevant variables  and in the times over which these values hold. for example  there is uncertainty in the time of the onset of puberty  and uncertainty of the age at which the first constraint ends and the second begins. there is uncertainty in a child staying  close to the same centiles  and in the bone age being  approximately equal to  chronological age. this uncertainty is due to experts characterizing a common pattern for a large number of patients with the same growth trend. 
1 tvend templates 
　　　　we wish to represent trends that include the uncertainty mentioned above. additionally  our representation must provide enough constraints to distinguish between competing trends. our attempt to reach these goals is the trend template. 
　　　　a trend template is a prototypical pattern of data for a process exhibiting a certain behavior. in figure 1 is the wend template for male average growth before puberty adapted from the text constraints in section 1. time constraints are drawn horizontally and value constraints are drawn vertically  the next two sections define trend templates and illustrate with this example. 
1 temporal constraints 
　　　　the temporal component of a trend template includes landmark points and intervals. the landmark points represent significant events in the lifetime of the monitored process. landmark points may linked with time ranges  min max  expressing the minimal and maximal times between them. the trend template for average nonnal growth includes three landmark points: birth  puberty onset  
haimowitz and kohane 
　　　　
and growth stops. puberty onset occurs 1 to 1 years alter birth  and growth stops occurs 1 to 1 years after birth. the links between landmark points establish a conceptual lime scale of the part of the process life being modeled. in the diagram  birth is illustrated as at time 1 and a time scale is labeled in  years.  these arbitrary labels are for illustration; a trend template requires no  zero point  and allows mixing of time units  hours  years  etc.  in temporal distances. 

figure 1 trend template for average normal growth. 
　　　　intervals represent periods of the process that are significant for diagnosis or therapy. the above trend template consists of five intervals: lntl corresponds to infancy  lntl to mid-childhood  lnt1 to all of childhood  lnl1 to prepubertal childhood  and int1 to post-pubertal childhood. intervals consist of begin and end points whose times arc declared either as: 
  offsets of the form  min max  from a landmark point  or 
  offsets of the form  min max  from another interval begin or end point. 
　　　　we represent time using the temporal utility package  tup  of  kohane 1j. tup is a temporal reasoning program with both time points and time intervals; intervals include a begin point and an end point. time is considered discrete  and for the growth domain trendx uses a minimal time distance of one second. with tup  one asserts a variable temporal distance between two points in the form of a range relation. a tup range relation has the general form: 

where p1 and p1 are points  and the n1 and n1 are integers 
denoting the lower and upper bounds on the numbers of seconds between p1 and p1. all temporal distances in a trend template are created with statements like these. 
1 value coastraints 
　　　　the value component of a trend template interval is a set of value constraints  each of which states that some function of a set of measurable parameters must fall within a 
　　　　certain range. thus each value constraint is an expression of the form 
		 eql  
where f is some real valued function defined on patient data  m is real-valued or  and m is a real-valued or  each temporal interval in a trend template is associated with a set of value constraints. in the diagnostic program trendx  the function f is evaluated on the set of data d currently assigned to that interval and the result is compared to the bounds m and m. 
　　　　in the average normal growth template of figure 1  interval lntl represents infancy  when height and weight centiles are established. we encode that height and weight centiles vary in the same way by constraining the difference between the average velocity of height sds and the average velocity of weight sds to be within a small number a of zero. interval lnt1 represents the period of the boy staying in his centile channels  lntl begins at the endpoint of int i and int1 ends at puberty onset. there are two value constraints: both the average velocities of height sds and that of weight sds are close to zero. presently the small value constraint bounds in this trend template are . these values may change as we refine the trend template. 
　　　　intervals int1 and lnt1 constrain other patient parameters. int1 begins at birth  ends at growth stops and describes the normal parameter values. screening tests for growth disorders are within normal published values. also  the difference between chronological age and bone age must be within one year of zero. int1 represents the pre-pubertal genital development: from birth until puberty onset by restricting testicular stage to 1. int1 distinguishes that puberty has occurred by constraining testicular stage to be between 1 and 1. together these intervals encode the temporal and value constraints of our earlier text descriptions of male prepubertal average normal growth. 
　　　　the trend template for male pre-pubertal constitutional delay of growth is similar to that of average normal growth. there arc a few differences. the time bounds on the landmark points puberty onset are 1 to 1 years  and the bounds on growth stops are 1 to 1 years. the value constraint in int1 states that bone age is one to four years behind chronological age. additionally  height sds arc measured with respect to the population of delayed puberty patients  as opposed to those of average puberty in the average growth trend template. 
1 reasoning by trendx 
hypotheses with different chronologies of the data fitting the 
1 	automated reasoning 　　　　trendx diagnoses trends by matching process data to the constraints of trcnd templates. those templates matching the data are retained as hypotheses; those not matching are discarded with possible triggering of other templates. for each disorder template  trendx may maintain multiple intervals of the template. here we describe the diagnostic algorithms and illustrate with the data of patient 1. 
　　　　each trendx hypothesis hyp for a patient pat includes a trend template tt hyp  and an assignment assignment hyp  of patient data to the intervals of the template. assignment hyp  is a relation   int d }  where int is an interval in tt hyp  and d is an interpreted datum of pat. each hypothesis also includes a set context hyp   see 
next section  of temporal information in that assignment. 
1 initializing a hypothesis for a patient 
       in trendx every patient is initially assigned a hypothesis of average normal growth. the program does this using the context mechanism of tup. a context is a collection of consistent temporal assertions that offers a single interpretation of events in the world - a possible chronology of events in the trendx hypothesis. contexts are arranged hierarchically in a tree  with temporal assertions from a parent context also holding in child contexts. every context has at most one parent. 
the general architecture for contexts in trendx interpreted and assigned to intervals of the trend template  there may be alternate assignments and therefore alternate chronologies. in that case trendx branches to multiple hypotheses and associated  fourth tier  contexts. 
1 matching algorithms 
　　　　let d be a patient datum  let hyp be a hypothesis of that patient  and let int be an interval in tt hyp . we say that value-satisfiesw  int  iff all value constraints bound to int meet one of the following conditions: 
1. the parameter of d is not constrained by that value constraint. 
1. inhere are insufficient data assigned to int to evaluate the function on the value constraint. 
1. the function on the value constraint evaluated on d and the data assigned to int  is within the constraints range. 
　　　　ihe reasoning in trendx tits a data-driven process monitoring cycle. for each datum d in the input data stream  trendx executes the algorithm process-datumw . 
haimowitz and kohane 
　　　　

1 	automated reasoning 
　　　　
trendx assigns more heights and weights to intl. later  
patient 1's height sd for the average pubertal population drops from -1  age 1  to -1  age 1 . call the height at age value-satisfies hd1  int1  is false and the final average growth hypothesis  is pruned. 
1.1 triggering a new trend template 
once no average growth hypotheses remain for 
patient 1  trendx considers the alternate hypothesis of delayed growth. details of how trcndx triggers alternate disorders are presented in  haimowitz and kohane 1j. the program monitors all of patient 1*s growth data in order. trendx branches similarly with the delayed growth hypothesis as it had with average growth  see figure 1 . however  value-satisfies hd1  lntl  is true for the delayed growth template because that template refers to the population of delayed pubertal boys. on this population standard the height sds stay close to equal. hypj   lasts three years longer  until age 1. it was at this age that the patient's pediatrician became concerned about a possible pathological growth disorder. 

datum  with age  in order of processing by trendx 
figure 1 number of hypotheses for growth patterns as trendx processes data of patient 1. 
1 related literature 
　　　　different approaches to automated monitoring and trend detection were mentioned in section 1. other researchers  e.g. allen and koomen 1j have encoded temporal predicates in associative rules to test conditions in a process for a diagnostically significant pattern. trendx extends this research by representing the entire process as phases. 
　　　　the different temporal interpretations of the same data in trendx is related to the time map manager  dean and mcdermott 1   that maintains different accounts of which logic propositions are true over which temporal intervals. trendx differs by interpreting primary numerical data. 
1 conclusions and future work 
　　　　trend templates represent multi-variatc trends as constraints on parameters over intervals that correspond to phases of a process. this representation is based on how expert diagnosticians verbally report their knowledge of trends. for this reason trend templates may be useful for knowledge acquisition and explanation of trends. 
　　　　trendx monitors process data and matches them to hypotheses which include a trend template and a chronology of how the data fall into different stages of the trend. our prototype application to growth chart monitoring produces plausible hypotheses on a real patient. 
　　　　we will extend our trend template representation to detect trends that may occur at any time  initial work appears in  haimowitz and kohane 1  . we are considering probabilistic bounds on value constraints  which may be used for assigning numerical scores to the match of data to template. 
　　　　trendx could detect trends more flexibly by representing data measurement error  or by ignoring markedly aberrant data. trendx may be more useful by presenting a ranked differential diagnosis of several likely trends. 
1 