 
many works have been carried out to improve search efficiency in csps  but few of them treated the semantics of the constraints. in this paper  we expose some properties of two classes of constraints  functional and bijective constraints: we first present conditions under which arc and path consistencies are sufficient to guarantee the existence of a bactrack free solution; we then exhibit classes of polynomial problems  and finally we propose a new method of decomposition for problems containing functional or bijective constraints. an interesting point in this method is that the resolution complexity is known prior to the search. 
1 	introduction 
improving search efficiency of constraint satisfaction problems  csps  is one of the main goals of researchers in this domain. their works can be classified into different approaches  like improving backtrack procedure  haralick and elliot  1; dechter and pearl  1   or filtering methods  arc and path consistencies in particular   montanari  1; mack worth  1; mohr and henderson  1 . another approach is to characterize polynomial classes; they rely on structure of problems  freuder  1   leading to the presentation of new methods of decomposition  dechter and pearl  1; dechter and pearl  1; jegou  1   or on the size of their domains  dechter  1 . few works have been done on the semantics of the relations; recently  deville and van hentenryck studied monotonic and functional constraints  l1l   perlin  factorable relations  and van beek  identified a class of problems for which the tasks of finding a solution or the corresponding minimal network can both be solved efficiently. 
　yet  in real applications  constraints don't take on any form. in particular a kind of constraints is often used: functional ones  vlsi tests  stallman and sussman  1   peptide synthesis  janssen et a/.  1  . 
　in this paper  we will study functional and bijective constraints  the relations defined by these constraints are respectively a function and a bijection . we will focus on the properties of arc and path consistencies when applied to these constraints  presenting a class of polynomial problems and a method of decomposition. 
　section 1 presents definitions and preliminaries  section 1 and 1 expose results on functional and bijective constraints. 


　in other words  a csp is arc consistent iff any value of any domain has at least one support for any constraint  and no domain is empty   and it is path consistent iff any tuple of any relation has at least one support in any domain. 
   more generally  a csp is k-consist tut if and only if any consistent  instantiation of k - 1 variables may be extended into any other variable to produce a consistent instantiation of ar variables. it is globally consistent if and only if it is k-consistent for any k from 1 to 1. for binary problems  arc and path consistencies are respectively 1 and 1 consistencies. 
   a csp v is not necessarily arc or path consistent; it can in this case be transformed into an equivalent problem pc  i.e. it has the same solutions  by suppressing inconsistent values from the domains  arc consistency  or inconsistent tuples from the relations  path consistency ; pc is then called arc  path  consistent closure of this csp v  montanari  1; mack worth  1; mohr and henderson  1 . notice that achieving path consistency may modify the constraint graph structure: some constraints may be induced instead of universal constraints  see figure 1 . 
   given a csp  the question can be to find all solutions  or one solution  or to know if there exists a solution; this figure 1: an exemple of a functional constraint 

	david 	1 




	david 	1 



proof: 
the first part of the property is similar to property 1.  f p is bijective  properties 1 and 1 respectively tell us that p is globally consistent  so any variable is a root set   and that all domains have the same size d' the number of consistent instantiations of r is thus the size of any domain 
1 	conclusion 
we presented in this paper some properties of arc and path consistencies for two classes of constraints  functional and bijective constraints  and characterized polynomial problems. we also proposed a decomposition method for these classes  based upon the semantics of the constraints. yet  many works remain to be done about this subject: in particular  extending this work to non binary constraints  as well as studying other classes of constraints  like monofonic constraints lor instance. 
acknowledgments 
i wish to thank philippe .janssen and marie-catherine vilarern for their helpful comments 
