 
reasoning about time often involves incomplete information about periods and their relationships. varieties of incompleteness include uncertainty about the number of objects involved  the distribution of a set of temporal relations among these objects  and what can be called the participation of a set of objects in a temporal relation. a solution to the problem of representing and reasoning about incomplete temporal information of these kinds is forthcoming if a restricted class of non-convex intervals  called n-tntervals  is added to the temporal domain of discourse. an n-interval corresponds to the common sense notion of a recurring period of time with a  possibly  unspecified number of occurrences. in this paper  we formalize a representation for temporal reasoning problems using n-intervals. the language of the framework is restricted in such a way that tractable techniques from constraint satisfaction can be applied. specifically  it is demonstrated how the problem of determining path-consistency in a network of binary n-interval relations can be solved. 
1 	introduction 
common sense knowledge about the occurrence of events is often incomplete. the kinds of incompleteness of interest here is expressed in the following sentences: 
1. john sometimes drives to orlando. 
1. john's ten trips to orlando this month twice preceded his phoning phyllis. 
1. some of john's ten trips to orlando preceded her phoning phyllis. 
the first example exhibits number incompleteness: it is not clear how many driving events there are  hence how many periods of time are involved  but that at least one occurs. the second example illustrates distribution uncertainty; we don't know which phoning intervals overlapped with which meetings. the third example exhibits  in addition to distribution uncertainty  what can be called participation uncertainty; it is not known how often the relation between the trips and the phonings occurred. 
   uncertainty of this kind is removed by adding quantitative information. compare  l - 1  with  john's ten trips to orlando this month twice preceded his phoning phyllis: the first time and the third time . adding the first quantity eliminates number uncertainty; the second quantity   twice   eliminates participation uncertainty; the last two quantities together eliminate distribution uncertainty. 
　temporal knowledge incompleteness makes it difficult to build a reasoner that adequately deals with time. in this paper  the concern is to formalize a representation which addresses the problem of reasoning with number  distribution  and participation uncertainty. to accomplish this aim the remaining sections 
1. define a class of binary temporal relations between pairs of n-intervals; 
1. construct an algebra for formalizing reasoning problems involving n-interval relations; and 
1. demonstrate how path consistency can be applied to a knowledge base of assertions about n-interval relations  recast as a relation network  in the sense of  van beek  1 . 

   in addition to the ordering constraints on n-intervals  there is structure imposed by the fact that n-intervals are the temporal component of the representation of knowledge about recurring events. this complexity is represented by introducing binary relations between convex parts of n-intervals. 
1
　　this term is used differently by ligozat  ligozat  1   viz.  to denote an interval consisting of n points. 
	morris  shoaff  and khatib 	1 

　first  time is viewed as being partitioned into segments  or blocks  each representing a set of occurrences of recurring intervals. blocks come in various sizes; common examples include days  weeks  months  years  etc. formally  a temporal partition can be viewed as a function from a convex interval r  which we will call a reference frame  to a set of convex intervals. being a parti-
tion  no two items in this set overlap  and each segment of r is in one of the members of the set. for example  let weeks r  = the set of convex intervals in r with a duration of  at most  one week  starting at r1. from this notion  where r is a partition  we define an equivalence relation which is true of pairs of intervals /  and jj if and only if /  and j  are in the same 
member of for example  if then and occur in the same week. 
　in addition to associated intervals within a block  the model views periods of time to be correlated. correlation is an equivalence relation between pairs of convex parts of recurring events that holds as a result of binary relations holding between them. for example  consider the sentence  meetings precede lunches twice a week . there are two distinct groupings here: the first is indicated by the term  weeks   which partitions the reference frame into weekly blocks of associated intervals. the second grouping pairs convex parts of the recurring events  meetings  and  lunches . this pairing phenomenon is represented in the model by the relation of correlation. further examples of correlation are provided below. 
　james allen  allen  1  defined a set of primitive binary relations on convex intervals by enumerating all ways in which two ordered pairs of real numbers can be related. there are 1 such primitives  which we collect together in the set acr: before  1   meets  m   during  d   overlaps  o   starts  s   finishes  /   their inverses  after  bi   met by  mi   etc   and equals  = . from these  he defined a class of 1 interval relations by considering all possible disjunctions of primitives; we call this set cr. members of cr can be depicted as finite disjunctions of the form  where 
 as constraints in a relation network  defined below  the same relation is depicted as the set 

　since temporal relations in such a knowledge base are binary  it is possible to represent the knowledge as a network  where each arc represents one of the temporal relations. more precisely  from  van beek  1  : definition 1. a network of binary relations is a set 
x of m variables {x  ... xm }  a domain of possible values for each variable  and binary relations be-
　　1 if it is not possible to divide r into equal segments of one week duration  there will be a segment at the end of r of duration less than one week. 
1
　　a word on notation used throughout: following convention  r  s etc. stand for members of cr. lower case letters from i  ; ... are used to specify arbitrary convex intervals; as noted  upper case letters from /  j ... specify n-intervals. 
single subscripts 	distinguish members of acr. 
double subscripts are used to emphasize that r is a relation between i and j  these are often omitted. 
1 	knowledge representation 

ated as assoc; 1. 
1. the set cr  based on the set of allen primitives 
a c r 
　in what follows  we extend the irn framework for the representation of n-intervals and their relations. it is demonstrated how the method of path consistency can be applied to the problem of determining the set of feasible relations in a n-interval relation network. 
1 	a class of tv-interval relations 
in this section  a language is constructed for specifying a collection of binary temporal relations between pairs of n-intervals  where a specification is a set of assertions describing n-interval relations. 
　this language regiments fragments of natural language discourse  in this case  english  involving the application of temporal adverbs  sometimes   only    always    always and only   and their negations   never    not always   etc. these adverbs can be viewed as operators on elements of cr to make assertions about recurring or repeating events. for example  applying  always  to the convex interval relation  before or meets  results in the n-interval relation  always before or meets . 
　an adequate semantics for temporal specifications requires sensitivity to what we will call co-designation. for illustration  contrast the following three fragments: 
1. john sometimes goes to work before calling his dad. then  he misses  i.e. the call overlaps  the meeting. 
1. joan sometimes goes to work before calling her dad. otherwise  she calls her dad first. 
1. faculty meetings sometimes precede seminars. those meetings overlap with lunch. 
in the first passage  the adverb  then  serves to establish a connection with the previously introduced occurrence of going to work. in the second   otherwise   serves to introduce a temporal relationship between a different occurrence of going to work and that of calling. informally  co-designation can be viewed as a relation between two assertions  in which  informally  each succeeds in  picking out  a common object  in this case  the same period of time . thus  there is co-designation between the sentences in fragments 1 and 1  but not in 1. 
　the case of  sometimes  thus illustrates the need for a mechanism for representing co-designation. this is also the case with contexts involving  always    only  and  always and only   but these cases are more complicated. to say that cocktails always follow faculty meetings implies a cocktail event after every faculty meeting event. dually  to say that cocktails only follow faculty meetings is to say that for every cocktail event  there is a faculty meeting preceding it. finally  to assert that cocktails always and only follow faculty meetings is to express a one-to-one correlation between the two events. 
　　& the association relation is not discussed extensively in this paper  and does not figure explicitly in the interpretation of the formal language defined in this paper. it is intended to serve within more general systems for reasoning about recurring events  and is introduced here for the reader to become acquainted with this broader framework. 
　assertions involving any of these operators will also be sensitive to co-designation relationships. however  in certain of these contexts  co-designation is being implicitly established with any subinterval of an n-interval. an example will motivate this idea. if i say  faculty meetings only meet cocktails   and also  sometimes  voodoo chanting begins faculty meetings   one can infer a temporal relation between voodoo chanting and cocktails  viz.  the former are sometimes before the latter   independently of the distribution of the chanting among the faculty meetings. to draw this inference  there needs to be a mechanism for expressing the added degree of uncertainty expressed by the italicized phrase. 

	morris  shoaff  and khatib 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


	morris  shoaff  and khatib 	1 

1. possible additions to the number of apparent edges in the network as the result of composition; hence 
1. dealing with possibly multiple arcs between the same two vertices;  i.e.  an nrn is a multigraph   and 
1. two kinds of relation composition  1 and o   intersection  inverse  complement  and i-term substitution. 
for an n-interval relation network  the worst-case behavior of a path consistency algorithm is determined by both the number of nodes and the number of edges  both the edges initially specified  and those added as the result of composition. the latter can be estimated by considering the number of distinct values of x and y among the  relations  as the following proof sketch demonstrates. theorem. path consistency for nrn networks can be determined in 1 k 1 m 1   time  where k is the number of distinct values of initial xy-indices  and m is the number of nodes in the network. 
proof  sketch : in an m-node nrn there are m m-1 /1 pairs of nodes. for each pair  j  j  there are up to 1 k 1   distinct xy-indexed temporal relations  arcs  from / to j. given a node pair  i  j  and an arc a from i to j there are m -1 intermediate nodes k where composition can be used to form an alternate path of length 1 from i to j. for this node k there are up to a maximum of k edges from / to a' that could qualify for composition. since the composition operation itself has constant time complexity  the time complexity of the path consistency algorithm on an nrn is 1{k 1 m 1  . 
　contrasting this result with the complexity of path consistency for convex interval networks  1 rn1   van beek  1    it should be noted that because clustering of convex intervals is involved  there will in general be fewer variables in an nrn than in a convex interval network. in addition  k will tend to be small in practice. 
1 	related work 
the research presented here extends current efforts in developing interval-based systems for reasoning about time by allowing for an explicit representation of intervals with gaps. the purpose of this extension is to expand the set of properties and relations that can be attributed to periods of time for applications such as static scheduling  natural language processing  and temporal database querying. 
　the impetus for this work was provided by peter ladkin's initial discussion  ladkin  1   and by advances made by ligozat  ligozat  1 . our work  as noted  has been also inspired by the success of constraint-based approaches to time  mehri  1 . finally  we were motivated in part by issues raised and discussed in  koomen  1  which led to similar ideas of clustering intervals and their relations as a heuristic to aid in the reasoning process. the results here should also be compared to earlier work by two of the authors  morris and al-khatib  1 . 
1 	knowledge representation 
1 	summary 
the problem of reasoning about certain kinds of incomplete knowledge about time was discussed. the mechanism chosen for the solution uses a non-convex interval representation  and a class of non-convex relations constructed by considering only groups of correlated convex intervals within a single temporal block. it was demonstrated that path consistency techniques can be applied to problem solving involving networks of n-interval relations. 
