 
a new approach to the semantics of description logics  using concept algebras  was introduced in  dionne et al.  1b . in that approach  the terms of a description logic  i.e.  concept descriptions  were viewed as elements of a free algebra. in the context of a given knowledge base possibly involving cycles  an intensional semantics was given by mapping every concept description to a possibly non-well-founded set that embodied the abstract structure of the concept description. this is in contrast to an extensional semantics that assigns to a concept description a specific set it describes. these sets that embody the abstract structures of concept descriptions are the elements of the universal concept algebra. the novelty of this approach is that one can define an ordering on the terms in these algebras that corresponds directly to the structural subsumption algorithms that most of these logics employ in their implementations. in this paper we prove that structural subsumption in the universal concept algebra is the most abstract with respect to all the greatest fixed point models  i.e.  that subsumption defined structurally is equivalent to subsumption defined model-theoretically. this result provides the link between our intensional semantics based on concept algebras and the usual extensional models. 
1 	introduction 
the nature of extensional semantics for description logics is easily grasped: given a knowledge base  concept terms are interpreted as sets of objects from some universe being modeled by that knowledge base. thus  there is a particular world view in the form of a fixed universe that is at the root of an extensional semantic model. in contrast  an intensional semantics implies an interpretation uncommitted to the specifics of a particular world view. a related contrasting use of terminology is found when we speak of a function being defined intensionally as some sort of algorithm or formula  as opposed to extensionally as a set of ordered pairs. concept alge-
1 	knowledge representation 
bras  recently introduced in  dionne et al.  1b   pro-
vide the mathematical underpinnings for a first attempt at an intensional semantics for description logics. an element of the universal concept algebra is an abstract object that reflects the structural essence of a term of a description logic. the ordering of the terms in this algebra corresponds to subsumption. in fact  the definition of this ordering is actually an abstract specification of structural subsumption used in description logics like krep  mays et al.  1   loom  macgregor and bates  
1   and classic  borgida et al.  1   in contrast to kris  baader and hollunder  1   which employs a model-based approach. this algebraic model captures the essence of subsumption as a process of structural comparison  and is defined without any use of extensional models. 
　bill woods has argued eloquently for taking a more operational or intensional view of subsumption  woods  1   with several examples that exhibit the confusions that arise through implicit use of quantifiers. his work has motivated our development of concept algebras. though certainly a broader approach to intensional semantics is called for by woods  concept algebras arc an initial step in that direction. another motivation for the algebraic approach was the problem of cycles. we've shown that  in elementary description logics supporting conjunctions of concepts  recursive definitions can be handled. this model has also been extended to handle disjunctions  while still handling cycles  dionne et a/.  1a . since we have not yet extended our proof of 
the main theorem of this paper to the model supporting disjunction  we will restrict ourselves to the more elementary case. 
　the class of concept algebras is defined using universal algebra  jacobson  1 . the signature is specified using the operators for term formation in the description logic  and axioms are specified that must be satisfied by algebras in the class. three kinds of concept algebras are of particular interest. first  there are free algebras  i.e  algebras of syntactic terms  that are generated by a set of variables that may be defined by a knowledge base  where a knowledge base is simply a set of equations equating variables with terms of the free algebra. second  we consider quotients of free algebras by congruences generated by knowledge bases. finally we consider the universal concept algebra  which is given by the so-

lution of a certain set-theoretic equation. the carrier of this algebra is a collection of non-well-founded sets  each representing the structure of a concept description. for each given knowledge base satisfying a certain weak condition  there is a unique homomorphism from the corresponding quotient algebra to the universal concept algebra. the universal concept algebra can be thought of as the collection of all possible concepts. in  dionne et a/.  1b   we conjectured that this algebra was the most abstract of all the greatest fixed point extensional models. in this paper  the conjecture is stated formally and proved as a theorem  thus linking this new approach with existing model theories. we claim the novelty of this algebraic approach is that the quotient algebra corresponding to a given knowledge base  together with its mapping to the universal concept algebra  elucidates the distinctions between descriptive and greatest fixed point semantics. this coincides with bernhard nebel's comment  nebel  1  that in descriptive fixed point models  concept names are a distinguishing feature. in fact  in a new implementation of k-rep two spaces of objects are maintained  a definition space corresponding to the quotient algebra  and a semantic space corresponding to the universal concept algebra. two concepts might be defined with different names that classify to the same ob-
ject. their separate definitions arc kept in the definition space  yet they point to the same object in the semantic space. we feel this is a first step towards an intensional semantics that will enhance our understanding of how to implement correctly the effect of definitional changes on subsumption relations. 
   in the next section we discuss some related works. this is followed by a brief section describing the description logic we are discussing. then  there is a section reviewing  dionne et a/.  1b  covering the formal definitions of concept algebras and of homomorphisms between them. in section 1 we outline the construction of extensional greatest fixed point models. next is section 1  which contains the main result: a theorem relating the universal concept algebra to the class of extensional greatest fixed point models. the paper ends with remarks on intensional semantics and prospects for handling negations. 
1 	related work 
various fixed point models have been investigated in 
 nebel  1 . the problem of cyclic definitions  in roughly the same subset of description logics that we discuss here  was first solved in  baader  1 . baader views concept descriptions as automata  and couches subsumption questions in terms of language acceptance. 
   a use of non-well-founded sets similar to ours is made in  rounds  1 . there the emphasis is on merging relational data bases  situation theory  and feature logics. our main emphasis is on subsumption of terms and the incremental maintenance of a network of terms. our work is restricted to description logics  with emphasis placed on issues particular to them. the  complex ob-
jects  appearing in  rounds  1  have both intensional and extensional aspects  and both least upper bounds and greatest lower bounds of complex objects are examined  including a detailed explanation of how aczel's solution lemma is used to compute the least upper bound. in our implementation we are never required actually to compute least upper bounds  since subsumption is computed directly. although our situation is  on the surface  less complex  it does not seem to be a special case of the results presented in  rounds  1 . nevertheless  the use of non-well-founded set theory to handle recursive definitions is similar. 
　another algebraic approach  brink and schmidt  1   involves an equational algebra of relations acting on a boolean algebra of sets  similar to the notion of a module. though more general than concept algebras  since roles are treated as first class citizens  the details of subsumption  which amounts to equational reasoning in their algebra  are not yet worked out. even though cycles are not considered  this work is similar to concept algebras  in that the view is algebraic as opposed to model-theoretic. 
1 	the representation language 
as in  dionne et a/.  1b   we are only considering a small subset of k-rep  mays et al.} 1   a description logic based knowledge representation language. table 1 shows the constructs in this language  together with their abstract form and set-theoretic semantics. though we have developed concept algebras for a larger model that includes disjunctions  and are currently pursuing negation  we restrict ourselves here to the original model. this is the model for which we prove the conjecture originally stated in  dionne et al.y 1b . note that our  allsonse  operator combines two operators that are normally kept separate in most description logics. the  some  operator by itself would act as a join homomorphism  see  brink and schmidt  1    and one attempt at extending concept algebras to handle negations involves separating the two out to make use of the classical relationship between negation and existential and universal quantification. 
   we assume the reader is familiar with description logics. the point we wish to emphasize is that concepts are organized into an ordered structure  in this model a meet-semilattice  in  dionne et a/.  1a  a distributive lattice   by a process called classification  whose main component is structural subsumption. one concept term subsumes another if: 1  all of its primitive components are contained in the other  1  its roles are a subset of the roles of the other  and 1  the value restriction of each of its roles subsumes the value restriction of the other concept's role. later this subsumption ordering will be rigorously stated in terms of the ordering of elements in the universal concept algebra. 
1 	concept algebras 
consider the signature e containing a set p of constants  a set !r of unary operators  a binary operator a  and a constant t. let e be the following set of axioms with respect to this signature: 
	dionne  mays  and oles 	1 



1 	knowledge representation 

l
　　apgs  accessible pointed graphs  are pictures of non-wellfounded sets  see  acsel  1   
	dionne  mays  and oles 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

	dionne  mays  and oles 	1 


1 	conclusion 
this paper has shown that structural subsumption as computed in the universal concept algebra  and subsumption in all greatest fixed point models  are essentially the same. therefore  for purposes of subsumption testing  one need not appeal to extensional models. this appears to be a first step towards intensional semantics  in the larger sense  as advocated in  woods  1 . concepts are seen as just descriptions. their relationships  via subsumption  to other concepts is a structural comparison process. each concept in k-rep gives rise to two objects: a definitional one in  and a semantic one in c. 
   currently we are working on extending concept algebras  which now include disjunctions  see  dionne et al.  1a    to include negation while still handling cycles. one approach might make use of the fact that a finite distributive lattice is a heyting algebra  in which one can define negation in terms of disjunction. another approach would be to use boolean algebras  in which case normalization in the presence of cycles is problematic. 
1 	knowledge 	representation 
