 and introduction 
this paper provides a backdrop to my invited talk at the conference. the talk itself will focus on selected successes of artificial intelligence from the industrial perspective. the selected success stories will demonstrate that artificial intelligence has a strong and meaningful influence on our lives by impacting development of products and services we use daily. they will show how the technical results in the field have been used to make a difference in designing complex artifacts  in coordinating our actions  in playing games and in other activities. the emphasis is on transformation processes rather than on specifics of achievements in knowledge representation  case-based reasoning  or sophisticated search techniques. i could not have given this type of a talk ten or even five years ago because this was the initial period of attempts to insert ai into the business processes of companies. today  ten years later  we have a large number of ai systems that are an integral part of critical business processes  i shall describe some shining examples in my talk. however  the expectations generated ten years ago were much higher than what we were able to achieve in ten years because of this we have pessimists who talk of failure and  ai winter . since i want to concentrate on the accomplishments in my talk  i wish to get the negative aspects out of the way here in this paper. taking the metaphor of a partially filled glass of water  i will describe the empty portion of it in this paper and only remind you of it during the talk. conversely  this paper just outlines the content of the filled portion while the talk will give you its full taste. 
half empty 
1 think our mission is to create artificial intelligence. it is the next step in evolution.  
this is how robert wright reports  sec  wright  1   that edward fredkin answered his question about the meaning of life. statements like these make ai vulnerable to criticism since they generate unrealizable expectations especially when the best that ai can produce are systems whose iq is so small that it cannot even be measured. at the same time these kind of a statements imbue the search for artificial intelligence with a higher purpose and make the activity exciting to the participants and the spectators. the surges of excitement are followed cyclically by backlash. let me briefly describe the most recent of these cycles  using the japanese fifth generation project; it clearly illustrates both the half empty and the half full portions of the glass. 
   the formulation of the fifth generation project was completed by 1; in april of 1 the centerpiece of this effort  the institute for new generation computer technology  icot   opened its door. the project had lofty goals  see  : 
 ... to cultivate information itself as a new resource comparable to food and energy  and to emphasize the development of information-related knowledge-intensive industries which will make possible the processing and managing of information at will.   
   some of the statements made to get the project off the ground come close to the fredkin quote above: 
 by promoting the study of artificial intelligence and realizing intelligent robots  a better understanding of the mechanisms of life will become possible. ... mankind will more easily be able to acquire insights and perceptions with the aid of computers.   
　the japanese were not alone in this enthusiasm. similar programs that were formulated either concurrently or as a response to the fifth generation project were discussed on national levels the united states and europe: darpa's strategic computing initiative  the us microelectronics and computing consortium  mcc   the british alvey project and the european common market esprit come to mind. the rhetoric in all of these programs contained allusions to the next industrial revolution  global economic interests  national defense strategics and the like. the mass media amplified and disseminated the promises this technology would bring to the world. to give an example  
	benda 	1 

here is a quote from fortune  see  alexander  1    a magazine read by the captains of industry: 
 the appearance on earth of a nonhuman entity with intelligence approaching or exceeding mankind's would rank with the most significant events in human history.  
   the examples i just discussed had exposure on the national levels. there were corresponding developments in the leading industrial companies and in the academia. these events helped to start a number of ai companies that struggled mightily to satisfy the demand for a technology with so much promise. 
   i was very fortunate to be deeply involved in these events: starting in 1 i was helping to establish artificial intelligence technology at boeing and i headed the boeing knowledge systems laboratory till it has successfully completed its mission; more on this later we conducted our business in the context of the statements i related above and these were exciting days the academia and the small companies started by professors marketed their consulting and their products to the government and industry; those of us in the industry tried to adapt the ideas and the products to the needs of the particular industry. these were the days when we thought that solutions to the toy problems of universities would transform our lives 
　　when i look at the situation with ten years of hindsight  we came way short of expectations looking at proposals that i received from universities for funding of projects  i can only note that capabilities promised to provide boeing with a competitive advantage by 1 are yet to be realized i can make similar observations for national level programs such as darpa's pilot associate - where is the electronic copilot on the f-1  where are the fifth generation machines that  listen  see  understand  and reply to human users   
   for those interested in a comprehensive account of expectations of this period should take a look at e feigenbaum's and p. mccorduck's book the fifth 
generation  see  feigenbaum and mccorduck  1   the book made significant contributions to the atmosphere of the period: one of the chapters is called scuba gear for the mind and talks about scientist beginning to create   a sort of scuba gear that will permit the human mind to go where it hasn't been able to go before . they also wrote  p. 1  that  the fifth generation project is hard ... but ... ten years is a long time!   their caps . i was with ed in tokyo at the second fifth generation conference in 1 and ten years indeed seemed plenty; now i know that ten years is a short time and that it has not been enough. 
　however  i have a positive observation to make about unfulfilled expectations. there is a correlation between expectations and the levels at which the expectations are generated. let me explain. the levels i am referring to go from the level of an individual researcher  to the level of a department  level of a small company  large company  industry  nation  mankind. at each of the levels  l  there is an expectation  e  of what will be possible  say  ten years in the future. assume that both the levels and the expectations are quantified by numbers. the observation then is that e is proportional 

to l1  e = cl1   no pun intended  
　this implies that the higher the level  the greater the disparity between the expectations and actual accomplishment; in other words  even if the individual researchers did not live up to their promises  their results were considerably closer to reality than the promises made or implied at national levels. 
　let me take this as an opportunity to transition to the positive aspects of what transpired in the past ten years. i believe that generating expectations is necessary even if it has negative effects  there probably is some social law that demands the generation of inflated expectations for large scale efforts: the motivating force to cause great changes must be correspondingly large. that force causes alignment in a direction at the higher levels and is propagated to the lower levels where real progress happens; that progress constitutes the filled portion of the glass 
half full 
 the half full portion of the glass consists of ai accomplishments that have already transformed our 

lives this will leave out a number of technical 
1 	invited speakers 

achievements with great potential that are close to the point of  condensation . some of them come from the programs i discussed in the preceding section; to provide a balanced view  let me mention a few examples. 
　the fifth generation project did achieve some superb technical results. it is my opinion that the following three developments will  in one form or another  have a significant impact in the future:  1  the highly parallel machines capable of executing 1 million logical inferences per second;  1  pimos  the operating system for the machines;  1  kappa-p  a parallel knowledge-base management system and quixote  an object-oriented database parallel language. these and other software  parallel theorem provers  natural language processing systems  etc.  are available to the computer science community for further development and while there already exist applications developed on the platform described above - intelligent computer aided design  legal reasoning systems - they are experimental and have not yet been incorporated into the real world 
   other programs i mentioned in the previous section have similar successes. esprit has turned out to be the most successful of them. it is now in its third framework programme and the european parliament is examining the fourth framework that would run from 1 through 1. european computer companies arc satisfied with esprit; there is an estimate that 1% of their information technology products contain technology obtained from their participation in esprit programs. and while darpa's strategic computing initiative is completed  its results continue to have an impact. for example  some of the concepts and ideas from the pilot associate program were used to build an electronic checklist for pilots of commercial aircraft; one such checklist is being tested by airline pilots in an engineering simulation cab at boeing. the results show significantly fewer pilot errors under complex emergency conditions. it still needs a few years to mature to make a difference but i am confident that no more than five ijca1 conferences from now i will be able to include increased airplane safety as one of the successes of ai. 
　two comments before we sample the filled portion of the glass. first  my definition of an ai system is operational: it is a system that can assist or even substitute for humans in manipulating frameworks of symbols. let me elaborate. the progress of our civilizations is largely  if not exclusively  due to the use of increasingly powerful systems of symbols  pictures  numbers  diagrams  alphabet  etc.. the advances in technology and in organizational structures can be clearly correlated with our ability to invent and exploit such systems: mesopotamia and numbers  egypt and hieroglyphs  greeks and the alphabet  arabs and the decimal system  renaissance and printing  etc. symbols and the associated mechanism of abstraction enable us to cope with complexity. tools that help us to shape the world of symbols and the knowledge they carry are what artificial intelligence is about. 
　the second comment deals with transformations that change established ways. transformations of this kind typically arise as a result of combining developments in diverse areas: a car or a television is a result of developments in a number of technologies. so  in listing ai successes we must be broad enough to include transformations in which artificial intelligence was one of many technologies responsible for the transformation. i divide the successes into the following classes: 
adopted 	successes: 	accomplishments 	from 	ai 
 prehistory  that turned out to be essential building blocks for ai 
conceptual successes: concepts  ideas and goals of ai that were developed into general techniques for building and interacting with information systems 
theoretical successes: real world implementations of elements from ai foundations  the formulation of general problem solving  the satisficing principle  heuristic search methods  
information appliance successes: ai systems embedded in run-of-the-mill software packages 
processes changing successes: ai systems integrated within large applications supporting major business 
processes 
my talk will concentrate on the last category. examples of successes in the other categories are: 
adopted successes: i like to think that it all started with a cro-magnon woman who  one day a long time ago  tied a knot on her handkerchief and thus invented a one-bit memory device. not exactly a personal digital assistant but definitely a step in that direction: a clear example of using symbols to conquer the biological constraints of storing and processing information. other  much more recent examples  include aristotelian logic. boolean algebra  and the predicate calculus. these concepts were later realized in computer languages such as lisp and prolog. most of these developments permeate our lives to such an extent that they are taken for granted. 
	benda 	1 

conceptual successes: the attempts in the fifties and the sixties at making computers to play games  solve symbolic puzzles  and understand language demonstrated that the mechanism of abstraction could be effectively imitated by computers. this had a great impact on the development of programming languages; two of these languages  interlisp and simula  originated the object-oriented paradigm  the method of choice for modern development of software. with these languages came the need to operate with symbolic structures much more complex than numbers or letters; this necessitated the development of user interfaces capable of displaying and interacting with information closer to our way of thinking: more parallel  at a higher level  and more intuitive. this type of an interface  windows  pull-down menus  mouse  has become almost universal now. 
theoretical successes: the fact that computer programs can now play chess better than but a few dozen humans also has its origins in ai. chess and other games spurred the formulation of operators on problem spaces and the development of heuristic search algorithms. these and subsequent refinements together with the advances in building specialized chips constitute the foundation of today's championship machines. the machines  relying on a hardware implementation of search  do not  think  in terms envisioned by ai pioneers  but they do rely on the basic concepts of heuristic search. they have changed lives of chess players: the millions of people who follow chess columns now routinely read game analyses  by  deep thought or are replaying its games. 
information appliance successes: i am writing this at the end of march; this is the period when people in the united states are preparing their taxes it is now my fourth year that i am using  together with hundreds of thousand of others  an expert system to do this chore; the system is really an expert in this field and it completely changed the way i prepare my tax return i ma very satisfied with this expert systems. another ai system that i am using is a grammar checker. grammar checkers are results of ai exploration into understanding natural language; they are now routinely bundled with word processing packages. there are a number of other systems running on pcs built using expert system methodology. my experience with the grammar checker is less positive than my experience with the tax advisor  probably because i know more about language than about taxes.. on the whole though  it is satisfying to see the productive convergence of personal computers and expert systems and other ai methodologies it shows that even a little bit of intelligence can go a long way. 
1 	invited speakers 
　with this as a background  i am now ready to outline what i will focus on in my talk our lives and work are enormously influenced by a relatively few corporations; the companies whose products and services we use in our everyday activities and  of course  the companies where we work. 1 want to show the difference ai made and is making for some of these businesses. the question was which ones to choose. i came up with several selection criteria; one of them was to simply take the 1 companies of the dow jones industrial group. after some reflection i decided to select from companies whose products or services would  one way or another  impact my trip from seattle  my hometown  to chambery  the site of this conference. out of the many companies fitting this criterion i chose american airlines  american express  at&t  boeing  intel  
microsoft  and xerox. each of these companies is effectively using systems integrating artificial intelligence techniques in the execution of its business. i shall describe one example of such system from each of the companies: its purpose  its evolution  and its impact on the business processes the progress is here and it is real. 
conclusion: i showed that the ai glass is definitely not empty as some would have us believe. the successes are real and those who contributed to them have every reason to celebrate in the introduction to this paper i 
stated that there were essentially no achievements for giving a talk of this type ten years ago. when i look to the future  i would expect that  because of the momentum generated  i would be able to report ten times as much progress ten years from now than was made in the past ten years and if it takes longer  so be it; sooner or later reality will catch up with our expectations! 
