 
the outline and concepts of the new 1 year japanese project called  real world computing program  will be introduced. it is the successor to the fifth generation computer project and aims at theoretical and technological foundation for human-like flexible information processing and intelligence toward the highly information-based society of the 1st century. 
1 	introduction 
the real world computing  rwc  program is starting this year on a large scale as the successor to the fifth generation computer project which formally ended in 1. this is the next japanese national project launched by miti  ministry of international trade and industry  with a budget of over $ 1 million for ten 
years 
　the reason why we dare call it  program  is that we intend to pursue more fundamental and generic technology in a new and wide framework of research and development different from the traditional miti projects which have mainly devoted themselves to the development of machines. through the program  which is open to the world  it is also intended that japan makes a greater international contribution to basic science and generic technology which should be the common property of mankind. 
　the primary objective of the new program is to lay the theoretical foundation and to pursue the technological realization of human-like flexible and intelligent information processing as a new paradigm of information processing towards the highly information-based society of the 1st century. contrary to that the fifth generation project pursued the aspect of logical  symbolbased  information processing  or intelligence  of humans  the rwc program is rather pursuing another aspect of intuttive  pattern-based  information processing as a new framework and foundation of information processing  and also aiming at unifying both aspects in a bottom-up manner. 
　in this paper the outline of the real world computing program is introduced  referring to the background  
1 	invited speakers 
concepts  and contents of the research and development of the program. 
1 	background and objective 
supported by the remarkable development of computer and communication technologies  information technology is producing an innovative change in the society  not only in industrial activities but also in the qualitative improvement of our way of life. it is foreseen that information to be handled will explosively increase toward the next century because of the increasing needs of multimedia information processing and the expansion of new application domains. it means not only the increase in quantity but also the increase in quality and variety of information. 
　such social and technological needs are starting to require a new paradigm of information technology  not as a simple linear extension of the conventional one  but as an essentially new underlying framework. in other words  it is necessary to make computers more friendly and easy to use by providing them with human-like flexible and intelligent capabilities in order to assist and collaborate with humans in the diverse information environment of the real world. 
　looking back the history of computing  modern electric computers originated from mechanizing calculation with logical circuits. in the first stage  they developed along the line of conventional von neumann architectures in the fields of numerical computation  document processing  management of data-base storage and retrieval  see fig. 1   since those application fields have clear algorithms and are suitable for processing by conventional computers. 
　the second stage of development was directed toward manipulation of symbols and logic  casting light toward the intelligent thinking process of humans such as logical  deductive  inference. the research fields of ai and knowledge engineering contributed in providing computers with the capability of handling symbolic representation of knowledge and inference rules. in 1  japan proposed the concept of the fifth generation computers as an approach to new generation computing based on the logic programming. the goal was to provide computers with the powerful logical inference capability and to open the door to the world of large-scale knowledge 


figure 1: extension of the functions of computing. 
information processing. 
　today  computers have come to possess enormous computing power and far surpass human ability in solving well-defined problems such as numerical computation  document processing and logical inference in preassumed ideal worlds where the algorithms for solution exist and can be clearly stated in programming languages. nevertheless  computers are still inferior to humans in many areas such as pattern recognition  problem solving under incomplete information  and learning. the framework of information processing by modern computers is still not so flexible compared to human flexibility in information processing in the real world where many problems are ill-defined and hard to describe in algorithms. it might be said that current information technology is still immature in the so-called intuitive aspect in contrast to the logical aspect. 
　therefore  in order to cope with such real world problems and to open a new horizon in information processing technology  it is essential to pursue the fundamental ways of human-like flexible information processing  by casting light on the intuitive or subsymbolic level of human information processing  and to embody them as new information processing technologies on the basis of the developing hardware technologies. 
　given these circumstances  the concept of  real world computing  is proposed as a new paradigm of information processing which aims at furnishing the realworldness  or flexibility  of human information processing to information systems. development of information systems which have human-like flexible information processing functions and can cope with real world problems is now one of the most important demands common to various fields  such as pattern information processing  knowledge information processing  intelligent robots  and friendly man-machine interface  which aim at further advanced intelligent information processing. 
1 	key concepts of rwc 
here  let us consider the notion of flexibility which is required for real world computing  therefore which is lacking in the conventional information systems . it will be summarized into the following functions: 
  the function to integrate a variety of complex and intricately related information containing ambiguity or uncertainty and to reach an appropriate  approximate  decision or solution within a reasonable time  
e the function to actively acquire necessary informa-
tion and knowledge  and to learn general knowledge inductively from examples  
e the function to adapt the system itself to users and changing environment. 
those can be regarded as corresponding to robustness  integratedness  real-ttmeness  and openness  which are required in rwc systems. 
　those functions can be further summarized into the following two essential functions: 
  the function of information integration  e the function of learning/self-organization. 
　thus   flexible information processing  is the key concept to indicate the functional aspect of rwc  which is necessary for information systems to work without failure in the real world environment that is full of uncertainty and change. actually we humans  ourselves  real world computing systems   have such flexibility  and it is realized and supported by the massively parallel and distributed information processing in the neural network of the brain. 
　therefore   massively parallel and distributed processing  is the key concept to indicate the computational aspect of rwc  which supports flexible information processing. here it should be noticed that the terms parallel and distributed are different from the conventional usage in the computer science in the sense that a variety of information is represented redundantly as distributed patterns and processed in parallel in the dynamics. 
　hence  rwc or flexible information processing can be characterized by parallel distributed and learning type information processing  while conventional information processing can be characterized by serial localized and procedural type information processing. 
　the primary objective of the rwc program is to realize flexible information processing as a new paradigm of information processing toward the 1st century and to establish the theoretical and technological foundations for expanding the application fields of information processing to the real world. 
　in the traditional information processing  humans  users  are forced to adapt themselves to accessing computers using hard logic. in the future  computers will be expected to get close to humans and support human intellectual activities  collaborating in the diverse information environment of the real world. for that purpose  it is necessary to provide computers with the ability to flexibly deal with and process a variety of information in the real world  such as images  speech sounds and languages  just like humans do. in this sense the rwc program is aiming at foundations for new generation information processing or ai which might be called computer renaissance. 
	otsu 	1 

1 	contents of r & d 
in order to accomplish the objectives  it is  first of all  important to explore theoretical foundation which underlies the real-worldness and flexibility of human information processing by casting light on the intuitive aspect. upon the theoretical foundation  novel functions for application  such as flexible recognition/understanding  inference  problem solving  and control  are pursued  and by integrating those novel functions  realization of new information systems dealing with real world problems is explored. as the computational bases for those  it is necessary to develop new computer architectures including neural networks and optical computing devices. 
　therefore  the research and developments in the rwc program are divided into the following three mutually related subjects: 
  theoretical foundation  
  novel functions for application  
  computational bases. 
the three-storied structure shown in fig. 1 is the fundamental framework for the organization of research and developments in this program. 
　in the following sections we shall outline respective research contents and topics in more detail. 
1 	theoretical foundation 
the research objective is to establish a new theoretical foundation for flexible information processing. 
　for this purpose  it is first of all necessary to expand and generalize the conventional framework of information processing in all aspects of information representation  processing and evaluation. in that generalized framework  it is important not only to continue in-depth study in the related research areas  such as pattern recognition  multivariate data analysis  probabilistic and statistical inference  fuzzy logic  neuro-computing  machine learning  regularization and various optimization methods  but also to theoretically clarify the principle or  soft logic  which commonly underlying these research fields  toward aiming at construction of a new unified theoretical base for rwc  otsu  1 . there  probabilistic and statistical formulation of problems and nonlinear dynamics will be a key approach. 
research topics and key words are the followings. 
  flexible representation of information: patterns vs symbols  spatial vs temporal  probabilistic  topological  or hierarchical representation  and knowledge representation as constraints  etc. 
  evaluation of information and processing models: from true/false to degree of certainty  information criteria such as mdl and aic  energy function  etc. 
  flexible storage and recall of information: associative memories using similarity  probabilistic reasoning  bayesian networks  non-linear dynamics  etc. 
  integration of information and of processing mod-ules: constraint satisfaction  neurocomputing  multivariate data analysis  etc. 
1 	invited speakers 
  learning/self-organization and optimization methods: statistical learning  multivariate data analysis  neurocomputing  ga  etc. 
　in particular  integration of multi-modal information  and of heterarchical processing modules  and learning and self-organization  optimization and adaptation  are the most fundamental issues  and how to implement these in a framework of massively parallel and distributed information processing will be a major key point in developing novel functions for application  such as flexible recognition  inference and control. 
　it will also be important to learn and get inspiration from nature  namely to take into account new findings in scientific research into the brain  evolution process of creatures  and ecological dynamic systems. 
1 	novel functions for applications 
since flexible information processing intends to expand the abilities of information processing beyond the conventional limitations  the range of expected application fields are quite wide. 
　research and development on novel functions for application should be directed toward investigating elemental novel functions which are essential for realizing the flexible information systems which solve a wide range of real world problems. those functions are the following: 
  flexible recognition and understanding of multimodal information such as pattern information  images  speech sounds  etc.  and symbolic information 
 natural languages  in the real world  
  flexible inference and problem solving based on a flexible information base which admits direct treatment of muiti-modal information and has learning and self-organization capabilities  
  flexible human interface and simulation enabling smooth man-machine interactive communication 
through enlarged multi-modal information chan-
nels  
  flexible and autonomous control and integration methods to interact with real world environment  such as sensory-motor association  etc. 
　the novelty of the functions should emerge from new concepts of theory or algorithm suitable to rwc  closely cooperating with the theoretical foundations. the bottle-necks of the conventional information processing should be broken through by new kinds of flexible functions such as integration of symbol and pattern and learning/self-organization. merely combining conventional technologies or to make ad-hoc systems for specified tasks is not what is desired. 
　some typical real world problems should be tackled by exploring the way of integration of these elemental technologies and for demonstrating their effectiveness. the following two are the important directions to pursue for realization of integrated systems of novel functions: 
  real-world adaptable autonomous systems  
  information-integrating interactive systems. 


figure 1: organization of research and developments. 

　the former means flexible autonomous systems that can understand the environment and actively and adaptively interact with the real world for partial replacement of human activities in the real world  while the latter means flexible systems which can support and enhance human intelligent capabilities such as problem solving and information creation through enlarged communication channels between humans and systems. 
1 	c o m p u t a t i o n a l bases 
rwc involves processing of large volumes of spatiotemporally distributed information at a high speed  while taking into account their mutual interactions. as a new computational basis to support it  computing systems which can exploit parallel and distributed processing at several processing levels should be developed. for this purpose  research and development from the following three perspectives is important  and the way of integrating those technologies will also be investigated. 
  general-purpose massively parallel computing sys-tems 
  neural computing systems 
  optical computing systems 
1.1 	massively parallel systems 
　implementation of rwc applications is likely to need a computing system which consists of many modules exploiting parallel and distributed processing at several levels both within and between modules. rwc will probably be realized by some combination of computing paradigms such as concurrent object-oriented processing  dataflow  dataparallel  or neural network  probability based processing  etc. these observations show that a massively parallel system is necessary rwc to support the computational power  and it must also be generalpurpose to efficiently execute the multi-paradigms. 
　the massively parallel system should be flexible itself  adapting itself to application environments for optimal performance while minimizing the workload on the users. the research and development will include the topics in the following: 
  massively parallel architectures  
  operating system for massively parallel systems  
  languages for massively parallel systems  
  environment for system development and program-ming. 
1.1 	n e u r a l c o m p u t i n g systems 
　in recent years  neural networks have been receiving attention for their capabilities of learning/selforganization and many types of flexible information processing. however  those networks are still limited to small scale applications  because the neural models used there are very simple  and the learning is mostly based on the back-propagation technique and requires large computing time. 
　in the rwc program  the possibilities for large scale neural networks will be explored to create flexible information processing systems that can operate in the real world. the research and development will include: 
  research on new models  
	otsu 	1 

  hardware architectures and software environments  
  development of a large scale prototype system  
  integration with the massively parallel systems. 
1.1 	optical computing systems 
　light is expected to be a new information medium  because of its extended transmission capacity and massively parallel processing capability. optics will provide new device technology as well as new architectures and algorithms in the rwc program which aims at flexible information processing using massively parallel distributed processing. the device technology is  however  still immature and has many things to do. 
　research topics will be classified into the following categories: 
  optical interconnection  
  optical neural systems    optical digital systems  
  environment for system development. 
in particular  optical interconnection is expected to be able to eliminate information transmission problems in electronic systems  such as propagation delay  line-toline crosstalk  space factors of wiring and mounting  and large power consumption. 
1 	organization of r & d 
so far  two years of preliminary study have been done in 1 through 1 under the research committee on the new information processing technology  nipt  and some working groups  with participation of more than one hundred researchers in various fields from universities  national institutes like etl  and companies. the activities resulted in the final report  miti  1 . fy 1 was devoted to a feasibility study under the new name of real world computing  rwc  program  toward making a master plan  miti  1 . during this period  we had three workshops  dec. 1  nov. 1  and mar. 1  and one international symposium  mar. 1   which were open to foreign countries. 
1 	fundamental policy 
the rwc program is quite a fundamental and challenging project to open a new horizon of information processing toward the 1st century. therefore  in order to accomplish the ambitious goal  interdisciplinary and international cooperation by industries  national institutes and universities is necessary in the related wide research fields. it is also important to secure a flexible scheme of r&d which is adaptable to the development of r&d. for this  the program is to be managed under the following fundamental policy. 
  formation of flexible research organization: research themes are appropriately allotted so that common-base  such as computational bases  or system integration oriented researches are performed in the central laboratory while individual or elemental researches are performed in the distributed laboratories  and an organic and flexible link between both parties is secured. 
1 	invited speakers 
  introduction of competitive principle: the program introduces competitive principles in the first halfstage  taking various approaches  and selects the research themes to be investigated in the second halfstage on the basis of the results of evaluation after the initial five years. 
  interdisciplinary and international cooperation: the program promotes interdisciplinary and international cooperation to fulfill its basic and challenging aims  supporting joint researches with national institutes like etl and universities  etc. and inviting subcontract applications from domestic/overseas research organizations such as universities  etc. 
  publication of research achievements: the progress and results of r&d are to be reported and published in domestic/foreign conferences  etc.  actively holding symposia and workshops as well. 
  establishment of infrastructure for research activi-ties: a high-speed computer network is to be established as the infrastructure for internationally distributed researches  and formation of a flexible research organization as well as exchanges of research results are supported. 
　to manage the total rwc program  miti has formed the evaluation and promotion committee  epc  whose members are from universities and etl. 
1 	organization scheme 
the organization scheme of r&d in the rwc program is illustrated in fig. 1. 
　the rwc partnership  rwcp  was founded in july of last year  1 . at the present  at the moment of preparing this manuscript   1 japanese companies including almost all major electronics firms have joined through the reviewing process by epc. more that 1 themes were selected as contract research topics. 
　in october 1  rwcp founded its own central laboratory  tsukuba research center  trc   near etl in tsukuba city  expecting close cooperation with etl and inviting about 1 researchers from distributed laboratories of each company. 
　etl  which belongs to miti and has been playing an important role in concept formation of this program  will continue to support and lead the program  sending some researchers to the main positions of trc and also carrying out its own basic and leading research on rwc with a big group of about 1 researchers. 
　like the previous 1g computer project  miti will provide a similar amount of total budget  about $ 1 million for ten years . the main part of the budget will be allocated to rwcp  and about 1% to etl and domestic universities  and not less than 1% to foreign research institutes to promote international cooperation. 
　there is a modality for foreign researchers to participate. foreign companies and non-academic  corporate  organizations are permitted to directly join rwcp  while foreign universities are able to participate either as subcontractors or by collaborating in joint research with 


figure 1: organization scheme. 
etl and rwcp. in the cases of joint research  basically there is no budget flow except the information exchange. 
　actually  gmd  germany  joined as a partnership member  and some other foreign corporate research in-
stitutes in ec and asia have applied and are under the review process. unfortunately  u.s. researchers can at present only participate in the field of optical computing in this rwc program  since the decision was made by the u.s. and japanese governments based on the sci-
ence agreement which requires large-scale international projects to be coordinated through government channels. 
　the first call for subcontracts was announced to overseas in february this year  1   and the deadline was the 1th of march. it was in a small scale this time by several reasons due to the first year. more chances for subcontracts are available after this year. detailed information about participation is available at the international relations department of rwcp  hirairwcp.or.jp . 
