 
winslett proposed a method for reasoning about action called the possible models approach  pma . the pma successfully removed the major difficulty manifested by ginsberg and smith's possible worlds approach  pwa . in this paper  we show that winslett's pma fails to solve the frame and ramification problems for some actions  as does the pwa. from this observation  we classify actions as definite and indefinite  and find that  in general  the pma is not appropriate for both definite and indefinite actions. we propose a new approach to formalize actions based on persistence. we compare our approach with the pma in detail  and show that our new formalization can avoid the problems in the pma and pwa in most cases  and give more intuitive results for reasoning about action  regardless of whether the action is definite or indefinite. 
1 	introduction 
winslett proposed a method for reasoning about action  which she called a possible models approach  pma   winslett  1 . the pma was devised to remove some difficulties in ginsberg and smith's possible worlds approach  pwa  for reasoning about action  ginsberg and smith  1a; ginsberg and smith  1b . as argued by winslett  although the pwa is an elegant  simple and powerful technique for reasoning about action  it fails to solve the frame problem  what facts about the world remain true when an action is performed    ramification problem  what facts about the world must change when an action is performed   and qualification problem  when is it reasonable to assume that an action will succeed    if the pwa is forced to operate with incomplete information  winslett  1 . 
　the basic idea of the pwa is to take a logical theory as the description of the world. the effect of an action is modeled by incorporating a set of formulas f  that specify the effects of the action  into the world description t. the description of the possible worlds after the action are the maximal subsets s of  that are consistent and  ginsberg and smith  1a . 
1 	knowledge representation 
　the pma  on the other hand  distinguishes the state of the world from a theory that describes the world. the state of the world is identified with a herbrand model. this distinction leads to different effects in representing the frame principle of actions between the pwa and pma. in particular  the frame principle of actions says that there are minimal changes in the world when an action is performed. the pwa translates this into  minimal changes in the description of the world when an action is performed.  however  as has been shown by winslett  winslett  1   since a minimal change in the state of the world does not necessarily correspond to a minimal change in the description of the world  the pwa may not give a correct handling of incomplete information. on the other hand  the pma represents the minimal change on the state of the world rather than on the description of the world when an action is performed  and thus can avoid the problems with the pwa. 
　does the pma always give satisfactory results for reasoning about action  in this paper  we show that the pma is sometimes incorrect in that it may give unintuitive results relative to the frame problem  and for its dual  the ramification problem. in developing our alternative approach we found it helpful to classify actions into definite and indefinite actions to systematize a comparison between the pma and our new proposal. the pma is shown to be inadequate for both definite and indefinite actions in the general case. our proposal for reasoning about actions is based on persistence. we show that our approach can avoid the problems with the pma and pwa in most cases  and yield more intuitive results  regardless of whether the action is definite or indefinite. 
　the paper is organized as follows. in the following section we briefly review the pma  and illustrate the problem with the pma by an intuitive example. we then start to develop our new approach. in section 1 we introduce the concepts of definite and indefinite actions  which are helpful for our discussion. we define the persistence set in section 1  and based on this definition we give a precise representation of the effect of action. in section 1 we present more examples to show how our approach works for reasoning about action. we then compare our approach with the pma in detail from a logical viewpoint in section 1. finally  we discuss the related work with our approach presented in this paper. 

1 	the problem with the pma 	- terminated p  a  and 	-ab-terminated p a  	are omit-
we first briefly review winslett's pma. let t be a first order theory  which is treated as a description of the world  and c be a subset of formulas in t representing the domain constraints about the world called protected formulas. to reason about the effects of performing an action with post-condition f  a first order formula   the pma considers the effect of the action on each possible state of the world  that is  on each model of t. the pma changes the truth valuations of the ground atoms in each model as little as possible in order to make both 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　sof and the protected formulas of t true in that model. the possible states of the world after the performance of the action are all those models thus produced. winslett made a herbrand universe assumption so that models are simply subset of the herbrand base. 
	zhang and foo 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 


	zhang and foo 	1 
　this proposition simply says that each mutable fact obtained by the psa is based on some logical relevance  i.e.  influence or indefiniteness. however  in the pma  some fact may be mutable for no reason. this is why the p m a may have some unintended effects in reasoning about an action. 
	1 	related work 
in this paper  we presented a formalization of actions based on persistence  which we call the persistence set approach  psa   and compared it with the p m a in detail. we showed that the psa provides a unified framework for representing effects of definite and indefinite actions  and argued that it is conceptually simple and plausible for reasoning about action. we notice that the computation of persistence sets seems difficult generally. in the full version of this paper   zhang and foo  1j  we present an algorithmic description and a computational analysis of the psa necessary for its implementation. we argue that it is possible to get a computationally tractable method for some special cases  i.e.  only definite actions occur or all constraints are horn clauses. more details about the computation of persistence sets will be considered in our further work. 
   we think that the psa can be applied as a general methodology for modeling state change. there are a number of issues related to the psa that we are considering. here we list some of them: 
  the problem of multiple extensions 
  persistence updating in knowledge bases 
  representing temporal persistence 
　the psa  at least in general  induces multiple extensions from a single description of the world  i.e.  example 1 . in order to avoid conflicting extensions  or unintuitive resulting states  it is necessary to provide more domain information in the psa for some applications. it seems feasible to introduce some perference policy into the psa to handle the problem of multiple 
extensions  i.e.  the idea of prioritized circumscription  lifschitz  1  or eptistemic entrenchment  gardenfors and makinson  1j . 
the other related work is knowledge base updates. 
while there are many approaches in this area  most of them have some limitations  katsuno and mendelzon  1 . one of the difficulties is to update knowledge base with indefinite information  i.e.  something like  as the psa provides a unified viewpoint for processing definite and indefinite information  we argue that the idea of persistence may provide new insights into knowledge base updates. furthermore  it seems that the psa also provides a unified representation for upadtes and actions. in  zhang and foo  1b   we show that under the persistent semantics  given a specific update operator some related action  or a sequence of actions  can be generated. 
　the psa presents a principle of persistence for reasoning about change  which is quite different from the principle of minimality that is widely used in current approaches. it would not be difficult to combine the 
1 	knowledge representation 

persistence idea into other formalisms. in  zhang and foo  1a  we presented a persistence-based formalization within the situation calculus framework  mccarthy and hayes  1  to represent temporal persistence  and showed that the yale shoolting problem  hanks and mcdermott  1  is solved in a natural way  that is quite different from those minimality-based methods. 
acknowledgements 
this research is supported in part by a grant from the australian research council. the first author is supported by a sopf scholarship from the australian government. discussions with members of the knowledge systems group of the university of sydney have improved the presentation. 
