 level where all possible means of expression can be envisaged as a sequence of universal symbols; it will be seen how ccl takes into account the concepts of the particularity and unicity of objects. 
e-language - the unique feature of this a-language logic is the fact that the universe of representations that it is concerned 
with is based entirely on a parameter that i call efficiency. this element constitutes  so to speak  cgl's driving force  which  in the most general case  is an element situated outside the universe of representations  and outside the scope of the alanguage. efficiency cannot be formulated in representation language; from the cr-language point of view  it is only perceivable as a break in the continuity of this universe's constitution* in fact the cr-language must handle a knowledge universe that is not defined for once and for all  but an evolving universe that develops layer by layer  where efficiency is 
	basso 	1 
the very essence of this dynamism. but this efficiency can no longer be handled by the a-language logic  and the world of efficiency is no longer that of constituted semantic units but a world of non-differentiated entities and of potentialities of representation. this environment's logic is that of the elanguage. it is not based on either the principle of identity nor on contradiction since  in order to be able to speak of a sym-
bol's identity  the symbol must have a fixed determination or  in other words  it must be identified as the representation of a thing. however  in the area that concerns us here  i.e. the complete ccl  there are no longer things but only potentialities of things whose connection engenders stable properties that can be identified within the universe of determinate objects. the formalization of this 뫩-language is still being developed. 
   therefore this publication is concerned only with the first level of ccl  i.e. the cr-language. the a-language  as we shall see  can be presented as a formal theory of knowledge representation based on an unspecified internal parameter that provides a basis for its complete structure and its approach. it is on this basis that the cr-language acquires its originality that distinguishes it from other types of formal logic. it is not possible to provide an exhaustive presentation of this formal a-language in this paper. this text aims to simply explain in natural language - the fundamental concepts and key ideas of this cr-language as well as its philosophical foundations. some indications of the syntax of the a-language shall also be given below. 
1 	determination 
from the ccl point of view  therefore  there are not things  or objects  but rather a dynamic process for elaboration of these things. i call this process determination. a determinate object is something that is designated by by a significant value: determination is the operation whereby correspondence is established between a bare thing and the significant value of a concept  a . the semantic field of the a-language is the universe of determinate objects. we proceed by the following: 
뫴 the concepts or general ideas  i.e.: tree  cat  house  car ...; 
뫴 tbtix functionalities  which can be considered as the concept's potentiality- this word will be explained later - to designate and represent the things; 
뫴 the efficiency  which is the process whereby this potentiality is updated: correspondence is established between a concept and a bare  indeterminate thing if and only if the functionality of the conptinquestionbecomes  in a manner of speaking   active  or  in a-language  if it becomes efficient or has efficiency. 
   thiscorrespondenc*betweenthereprese  representing concept is called an inscription of a concept in 
1 	logic programming 
the cr-language  a determinate object is called a c-ity. therefore determinate objects include concepts  which are also aities  and the a-ities resulting from the inscriptions of these concepts. 
   the collection of inscriptions of a concept constitutes the universe of this concept thus universe 뫩 is the collection of all that is determinate; it can be considered as the universe of the inscriptions of the  determination  concept 
   as a general rule  a universe is not a set or a class  except in the particular case where efficiency is replaced by a determinate process; in this case  the notion of a universe can be considered to correspond to the notion of a set or a class. 
   the idea that governs this operational distinction between concept and its functionality is the will to take into account this fact of a common experience: the conceptual representation of a perception does not exhaust the real contents of this experience. thus the tree representation does not exhaust the reality of the experience - in terms of sight  smell  touch and emotion - involved in the perception of a tree. this corresponds to the fact that a cr-language universe is not totally complete but open; in classical theory  a thing exists as soon as it is defined  while in cgl it only exists as a result of the operation called determination by efficiency. the representedobject/representing-object dichotomy is not initially given  it is constituted operationally. therefore the a-language will distinguish two types of universe: open universes  where inscriptions of the corresponding concepts are produced by efficiency; and closed universes  where these inscriptions result from the application of logic rules defined with the concepts. the functionality of these concepts is a determinate functionality or a r-fonctionnality. 
   but  before a thing can be determined  at the moment of efficiency  as being a given thing  viz. a cat  a tree  a table  a fruit etc.   i.e. before one-to-one mapping can be established between the indeterminate thing and a given concept and none other  there must be an existing selection function that  in the a-language  is called the determinant or list of determinant conditions. this term refers to any determinate structure that figures as a knowledge development context thus  for example  the fact that visual perception can be identified  or let us say determinate  - e.g. it is a tree - implies determinant conditions such as the nature of the surrounding environment - e.g. the fact of being in a garden - and then the process of learning  by the cognitive system  what a tree is or what this notion implies  memorizing this notion and the possibility to associate it with a perceptive experience. 
in brief  it is its determinant conditions that constitute the unicty of a determinate object - i.e. the fact that it has a specific difference that distinguishes it from all other objects in a unique manner  including those of the same type. 
thus each object is associated with its universe and 뫩 
includes the universes of all possible concepts* but this is not enough to characterize  since these universes are not taken as classes of objects  but they are associated by relations that a-language calls correlations between universes. it has been seen these universes are collections of occurrences of concepts that are used to designate the events in the life of a system. however  there are correspondences  or relations  between the concepts that are not isolated idealities but are interlinked. these correlations structure the universe by establishing structural correspondences between determinate objects; thus  for example  the concept is correlated to the concepts  leaves    trunk    bud    fruit  etc. in fact  it will be shown that no determinate object exists without correlation to other determinate objects. 

1 	t h e paradox of determination 
this could be formulated as follows: if everything handled by the -language comes under the concept of determination  since  from the ccl point of view  the statement it exists is an equivalent expression to is determinate  then how is determination determined  
모this is another form of the famous paradoxes  such as the set of all sets. 
   ccl incorporates the determination paradox into its own dynamics. in fact  determination  or the universe of the determinate  is perpetually approaching total completion without ever being able to attain it to the same extent as this is because of the very existence of this paradox in which the resolution process leads to the organization of not as a whole that is complete as soon as it is defined  but as a dynamic universe that is always open and evolving from state to state. according to a theorem of the a-language  the sequence of states of ! has no first or last terms. 
모the change from one state of  to another is called a transition. 
모the universe is therefore composed of a series of states separated by a radical discontinuity called transition which is the domain of efficiency. indeed: 
뫴 this transition is not determinate  and does not belong to 
뫴 this transition has a generative role in that it always implies a new determination. 
it should be noted that determination by efficiency is more a 
process of emergence from an indeterminate environment. 
모we could try to use an application model to illustrate what we want to formulate by this idea of discontinuity of the universe as we shall see below  this universe can represent a given cognitive system  or rather the state of knowledge of this system. we can therefore already see how to interpret the non-exhaustive nature of for a given system  everything that it has accumulated - by learning or by experience - is determined. we can place innate acquired knowledge under the heading of this notion  inasmuch as we would model 
모모모모of a system on the basis of a theory of the acquired knowledge. but  for the system in question  the external world  full of non-updated possibilities  is indeterminate. the state transition can be interpreted as a process of acquisition of new knowledge and a repeated experience  irrespective of whether it is receptive or active; an acquisition that will enhance the system's knowledge base and facts base. 
   thus  that which was indeterminate has been incorporated into the system as a new determinate object. at the same time  the system undergoes change represented by the notion of state transition. this is integrated as an event described by a conceptual representation. this notion of an event emerging at each transition  to which the determination process then joins a conceptual representation  is designated by the term punctor in ccl. 
lb sum up  in an operation of determination by efficiency  
the punctor is the particular thing; the concept is the general or generic object. determination of the punctor  or inscription of a concept  is the creation  in of a correspondence between a concept and the state transition punctor. the inscription of  a  is the establishment of correspondence between any punctor  e.g. and the concept  a   let be  a  x  . in this expression  the role of element x is purely that of an index: it formalizes the application of a concept to the designation of a particular object this tree. the correspondence that determines this particular object  x   or  a  x    is provided by efficiency. the -language will be the mathematical formalization of this efficiency  and it is in this sense that it will be a logic of the genesis of particular objects. 
1 	identities and distinctions 
in this language there are several possible definitions of identity. this section discusses the identity of determination: an object of the a-language exists because it is determinate. this existence  in the logic sense of the term  is conditioned by what i previously called the determinant conditions. for two given determinate objects  e.g. a and b  there are a number of possibilities that we shall explore: 
뫴 object a and object b are determined by a set of common conditions. thus a and b have an identity of partial determination. 
	basso 	1 

뫴 all determinant conditions of a determine b without the converse being true. thus there it an identity of inclusive determination of a byb or inclusion of a by b. 
g all determinant conditions of a determine b and vice versa. tiros there is an identity of total determination of a and b or identity of a and b. 
there is no determinant condition common to a and to b. 
   following examples can be situated in this kind of total determination identity: napoleon and  emperor of france   or venus and the  morning star . in the identity of inclusive determination  there is a sort of idea of additional determination of the including term in relation to the included idea. there are numerous possible examples  but i will just mention one: the inclusive determination identity of the flower object by the rose object. this means that a rose is indeed a flower and that it has all the characteristics of a flower  but the converse is not true: not all flowers are roses! the same plant example illustrates determination partiality:  rose is a flower  and 'violet is a flower . these two objects have certain characteristics in common  which means that they are both flower objects. 
모from identity we move on to distinction  which is again based on the notion of determination. the a-language takes two types of distinction into consideration: 
뫴 punctorial distinction  or simply distinction  between the various different inscriptions of a single concept. 
뫴 specific distinction between concepts or between objects in universes of distinct concepts. 
   the first type of distinction is that practised in natural language between individuals of a single generic object. thus the name rose designates a generic object. there are numerous specific objects that correspond to this concept; the distinction corresponds to an operation of our language that establishes selection between  this rose  and  that rose   or between rose number 1  rose number 1 etc. 
   but specific distinction is practised between general objects  e.g. a rose and a violet  an animal and a plant. thus it is possible to observe some overlapping - deliberately intended in the a-language - of identity and distinction. these notions are both based on determination. they are not absolute opposites; rather  there is a continual shift from one towards the other in both directions. thus two occurrences of the  rose  concept are clearly distinct but they are also linked by a determination identity relation since they have the common determination of being a rose. there is a specific distinction between an inscription of the  rose  concept  or a specific rose  and an inscription of the  violet  concept  or a 
   specific violet ; nevertheless  there is a determination identity because of the fact that they are both flowers  i.e. inscriptions of the  flower  concept therefore  to a certain extent  their specific distinction could gradually dissolve  leaving a single plain distinction between two occurrences of the  flower  
1 	logic 	programming 

functional negation  which concerns the functionality of concepts and not the concepts themselves. this functional negation will be used in defining the potentiality of concepts: the potentiality of is formalized as the junctional negation of  non-a . in the next paragraph you will see an application of functional negation. 

1 	conditional causal logic 
it has been seen above that  because it is impossible to resolve the paradox of the  determination  concept within its own universe  has an evolutionary structure. since this evolutionary and dynamic nature of causes the determination of a new object at each transition  i will now define a method for resolving this determination paradox. this method will clarify this concept of determination. that is  it will describe how the determination process takes place  why the state transition leads to the punctor-event being determined as that thing and nothing else; why it is this  tree  concept that determines this punctor and not  table  or any other concept. 
   from the ccl viewpoint  there is no innate one-to-one mapping between the external world and our representations. and that this correspondence is constructed in the cognitive system and according to its past experience  its knowledge base  its personal history and - going further - the history of its surrounding environment. 
   now let us try to describe the process of determination by causes and conditions that is responsible  among other things  for the denomination causal conditional logic. this process is based on three terms: efficiency  determinant conditions  and causes. 
efficiency - this is not necessarily the efficiency of something or some concept. if so  this would imply that the virtualities that arise from efficiency in the form of determinate objects would have the character of precoded entities. 
determinant conditions - i will illustrate the relationship between and efficiency by the following metaphor: efficiency is to the universe as the arctic ocean is to the numerous icebergs floating on its surface; where the determinate objects of e are  so to speak  the  solidification  of efficiency. the image stops here but it still true that an object of is produced by limiting efficiency on the basis of determinant conditions. the determination conditions realize the potentiality of determination for a given situation by excluding all that cannot happen in this situation. for example  if the state of  represents the following space-time situation:  it is 1 o'clock  sunday 1 january; john is in his bedroom   such a context would exclude all possibilities relative to the following situation:  it is 1 o'clock  sunday 1 january; john is in his office . 
in a-language this is formalized as the functional negation of everything that is other than the current situation. in other* words  in a given situation  the potentiality of  a  would be defined as the functional negation of the possibility of inscription of all things other than  a   i.e. the functional negation of  !  . 
the causes - the combination of efficiency and determinant conditions leads to the determination of the state transition by inscription of a concept. such a concept is called an efficient cause  or simply a cause. but one must bear in mind that such a concept is not predetermined to become an efficient cause. let us take a current state of  which we will call  and the determinant conditions of this state. it is the limitation of efficiency by the power of determinant conditions that will manifest itself in  as the cause  a . 
   within this perspective  ccl constitutes a sub-version of the ordinary sense of causality  since here the causes are not considered upstream as producers of the phenomenon  but downstream as representations of the punctor-event. in brief: 
뫴 the transition is the bare thing to be determined; 
뫴 the causes are the agents of this determination; 
뫴 the determinant conditions act as a medium for this determination by performing selection from all possible causes; 뫴 efficiency is the driving force behind this process. 
   the theory of determination by causes and conditions can be summarized as follows: 
a concept appears as a determinant cause by the action of efficiency in certain conditions. 
   but we can go further in this expression of determination by causes and conditions  by showing that if i can determine a punctor by the causes  1yee    leaves    trunk  etc  then these same objects that constitute the causes of determination are also products of determinations. take a state of determinant initial conditions representing a set of data such as leaves  trunk  bark  bud etc. in such a context  efficiency will result in the inscription of something that can only be the concept  tree ; therefore we will say that  tree  constitutes a determinant efficient cause. let us then suppose that the description of this plant world does not undergo any modification  i.e. that in all previous states of  there will be a list of identities and of distinctions of determinant conditions that will select the presence of a tree object by excluding all other possibilities of the manifestation or emergence of another type of event. therefore the evolution of the system will reproduce itself identically  from state to state  with  treee  as the only efficient cause. this sort of evolution of enables us to formalize a common empirical notion  that of the duration and relative permanence of objects in our everyday experience. therefore we shall refer to a causal system  that is  a cause whose efficiency perpetuates itself identically torn state to state  using the a-language  we can define initial and 
	basso 	1 
뫴 all determinant conditions of a determine b without the converse being true. thus there is an identity of inclusive determination of a by b or inclusion of a by b. 
뫴 all determinant conditions of a determine b and vice versa. thus there is an identity of total determination of a and b or identity oia and b. 
뫴 there is no determinant condition common to a and to b. 
모following examples can be situated in this kind of total determination identity: napoleon and  emperor of france   or venus and the  morning star . in the identity of inclusive determination  there is a sort of idea of additional determination of the including term in relation to the included idea. there are numerous possible examples  but i will just mention one: the inclusive determination identity of the flower object by the rose object. this means that a rose is indeed a flower and that it has all the characteristics of a flower  but the converse is not true: not all flowers are roses! the same plant example illustrates determination partiality:  rose is a flower  and 'violet is a flower''. these two objects have certain characteristics in common  which means that they are both flower objects. 
모from identity we move on to distinction  which is again baaed on the notion of determination. the a-language takes two types of distinction into consideration: 
뫴 punctorial distinction  or simply distinction  between the various different inscriptions of a single concept. 
뫴 specific distinction between concepts or between objects in universes of distinct concepts. 
   the first type of distinction is that practised in natural language between individuals of a single generic object. thus the name rose designates a generic object. there are numerous specific objects that correspond to this concept; the distinction corresponds to an operation of our language that establishes selection between  this rose  and  that rose   or between rose number 1  rose number 1 etc. 
   but specific distinction is practised between general objects  e.g. a rose and a violet  an animal and a plant. thus it is possible to observe some overlapping - deliberately intended in the a-language - of identity and distinction. these notions are both based on determination. they are not absolute opposites; rather  there is a continual shift from one towards the other in both directions. thus two occurrences of the  rose  concept are clearly distinct but they are also linked by a determination identity relation since they have the common determination of being a rose. there is a specific distinction between an inscription of the  rose  concept  or a specific rose  and an inscription of the  violet  concept  or a 
   specific violet ; nevertheless  there is a determination identity because of the fact that they are both flowers  i.e. inscriptions of the  flower  concept therefore  to a certain extent  their specific distinction could gradually dissolve  leaving a single plain distinction between two occurrences of the  flower  
1 	logic 	programming 
concept 
   similarly  concepts such as  animal  and  plant  can be found to have the common determination of being  oellular organisms . 
   of course  the fourth possibility mentioned above - according to which two objects  a and b  could have no common determination - could be found to be purely theoretical  since it is always possible to find something in common between two objects. 
important note: identity and distinction are only circumstantial notions that vary according to determinant conditions. the notion of identity certainly characterizes determinate ob jects but the identity a 뫴 a is not initially given: it results from the determination process. 

functional negation  which concerns the functionality of con- in a-language this is formalized as the functional negation of ~ cepts and not the concepts themselves  this functional nega- everything that is other than the current situation. in other tion will be used in defining the potentiality of concepts: the words  in a given situation  the potentiality of  a  would be potentiality of a  is formalized as the functional negation of defined as the functional negation of the possibility of inscrip- non-a . in the next paragraph you will see an application of functional negation. 

1 	conditional causal logic 
it has been seen above that  because it is impossible to resolve the paradox of the  determination  concept within its own universe  has an evolutionary structure. since this evolutionary and dynamic nature of causes the determination of a new object at each transition  i will now define a method for resolving this determination paradox. this method will clarify this concept of determination. that is  it will describe how the determination process takes place  why the state transition leads to the punctor-event being determined as that thing and nothing else; why it is this  tree  concept that determines this punctor and not  table  or any other concept. 
모from the ccl viewpoint  there is no innate one-to-one mapping between the external world and our representations. and that this correspondence is constructed in the cognitive system and according to its past experience  its knowledge base  its personal history and - going further - the history of its surrounding environment. 
모now let us try to describe the process of determination by causes and conditions that is responsible  among other things  for the denomination causal conditional logic. this process is based on three terms: efficiency  determinant conditions  and causes. 
efficiency - this is not necessarily the efficiency of something or some concept. if so  this would imply that the virtualities that arise from efficiency in the form of determinate objects would have the character of precoded entities. 
determinant conditions - i will illustrate the relationship between and efficiency by the following metaphor: efficiency is to the universe as the arctic ocean is to the numerous icebergs floating on its surface; where the determinate objects of are  so to speak  the  solidification  of efficiency. the im-
age stops here but it still true that an object of is produced by limiting efficiency on the basis of determinant conditions. the determination conditions realize the potentiality of determination for a given situation by excluding all that cannot happen in this situation. for example  if the state of represents the following space-time situation:  it is 1 o'clock  sunday 1 january; john is in his bedroom   such a context would exclude all possibilities relative to the following situation:  it is 1 o'clock  sunday 1 january; john is in his office . tion of all things other than  a   i.e. the functional negation 

the causes - the combination of efficiency and determinant conditions leads to the determination of the state transition by inscription of a concept. such a concept is called an efficient cause  or simply a cause. but one must bear in mind that such a concept is not predetermined to become an efficient cause. let us take a current state of which we will call and the determinant conditions of this state. it is the limitation of efficiency by the power of determinant conditions that will manifest itself in  as the cause  a . 
모within this perspective  ccl constitutes a sub-version of the ordinary sense of causality  since here the causes are not considered upstream as producers of the phenomenon  but downstream as representations of the punctor-event. in brief: 
뫴 the transition is the bare thing to be determined; 
뫴 the causes are the agents of this determination; 
뫴 the determinant conditions act as a medium for this determination by performing selection from all possible causes; 뫴 efficiency is the driving force behind this process. 
모the theory of determination by causes and conditions can be summarized as follows: 
a concept appears as a determinant cause by the action of efficiency in certain conditions  
   but we can go further in this expression of determination by causes and conditions  by showing that if i can determine a punctor by the causes  1vee    leave$    trunk  etc.  then these same objects that constitute the causes of determination are also products of determinations. take a state of determinant initial conditions representing a set of data such as leaves  trunk  bark  bud etc. in such a context  efficiency will result in the inscription of something that can only be the concept  tree : therefore we will say that  treee  constitutes a determinant efficient cause. let us then suppose that the description of this plant world does not undergo any modification  i.e. that in all previous states of there will be a list of identities and of distinctions of determinant conditions that will select the presence of a tree object by excluding all other possibilities of the manifestation or emergence of another type of event. therefore the evolution of the system will reproduce itself identically  from state to state  with  tree  as the only efficient cause. this sort of evolution of enables us to formalize a common empirical notion  that of the duration and relative permanence of objects in our everyday experience. therefore we shall refer to a causal system  that is  a cause whose efficiency perpetuates itself identically from state to state. using the a-language  we can define initial and 
	basso 	1 

final determinant conditions of this process; in this way  we can formalize notions of beginning  of lifetime and of end of a causal system. 
모now we have linked the notion of universe to the formal representation of a causal system. we can generalize and deduce the possibility of a multitude of  universes corresponding to as many causal systems. from this we can define 
a conjunction of causal systems which expresses the possibility of interaction between two causal systems-or many more  of course. to continue the previous example: on the one hand we have this  tree  causal system  and on the other  we have a john  causal system representative of the life and activity of a person. this system has its own evolution according to the determinant conditions that guide this evolution. let us suppose that a modification of the  john  system allows its perceptive interaction with the  tree  causal system. ccl will then say that there is conjunction of these two systems  which is will treat as a new system representing the following situation:  john-perceiving-tree . 
   some words about ccl's philosophy; it is not absolute determinism  as might be suggested by the notion of inscription of a cause by an exclusion programmed on the basis of determinant conditions. in fact  to use another image  the evolution of the causal system resembles the situation of a chess player: during a game be is free to choose his move  but his choice is limited by the state of the game  i.e. all the moves that have been made by both himself and his opponent. he chooses a move and then makes it  and this new move will then constitute a further determinant condition for all later moves in the game. 
causes 	 john    tree  
causal conjonction 	 john : see :  tree  
determination of ai   john  : see :  tree  ai   
1 	conclusion: designing a conditional causal network 
in the meantime  the  r-language could act as a basis for defining a connexionist system capable of symbolic processing. the main idea of such a  conditional causal network''  ccn  rests on a representation of meanings by means of non-linear waves which propagate in a physical network. a system that the physicists call the zakharov system  viz.: 
is associated to any given meaning  e.g. john  tree  rose  book  etc.. in other words  a meaning is like a quantum particle which will be called a connecton;   its wave-function  collapses into a potential well itself resulting from all information 
1 	logic programming 
