 
the purpose of this paper is to study the fundamental mechanism humans use in argumentation and its role in different major approaches to commonsense reasoning in ai and logic programming. we present three novel results: 
　　　　we develop a theory for argumentation in which the acceptability of arguments is precisely defined. 
　　　　we show that logic programming and nonmonotonic reasoning in ai are different forms of argumentation. 
　　　　we show that argumentation can be viewed as a special form of logic programming with negation as failure. this result introduces a general method for generating metainterpreters for argumentation systems. 
1. introduction 
argumentation constitutes a major component of human's intelligence. the ability to engage in arguments is essential for humans to understand new problems  to perform scientific reasoning  to express  clarify and defend their opinions in their daily lives. the way humans argue is based on a very simple principle which is summarized succintly by an old saying  the one who has the last word laughs best . to illustrate this principle  let us take a look at an example  bl   a mock argument between an israeli and an arab over who is responsible for blocking negotiation in middle east. 
example israeli:  israel can not negotiate with the plo because they don't even recognize israel's right to exist  arab:  israel doesn't recognize the plo either  
the explicit content of the israeli's utterance is that 
plo's failure to recognize israel blocks the negotiation. this establishes the responsibility of the plo for blocking the negotiation by an implicit appeal to the following commonsense responsibility attribution rule:  if some actor performs some action which causes some state of affairs then that actor is responsible for that state of affairs unless its 
1 	logic programming 
 the true basis of the logic of existence and universality lies in the human activities of seeking and finding   
jaakko hintikka  h pp1  
action was justified . 
　　　　the arab uses the same kind of reasoning to counterargue that israel is also responsible for blocking the negotiation as israel doesn't recognize the plo either. at this point  neither arguer can claim  victory  without hurting his own position. consider the following continuation of the above arguments: 
israeli:  but the plo is a terrorist organization  
　　　　this utterance justifies the failure of israel to recognize the plo. thus the responsibility attribution rule can not be applied to make israel responsible for blocking the negotiation. so this represents an attack on the arab's argument. if the exchange stops here  then the israeli clearly has the  last word   which means that he has successfully argued that the plo is responsible for blocking the negotiation. ＊ 
　　　　the problems of understanding the process of argumentation and its role in human's reasoning have been addressed by many researchers in different fields including philosophy  logic and ai  t a b1 gbf . in ai  much work has been done to analyze the structure of arguments and to build computer systems which can engage in exchange of arguments. argument systems which can understand 
editorials or engage in political dialogues have been built by alvarado  a  and birnbaum et all  b bfg gbf . these works can be considered as forming an heuristic approach to argument-based commonsense reasoning. 
　　　　roughly  the idea of argumentational reasoning is that a statement is believable if it can be argued successfully against attacking arguments. in other words  whether or not a rational agent believes in a statement depends on whether or not the argument supporting this statement can be successfully defended against the counterarguments. 
　　　　understanding of the structure and acceptability of arguments is essential for a computer system to be able to engage in exchanges of arguments. much work has been done to analyze the structure of arguments. deep insights into the structures of arguments have been gained  t c1a 

b1fg ls pl tht v . in contrast  it is still not clear how to understand the acceptability of arguments. the lack of progress here leaves the question about the semantical relations between argumentation and the formal logic-based approaches to reasoning  especially nonmonotonic reasoning remaining open until today. this paper is devoted to study these problems. 
　　　　moore distinguished between default reasoning and autoepistemic reasoning  m . according to him  default reasoning is drawing plausible inferences in the absence of information to the contrary while autoepistemic reasoning is like reasoning about one's own knowledge or beliefs. thus default reasoning is like arguing with the nature  where a conclusion  supported by some argument  can be drawn in the absence of any counterargument. on the other hand side  reasoning about one's own knowledge or beliefs is much like arguing with oneself. so both autoepistemic reasoning and default reasoning are forms of argumentation. this insight should not be very surprising as it may seem since all forms of reasoning with incomplete information rest on the simple intuitive idea that a defeasible statement can be believed only in the absence of any evidence to the contrary which is very much like the principle of argumentation. in  dl   this idea has been applied to develop a simple and intuitive framework for semantics of logic programming unifying many other previously proposed approaches  gl grs p1 . later  kakas  kowalski and tony  kkt  have pointed out that the framework given in  dl  is in fact an argumentational approach to logic programming. this important insight constitutes a major source of inspiration and motivation for this paper. 
　　　　this paper provides three novel results. the first one is a theory of acceptability of arguments which  in fact  is a formal account of the principle of argumentation. the second result shows that logic programming as well as many major formalisms to nonmonotonic and defeasible reasoning in ai and logic programming  r m md p1 d1 gl kkt sl  are argumentation systems. that means that all these systems are based on the same principle. they differ only by the structure of their arguments. the third result reveals that argumentation can be viewed as logic programming with negation as failure. this result introduces a general method for generating metainterpreters for argumentation systems  a method which is very much similar to the compiler-compiler idea in conventional programming. 
1. a theory of acceptability of arguments 
our theory is based on the notion of argumentation framework given in the following definition. 
definition 1 an argumentation framework is a pair af = 
 ar  attacks  where ar is a set of arguments  and attacks 
qarxar. 	m 
　　　　for two arguments a b  the meaning of attacks a b  is that a represents an attack against b. for example  the exchange between the israeli and the arab in the introduction can be represented by an argumentation framework  ar attacks  where ar = {1 a}  and attacks ＊ { i1 a   a1   i1 a } with 1 denoting the first and the second argument of the israeli  respectively  and a denoting the argument of the arab. 
　　　　from now on  if not explicitly mentioned otherwise  we always refer to an arbitrary but fixed argumentation framework af =  ar attacks . 
　　　　a set s of arguments is said to be conflict-free if there are no two arguments a b in s such that a attacks b or b attacks a. 
　　　　for a rational agent g  an argument a is acceptable if g can defend a  from within his world  against all attacks on a. further  it is reasonable to assume that a rational agent accepts an argument only if it is acceptable. that means that the set of all arguments accepted by a rational agent is a set of arguments which can defend itself against all attacks on it. this leads to the following definition of an admissible  for a rational agent  set of arguments. 
definition 1  1  an argument a is acceptable wrt a set s of arguments iff for each argument b: if b attacks a then b is attacked by some argument in s. 
　　　　 1  a conflict-free set of arguments s is admissible iff each argument in s is acceptable wrt s. = 
　　　　the  credulous  semantics of an argumentation framework is defined by the notion of preferred extension. 
definition 1 a preferred extension of an argumentation framework af is a maximal  wrt set inclusion  admissible set of arguments of af. ＊ 
for example  the argumentation framework of the 
arab-israeli example has exactly one preferred extension e = {1}. 
　　　　the well-known nixon diamond example  r  can be represented by an argumentation framework af = 
 ar attacks  	with 	ar 	= 	{a b}  	and 	attacks 	= 
{ a b   b a } where a represents the argument  nixon is anti-pacifist since he is a republican   and b represents the argument  nixon is a pacifist since he is a quaker . this argumentation framework has two preferred extensions  one in which nixon is a pacifist and one in which nixon is quaker. 
theorem 1 let af be an argumentation framework. then 
　　　　 1  the set of all admissible sets of af form a complete partial order wrt set inclusion. 
　　　　 1  for each admissible set s of af  there exists an preferred extension e of af such that s ♀ e 
　　　　 1  every argumentation framework possesses at least one preferred extension. = 
　　　　to compare our approach with other approaches  we introduce the notion of stable extension. 
definition 1 a conflict-free set of arguments s is called a 
stable extension iff s attacks each argument which does not 
	dung 	1 


1 	logic programming 


	dung 	1 

　　　　 1  there exists at least one stable model for each call-consistent logic program. 
　　　　it is also easy to see that af p  is well-founded for locally stratified p. from this fact  it follows immediately the coincidence between stable and well-founded semantics of locally stratified logic programs  a well-known result in logic programming  p1 . 
1. argumentation as logic programming: a generator of metainterpreters for argumentation systems 
any argumentation system is composed from two essential components: one for generating the arguments together with the attack-relationship between them. the other is for determining the acceptability of arguments. so we can think of an argumentation system as consisting of two units  an argument generation unit  agu  and an argument processing unit  apu. the argument processing unit apu is in fact a very simple logic program consisting of the following two clauses: 

where c1 means that an argument is defeated if it is attacked by an acceptable argument  and ci means that x is acceptable if it is not defeated  or equivalently  each clause which attacks x is defeated . the just described architecture of an argumentation system is illustrated by the following picture: 

　　　　the above architecture of argumentation systems is in fact a schema for generating metainterpreters for argumentation systems. in practice  to increase the efficiency of this metainterpreter  the well-developed techniques of partial evaluation and program transformation in logic programming should be applied. 
　　　　kowalski  k1  has pointed out that logic-based knowledge bases can be described by the equation  knowledge base = knowledge + logic . logic-based knowledge bases can be viewed as argumentation systems where the knowledge is coded in the structure of the arguments and the logic is used to determine the acceptability of the arguments. in that sense  the above architecture of argument systems can be viewed as a schema for generating metainterpreters for knowledge bases. 
conclusions 
the theory of argumentation frameworks proposed in this paper provides an unified foundation for the different approaches to knowledge representation and reasoning in ai  philosophy and logic programming. therefore  our results can serve als the foundation for the development of knowledge representation formalisms capable of communicating knowledge among different knowledge representation systems. this is especially important in constructing large knowledge bases as such systems will require a sustained effort over a large geography by many teams which will be forced to use different knowledge representation languages in developing their subsystems 

1 	logic programming 

since no single formalism to knowledge representation can satisfy all the  basic properties  of a knowledge base system p1 k1 . 
　　　　our theory of argumentation in this paper considers only argumentation frameworks with one kind of conflicts between arguments. but there are often at least two kinds of conflicts between arguments in a real-world argumentation framework: reductio ad absurdum conflict and the conflict between specific and more general knowledge  d1 p1 p1 . hence  it is necessary to generalize the theory given in this paper to handle argumentation frameworks with more than one kinds of attacks between argumments. the semantics of such argumentation frameworks have been studied in  d1 . recently  a very interesting argumentation-based framework for nonmonotonic reasoning which can handle more than one kinds of conflicts has been developed by bondarenko toni and kowalski  btk . still  more works need to be done to gain deeper insight into the nature of conflicts between arguments. 
acknowledgement 
i am grateful to bob kowalski for his support  encouragement  and especially for the spiritful discussions with him which have been the major source of motivation and inspiration for me. many thanks to franchesca tony and kostas stathis for their vital help with the literature. thanks also to the anonymous referees for some constructive criticisms. 
this paper has been partially supported by the 
abduction group at the imperial college under a grant from fujitsu. 
endnotes 
1
  a p a r t i a l order  s    is a complete semilattice i f f each nonempty subset of s has a glb and each increasing sequence of s has a lub. 
