 level  and for guiding the numeric computations which take place on the metric diagram. moreover  these two representations are intertwined so that there is a correspondence between the places identified by the place vocabulary  and the quantities manipulated in the analog representation. in a more recent paper  forbus  1   he proposes six challenge problems for spatial reasoning  the fourth one being : 
develop a system which can  given a sequence of weather maps for a region  provide a consistent qualitative explanation of the atmospheric behavior during that period ... 
the problem we have addressed is very similar: given a sequence of 1d snapshots of seismic amplitudes within the underground  our method provides a consistent qualitative explanation of the propagation of acoustic waves during that period. this has been achieved by effectively integrating several representations  namely a metric diagram  i.e. fields  used for simulation and a place vocabulary  i.e. objects  describing the geological structures.  junker  1  additionally experimented with a physical representation based on rays. 
   research in qualitative and model-based reasoning has focused since its beginning on systems that could be simulated by ordinary differential equations  odes . numerical simulators using differential equations can be divided into two classes: those using scalar variables and those using field variables. scalar variables describe different quantitative properties of a system and are not distributed over a space. good examples of this class of systems are simple physical devices  chemical processes  chemical kinetics  global socio-economical models  or econometric models. in contrast to this  field 

variables are distributed over a space  often related to the real world in one  two or three dimensions. within this category  we can distinguish between fields of scalar variables and fields of vector variables. different simulation techniques are used for approaching this kind of problems. finite difference and finite elements are the conventional tools used by applied mathematicians for the simulation of field variables. examples are fluid dynamics  geophysics or mechanics. other approaches for field variables are naive physics and cellular automata  the basis for a number of a life experiments such as conway's game of life. 
1 	conclusion 
we developed a method for interpreting snapshot images produced by finite element  simulators for seismic wave propagation. as a result  the regions in the images are linked with hayes-like histories of waves: 
1. in order to detect wave fronts in a snapshot  we characterized them by the zero regions in the background they are enclosing. the first  snapshot contains a single front enclosing the zero region that contains the source point. 
1. symbolic constraints are posed on the zero regions to track a given wave from one snapshot to the other and to detect new waves. we obtain new waves when wave histories intersect with the static histories of obstacles. 
a first prototype of a snapshot interpreter which is called sismonaute  junker  1  has been implemented using the iloc tools l e l i s p   a i d a   and s m e c i . this experience enabled us to find the crucial concepts for characterizing waves and for describing histories  as well as symbolic constraints  which enables the use of constraint programming tools to find globally consistent interpretations. 
¡¡as a future perspective  the interpretation method could be adapted to other kinds of numerical simulations 
 e.g. that of flame fronts in simulations of combustions . 
acknowledgements 
this work was initiated by alain bamberger  ifp  and significantly supported by laurence nicoletis  laurent anne  jean brae  ifp  and michel gondran  edf . furthermore  the authors would like to thank claude le pape and the anonymous referees for their suggestions and comments. 
