 component c as described in example 1. by default  we only use the abstract model of this component for diagnosis  i.e. -refine g  is used as working hypothesis. the detailed model is only used when c is identified as faulty. this can be captured by the following rule: 
if an abstract component c occurs in all diagnoses  activate a more detailed model for c 

making its subcomponents visible to the diagnostic process. 
　in order to check if a given strategy should be applied we have to evaluate a condition on the current set of diagnoses. such a condition cannot be modeled as part of the system description. so boettcher and dressier implement the check of these conditions as part of the 
diagnosis system. 
　however  the only flexible way of evaluating these conditions is by introducing a meta-level in the diagnosis system as shown in figure 1. so the strategies are defined on the meta level and they are evaluated using the knowledge obtained so far during the diagnostic process which is represented by the current possible diagnoses. 
　so diagwfi sd u obs  as defined in the previous section is the information on which the decisions on the meta-level are based. for some strategies it is not sufficient to have information about the faulty components only. for example  one necessary precondition for proposing a measurement point is that the value at that point is not known. to evaluate this condition we need to extend the diagnoses by the values predicted in the corresponding system models. so we postulate that diagwh sd uobs  contains all predicates needed by the preconditions of the diagnosis strategies. 
1 	t h e m e t a language 
the language cstrat for defining diagnosis strategies defines modal logic operators specifying properties of the current diagnoses as well as for proposing working hypotheses. before we give a formal definition of the language we motivate the need for these modal operators 
informally. 
modal operators for characterizing the current state of the diagnostic process: 
as already stated the preconditions for the application of diagnosis strategies are statements about the current set of possible diagnoses. the atomic statements in these conditions are: 
  a property p x  is true under all possible diagnoses  or 
  a property p x  is true under at least one possible diagnosis. 


m o d a l operators for p r o p o s i n g w o r k i n g hypotheses 
strategy formulas specify which working hypotheses should be assumed in a given situation. this is achieved by the following  informally described  modal operators: 
 is a necessary working hypotheses in the current situation  i.e. the diagnostic process cannot be continued without assuming wh. is a possible  allowed  working hypotheses 
in the current situation. 
   actions can also be expressed in this approach by using a restricted form of procedural attachment in the system description. for example  we have a working hypotheses mcasure x  for proposing a measurement. the measurement itself is then implemented by a procedure get value  which executes the measurement and remembers the value. the combination of the two concepts is modeled by a rule 

in the system description. thus  from the logical viewpoint  the only effect of the predicate get value is that it tests if v is the value of x. our language allows to explicitly represent dependencies between actions  eg it is possible to express that action a is to be preferred over action b if both are possible  see section 1 . 
syntax of cstrat 
besides the modal operators lstrat contains the usual logical connectives and quantifiers. in the following definitions we only consider v -  a since this is already a complete set. 
e x a m p l e 1 lstrat-formula for structural refinement 
for component c the strategy  structural refinement.  can be expressed by the strategy formula 

by introducing a predicate refinablc c  in the system description  which is true for all components that have subcomponents  we can generalize this rule: 

   more examples for the formalization of diagnosis strategies can be found in section 1. in the next section we define the declarative semantics for the strategy language. 
1 	declarative semantics for strategies 
we consider a diagnosis problem that is now described by 
              sd  st rat  c o m ps  dbs  where sd is the system description  st r a t is a set of l$f rat-formulas  c o m ps is a set of components and o b s is a set of observations. 
　diagnosis strategies are used to guide the diagnostic process. the semantics introduced in this section an-
swers two questions: 
  what are the possible sequences of diagnostic decisions implied by the given diagnosis strategies  i.e. which diagnostic process is consistent with respect to the given strategies strat  and with sd  co mps  obs   
  which diagnoses are the result of such a consistent diagnostic process  
1 c h a r a c t e r i z a t i o n o f t h e d i a g n o s t i c p r o c e s s 
the state of the diagnostic process can be characterized by a set of working hypotheses. then  given s d u o b s the diagnoses can be inferred by applying diagwh-
　the diagnostic process as a whole can be characterized by specifying which states can be adopted or which tran-
sitions between states are considered. we will therefore define a state transition relation as follows: 
	nejdl  frohlich  and schroeder 	1 

point if its value t$ unknown. having made some observation we start the diagnosis in the most abstract model without assuming any hypotheses. a look at the resulting diagnoses reveals that we do not know the value of y and so we cannot say whether c  or c1 ls faulty. so we measure the value of y  i.e. we adopt the hypothesis measure y  and compute the diagnoses again. now we identify c1 as the faulty component. therefore we look at a more detailed model of c1 to find out which subcomponent of c1 caused the error. so we additionally adopt the hypothesis refine{c 1 - after recomputing the diagnoses we know that c1 is the faulty component. this diagnostic process can be characterized by the following state transition relation r: 
   the first element of r denotes that in the state described by the empty set of working hypotheses we adopted the hypothesis measure y  which caused a measurement. after measuring we additionally considered the hypothesis refine g1 - the termination of the diagnostic process in the state {measure y   refine{c1 } is modeled by the cycle in that state. 
   the course of the diagnostic process need not be linear. if we had also considered refining component c1 instead of making the measurement  we would characterize the diagnostic process by 
　so  the state transition relation is just an encoding of the working hypotheses we used in each step of the diagnostic process and is influenced by the diagnoses found and the strategies given. in the declarative semantics we judge whether or not a diagnostic process  represented by a state transition relation  is correct wrt a diagnosis problem characterized by  sd  st rat  c o m ps  obs . 
   the procedural semantics which is only briefly discussed in this paper computes correct diagnostic processes based on this semantics. the user of the diagnosis system only has to provide the system description and the strategies. 
   in order to check if the decisions made during the diagnostic process are consistent with the given diagnosis problem  we define how strategies can be interpreted as statements about the diagnostic process. first  we define logical structures which provide the interpretation for the strategies. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1 	lstrat~model 
a model for cstrat is a structure m -  w  d  r1  r1  f   where w is a set of individuals  called worlds   d is a domain of individuals  r1 and r1 are accessibility relations on the worlds  i.e. subsets of w x w and f is an interpretation function. 
   f provides the interpretation for predicates and ground terms  in our case all ground terms are constants . the values of the variables are given by an assignment: 

	nejdl  frohlich. and schroeder 	1 



   our approach allows to formalize all other strategies presented by boettcher and dressier as well. however in some cases we find it more appropriate to express them by preferences on diagnoses  see  for a discussion of this issue . the next strategies are completely new ones. 
1 	i n t e g r a t i n g heuristic knowledge into model-based diagnosis 
consider an electronic device  where a single chip contains a number of gates  e.g. and-gates . assume we have n such chips. from experience we know that a diagnosis containing two and-gates on different chips is much less likely than a diagnosis containing two and-gates on the same chip  as the latter can be explained by a single cause that damaged the whole chip. such heuristic knowledge if. easy to describe in our strategy language. we use loeation{a  c  to denote that component a is located on chip c. the heuristic assumption expressing our belief that all faulty and-gates are on one chip is represented by the working hypothesis focus.chip. the effect of this assumption is expressed in the system description as follows: 

1 	m e a s u r e m e n t s and dependent actions 
if different consistent models of the system predict  different values for some measure point -v we can discriminate between these values by making a measurement  as represented by the following strategy rule 

since measurements require interaction with the user  we want to express that measurements should only be made when no other strategies are available. 
   in some situations  more than one assumption is supported at the same time. l strat allows to explicitly specify that a working hypotheses wh should only be considered  if wh' is not supported. for example the following formulas specify the strategies structural refinement and measurements so that measurements are only per-
formed  if all useful structural refinements have already been considered. 
i 
　since we only consider minimal models of these formulas  measure x  will only be assumed if all the conditions on the left side of the last formula are satisfied. 
1 	conclusion and further work 
this paper defines the concept of diagnosis strategies using a modal logic language that makes strategic knowledge explicit. our approach allows not only to express system models in a declarative way  which is one of the main advantages of model-based diagnosis   but extends this declarativity to the meta level by allowing the 
declarative description of diagnosis strategies. 
　we are currently working on an efficient implementation of the formal concepts introduced in this paper using transformations of our meta-language into first order logic and minimal model semantics within our drum diagnosis system. 
　finally  we want to thank carlos damasio and luis percira for their fruitful cooperation within the inida project on the topics discussed in this paper and in a companion paper   . 
r e f e r e n c e s 
 l  c. bottcfier and o. dressier. diagnosis process dynamics: holding the diagnostic trackhound in leash. in proceedings of the international joint conference on artificial intelligence  volume 1  pages 1. morgan kaufmann publishers  inc.  1. 
 c bottcher and o. dressier. a framework for controlling model-based diagnosis systems with multiple actions. annals of mathematics and artificial intelligence  special issue on model-based diagnosis  1-1   1. 
 c. v. damasio  w. nejdl  l. pereira  and m. schroeder. model-based diagnosis preferences and strategies representation with meta logic programming. in k. r. apt and f. turini  editors  metalogics and logic programming  chapter 1  pages 1. the m i t press  1. 
 c v. damasio  l. m. pereira  and w. nejdl. revise: an extended logic programming system for revising knowledge bases. in proceedings of the international conference on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  pages 1  bonn  germany  may 1. morgan kaufmann publishers  inc. 
 j. de kleer and b. c. williams. diagnosing multiple faults. artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
 p. frohlich  w. nejdl  and m. schroder. a formal semantics for p