ed version of the translation technique discussed in  rajamoney and koo -1   spatial extents and implicit parameters can be handled by our method. 
because our targets are limited to 'mobile' multi-agent systems  our translation technique can exploit the metric of euclidean spaces. in other words  there is a simple mapping between position  point  at micro-level and spatial extent  region  at macro-level. that's why the above procedure can be applied to each condition of mode transition. 
1 	macro-behavior rules  1  
- about physical e n t i t y 
all physical entities appearing in our problem 
 pherornone  trail  are described at the macro-
level  i.e.  
region phero l  phero region . 
equation type phero region  diffusion . 
where the latter predicate indicates that a region in the class phero region changes governed by a diffusion equation. 
the macro-behavior rule for such a physical entity depends only on the equation type governing the entity  e.g.  the rule for a diffusing entity is written as follows: 
solve diffusion  	:-
region r  class   equation type class  diffusion   assertz expanding r    assertz i minus total amount r   diffusion rate r   . 
when generating causal networks  such a rule is used to check the equation type of a certain physical entity  and to reason about the change of concerning parameters  after defining implicit variables such as dtffusion-rate phero l . 
1 	collecting qualitative relations 
the reasoner receives 1  behavior of the agents  1  descriptions of the environment  and 1  the initial state of the target system. 
first of all  the reasoner generates macrobehavior rules about agents. 
the environment should be described with qualitative regions. the macro-behavior rules about physical entity check the equation type of an entity in the environment  and reason about the changes of its characteristic properties. 
both types of macro-behavior rules are a collection of the declaration  how the target system behaves in a certain situation  described at the macro-level. we reason about the target system's behavior using the following process: 
1. set the initial state to the current-state. 
1. apply the macro-behavior rules to the current-state  and determine the rule to become active. 
1. if there is no rule which can be activated  stop. 
1. collect the qualitative  causal  relations of parameters in the activated rules  i.e.  generating the causal network corresponding to the current state. 
1. examine the possibility for each parameter to cross the landmark  and also examine the possibility that topological relations change  spatial version of limit analysis . 
1. collect the fragments of the next state in the activated rules  and set it to the current.state. 
1. go to 1. 
this process resembles one from qualitative process theory  forbus  1   falkenh ainer and forbus  1 . the differences are that 1  the macro-behavior rule  which corresponds to individual view and process in qualitative process theory  is generated by the reasoner  in addition to defining implicit parameters  and 1  spatial extents  such as pherornone diffusion  can be represented and reasoned about with qualitative regions. 
main part of a generated causal network is shown in figure 1. this network corresponds to a state in figure 1 b  after a large enough number of ants are attracted by the pherornone  trace the trail  and transport the bait while secreting recruitment pherornone. 

	kurumatani 	1 
pheromone is expanding. 
transition from search to attracted is positive. 
transition from attracted to trace is positive. 
transition from trace to transport is positive. pheromone is expanding. 
in the generated explanation  the reasoner finds a positive feedback among the parameters. this means that there is a possibility that the pheromone atmosphere and the gathering ant population will grow exponentially. 
the fact that the reasoner can find such a causal relation in the target system is important  because we can use the results in order to redefine each agent's behavior. 
the system presented in this paper is implemented in sicstus prolog  ver.1  on a sparcstation1. 
	1 	discussion 
the relationship between the complex behavior of multi-agent systems and each agent's behavior has been partially investigated  ray  1   but they lack the ability of providing underlying mathematical models. statistical analysis for system behavior with a fixed simple agent behavior  axelrod  1  can describe the statistic relationship between agent's behavior and system's behavior  e.g.  distribution of agent in the environment. since both of them lack causal relations  explanation generation and reorganization are impossible. 
	1 	conclusion 
a method for generating causal networks for mobile multi-agent systems has been discussed. our method consists of generating macrobehavior rules while salvaging implicit parameters  then constructing causal networks among system parameters. spatial extents are represented and reasoned with qualitative regions  in the course of the process. 
this method was applied to the explanation generation of the foraging behavior of ant colonies. 
since the causal network represents the underlying mathematical structures of the target system  the reasoner can find the macro properties of the target system  such as positive/negative feedbacks embedded in the target system  which can be used in redefining each agent's behavior. 
potential applications include cargo-control system  traffic navigation  industry flow control  and so on. 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis a c k n o w l e d g e m e n t 
the author would like to thank mari nakamura for discussion about modeling ant colonies  and for the implementation of numerical simulators of the foraging behavior. 
