 
in this paper we propose a propositional temporal language based on fuzzy temporal constraints which turns out to be expressive enough for domains -like many coming from medicine- where knowledge is of propositional nature and an explicit handling of time  imprecision and uncertainty are required. the language is provided with a natural possibilistic semantics to account for the uncertainty issued by the fuzziness of temporal constraints. we also present an inference system based on specific rules dealing with the temporal constraints and a general fuzzy modus ponens rule whereby behaviour is shown to be sound. the analysis of the different choices as fuzzy operators leads us to identify the well-known lukasiewicz implication as very appropriate to define the notion of possibilistic entailment  an essential element of our inference system. 
1 	introduction 
representation and reasoning about time is a major issue to be considered in all those reasoning tasks which take account of a dynamic domain. most of ai systems incorporating an explicit temporal representation are based in some manner on constraint-reasoning techniques  allen  1; malik and binford  1; valdes-perez  1; vilain and kautz  1; dean and mcdermott  1; 
knight and jixin  1; porto and ribeiro  1; vila  1a  1. temporal constraints account for uncertainty in temporal knowledge up to a certain extent. both qualitative  allen  1; vilain and kautz  1; van beek  1  and metric temporal constraints  dechter et a/.  1  represent the set of  equally possible  precise temporal relations between two time units. the larger is 
   *this work has been partially supported by spanish mec grant fpi-pn1  by cicyt project arrel  tic1-c1  and by ec grant mum  copernicus 
1 . 
    presently at the university of california at irvine  information and computer science departement. 
1see  vila  1b  for a comparative survey. 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
this set  the higher is the degree of uncertainty about the temporal relation. 
   nonetheless  this is not enough for domains where knowledge about time is highly pervaded with vagueness and uncertainty. let's illustrate it with an example taken from a medical domain and supplied by an expert in the domain of lumbalgia pathologies. brucelosis is one infectious pathology which may be the origin of serious lumbalgia problems. it has an evolution pattern which can be regarded as a particular instance of the common infectious evolution pattern. it is usually composed of an inoculation event   an initial period  ip   a period of ondulating fever  ofp  and  finally  it reaches the state of an intervertebral affection  ia . we reproduce here the temporal aspects of this knowledge without abstracting the vagueness in terms of which it is obtained from experts. there is some  vague  knowledge about the temporal evolution of brucelosis cases: 
  the initial period usually starts at a time between one and three weeks after the inoculation event  although extreme cases range from starting at the very inoculation time up to four weeks after. 
  the initial period uses to be short: it lasts few days  although in unusual cases it may last up to two weeks at most. 
  the ondulating fever period always occurs after the initial period. it uses to last between 1 and 1 days though other less possible cases range from 1 days as the lowest bound up to 1 days the uppest one. 
  finally  the intervertebral affection usually starts between 1 and 1 days after the start of the ondulating fever period  having extreme cases where the intervertebral affection did not appear after 1 months. the intervertebral affection lasts more or less between 1 and 1 months. extreme cases may range from the shortest case of 1 days and longer periods up to 1 months in cases where it is not properly treated. 
모several pieces of work have considered the representation of approximate temporal knowledge. among them we would stress those based on possibility theory  vitek  1; dutta  1; dubois and prade  1; kohlas and monney  1; console et a/.  1; dubois et a/.  1; marin et a/.  1; barro et a/.  1; 

vila and godo  1 . in particular  barro et al  propose an straight forward redefinition of generalization of the notion of metric temporal constraint based on fuzzy sets  marin et al.  1 . 
모in this paper we propose an approximate temporal logic based on the embedding of fuzzy temporal constraints into a logical framework. it is provided with an inference system composed of specific inference rules for the fuzzy temporal constraints. for the sake of clarity  we have chosen a simple propositional language. dealing with fuzzy temporal constraints leads to many-valued interpretations of our formulas  but inference from fuzzy constraints also induces uncertainty as soon as they represent a kind of incomplete information. this induces to extending the whole language to handle both fuzziness and uncertainty. the natural framework where to model fuzziness and uncertainty in a unified way is the possibilistic framework. therefore this will be the model used througout this paper in accordance with using fuzzy sets for representing the temporal constraints. uncertainty will be taken into account in the extended language by attaching certainty  necessity-like  degrees to formulas. 
   the paper is organized as follows. in next section  we describe the syntax -which is illustrated by formalizing the example above introduced- and semantics of our basic language. in the third section an extended language and semantics to handle uncertainty is presented. in section 1 we present an inference system and prove its soundness. finally  we sketch future lines of work. 
1 	the basic temporal language 
we start out from a language where the temporal and the atemporal parts are neatly separated. the atemporal part is simply made over a set of classical crisp propositions. the temporal part is based on fuzzy temporal constraints over a set of temporal propositions. it consists of the introduction of a single predicate fuzzdlst which states a fuzzy temporal constraint between a pair of time points. whereas in the metric case  a temporal constraint is represented as an interval  now it is represented by a  convex  fuzzy set of time points  inducing a possibility distribution on the set of duration values . although this approach is very simple in definition  it is highly powerful in expressiveness. some important con-
straint based temporal representations  like point algebra  vilain and kautz  1   or the metric pointwise constraints  dechter et al  1  turn out to be a particular case of it. the link between the temporal propositions and the temporal constraints is performed through the duration-valued functions b e g i n   p   and e n d   p   that specify the initial and final instants of the period the proposition p holds throughout. 
   regarding the underlying time structure  and for the sake of simplicity  we take a fix interpretation of the set of duration symbols vu as the set of rational numbers q. accordingly  the set tvu of fuzzy durations will be taken as the set of fuzzy subsets of q  i.e. tvu = q'뫢'1  . however  nothing would prevent us to take other particular either discrete or dense group structures of time. 

   to illustrate the usage of our language in formalizing domain knowledge let's consider the example in the introductory section. figure 1 presents a graphical representation of it. events and properties being part of the temporal evolution description are taken as primitive temporal propositional variables. we shall approximate a soft constraint in fdu by a trapezoidal function characterized by four points 1. from a knowledge adquisition point of view the second and third point determine the interval of those temporal values which are likely whereas the first and fourth points determine the interval out of which the values are absolutely impossible. for example  both the inoculation event and the initial period state are conceptualized as temporal propositional variables and the first statement related to the temporal distance between the inoculation event and the begin of the initial period will be formalized as a fuzzy temporal constraint described by  1  1  1  1  where these values represent days. the heuristic rule formalizing the whole piece of knowledge would be as follows:  
     1 notice that this approximation is only feasible for unimodal fuzzy constraints. 
g1od and vila 1 

where m stands for month  xm can be taken as a short hand of the value x * 1 . 
1 	semantics 
the semantics of our propositional language c involves  for each model  first the assignment of intervals of time points to the temporal propositional variables  and second the interpretation in terms of truth-values of the formulas of the language. atemporal propositional variables can be directly assigned to either 1  true  or 1  false   while temporal constraints expressions are assigned truth-values of  1  via the fuzzy duration function they contain 1. as for compound formulas  we have chosen to interpret conjunction by the min function and implication by the godel's many-valued impli-
cation function  see definition 1 . the choice of min for 
   'without gain of complexity we could allow the atemporal propositions to be fuzzy as well and thus to have a more general language but  for the sake of clarity we prefer to only allow fuzziness in the temporal expressions  which is the focus of the paper. 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 


1 	t h e possibilistic t e m p o r a l language 
to fully exploit the use of fuzzy expressions for temporal durations in the language  it seems very natural to also allow for partial degrees of matching between fuzzy expressions. as a matter of example  consider the following piece of knowledge: the duration of the ondulating fever period of a patient has been between 1 and 1 weeks  but it is known that in any case it has been not less than 1 days and not more than 1. this knowledge can be represented by the proposition f u z z d i s t   b e g i n   o f p     e n d   o f p     1 t     being 
the trapezoidal possibility distribution corresponding to the parameters  1  1  1  1  and presented graphically in figure 1. 
모on the other hand  the example rule in section 1  codifying the brucelosis evolution pattern  has 
fuzzdlst begin off   e n d   o f p      1  1 1   	as 

one of conditions  being the membership function a of the fuzzy duration represented by the tuple  1  1  1  1  also shown in the figure 1. of course 붫   ua  and therefore f u z z d i s t   b e g i n   o f p     e n d   o f p     붫  does not entail f u z z d i s t   b e g i n   o f p     end ofp  /ia   in the sense of definition 1  but one would say that it nearly entails it. in such a context  if we want to use the above mentioned rule to conclude about the possibility for that patient of having brucelosis  it makes sense to think of a way to measure at what extent n is included in ua and use this measure as a certainty degree with which that condition of the rule is satisfied 
1
  . therefore  in reasoning with fuzzy constraints one is led to deal with partial degrees of certainty  mainly of propositions involving fuzzy duration constraints but also non-fuzzy propositions. on the other hand  many ai domains  being the medical one a good example  require the management of uncertainty from a knowledge representation language. possibility theory  dubois and prade  1  offers a unified framework where to model both uncertainty and fuzziness. we would like to stress here again that the kind of uncertainty the possibilistic model deals with comes from the use of imprecise knowledge modelled by a fuzzy set  and differs from other kinds of uncertainty  like probability  which are of different nature. we present below an extension of the language decribed in the previous section where lower bounds of a necessity-like degree are attached to formulas  with a semantics based on ideas in  dubois and prade  1; 1  and extending the dubois  lang and prade's possibilistic logic semantics  dubois et a/.  1  for crisp propositions. 
모let us make more precise the above claim. temporal constraint inference rules provide the tightest constraints between durations of events entailed by a given set of temporal facts. such constraints can be used as inputs in heuristic rules that may help in turn to obtain additional temporal facts. therefore  when trying to apply heuristic rules  we are interested in certainty qualifying the conditions of such rules given for granted the constraints provided by the temporal facts. next subsection is devoted to discuss how such certainty evaluation can be performed. 
1
모모 such certainty degrees should not be confused with the truth degrees arising from the many-valued approach introduced in the previous section to evaluate fuzzy temporal expressions. there  l-models evaluate the truth degree of formulas in a purely functional way. this is not the case with the certainty degrees we propose in the possibilistic temporal extension. 
	godo and vila 	1 

1 	c e r t a i n t y e v a l u a t i o n o f f u z z y c o n s t r a i n t s 
in technical terms  for a given duration variable x on du  we aim at finding the certainty evaluation of a fuzzy proposition xisa  the condition of a rule   being a a fuzzy subset of du  knowing that the values of x are restricted by a possibility distribution  the constraint induced by the temporal fact base . dubois and prade  have discussed this issue and they propose to use the following measure: 
- 1 iff 
of a based on tt and used in possibilistic logic . in fact  dubois and prade  1  discuss the inverse problem  that is  which possibility distribution corresponds to the semantical interpretation of the qualified proposition   xisa  is a - certain   and to which evaluation of a is identified. this is also of much interest since it will allow us to use uncertain constraints derived from a set of heuristic rules as inputs in the temporal fact base. an interesting line of argumentation leads them to represent the above qualified proposition by the following family of inequalities 

which  as expected  turns to be equivalent to 

however  the certainty degree  provides not very natural results in very common situations. in particular  the existence of only one element u in the domain for which n u  - 1 and  causes the certainty degree . to be 1  independently whether the value is close to 1 or close to 1. for instance  this is the case depicted in figure 1 where an easy computation shows that  while 뷇 is very close to entail a. 
모this counter-intuitive behaviour has led us to look for an alternative definition of the certainty degree. if one wants to keep the property that  = 1 iff tt   na  one is forced to stay either with residuated many-valued implications 1 or with their reciprocals. residuated implications  in general  share the problem that the resulting certainty degree does not collapse to the necessity degree in the non-fuzzy case  actually it becomes a trivial {1}-valued measure   and thus the resulting semantics is not an extension of that of possibilistic logic. on the 
1
tions in  1  defined as where  stands for a t-norm  i.e. a a binary operation in  1  which is associative  commutative  non-decreasing in each variable  with 1 as neutral element and 1 as absorbent element. 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
other hand  the reciprocal implications  in general again  share the above mentioned problem of the godel's reciprocal implication. however  among these two families of implication functions  there is one exception  up to isomorphisms   the well-known lukasiewicz implication 

that avoids the above problems. namely  defining 

we keep most of the interesting properties of the previous definition while solving the main problem with it. now the interpretation of 	least  certain  as ~ 
this representation can be provided with practically the same argumentation used in  dubois and prade  1  to justify their proposal  only a slight modification in one step is needed. the agreement of this proposal with the original one in the non-fuzzy case is easy to establish by noticing that i when 
a is non-fuzzy. 
1 	p o s s i b i l i s t i c s e m a n t i c s 
now  we are prepared to define our possibilistic temporal language and show that captures the above require-
ments. 
definition 1 	the set of possibilistic temporal formulas 

definition 1 a possibilistic t e m p o r a l m o d e l ii is a possibility distribution over the set q of c-models  ii : 

definition 1  possibilistic e n t a i l m e n t   a possibilistic temporal model   with a certainty 
degree 
with its corredefined 
as  the notion of logical consequence is the natural one  i.e. a possibilistic temporal formula g is a logical consequence of a set of possibilistic temporal formulas f 1  ... f n   iff for any possibilistic model imply 
모the possibilistic entailment  =1- in 뫩1- is related to the entailment relation  = of the basic language c  without uncertainty  as follows. 
for-
iff 
     1 these possibilistic models differ from those of possibilistic logic in that the possibility distributions are defined on  1  l -valued  -models  rather than on {1  l}-valued lmodels. 

모this proposition shows that the possibilistic entailment  =r actually extends  = in a natural way  as it could be expected. in particular  the set of inference rules for fuzzy constraints presented in section 1 are then also sound w.r.t. for  =t once the fuzzy temporal constraints appearing in those rules are attached the certainty value 1. 
a possibilistic temporal knowledge base is a pair kb = 
 fb  hb  of a set of weighted facts tb and a set of weighted rules rb. the temporal fact base will be represented as a network of fuzzy temporal constraints. 
1 	inference 
in this section we supply the set of inference rules which compose the deductive system of our logic. the separation between the non-temporal and the temporal part also holds for them: we distinguish between rules specific for temporal propositions and rules applied to arbitrary well-formed forms in the kb. 
모since temporal inference rules deal exclusively with temporal constraints which certainty degree is 1  for the sake of completeness  additional inference rules are needed to state the degree of fulfillment for a temporal proposition and viceversa. 
fuzzy constraint inference rules. as already mentioned  the reflexivity  universal constraint  symmetry  transitivity  intersection and inclusion inference rules  with the certainty value  1  attached to premises and conclusions  are sound rules w.r.t. to the possibilistic semantics  and they capture constraint network pro-
cedures. 
constraint certainty inference rules. the following inference rules show how uncertainty influences fuzzy temporal constraints  and thus how they provide a kind of bridge between knowledge from the temporal constraint network and knowledge from a heuristic rule set. in other words they provide a way to infer certain fuzzy constraints from uncertain ones  and viceversa. 

모taking back the example of the beginning of section 1 and applying the rl inference rule  from 
f u z z d i s t   b e g i n   o f p     e n d   o f p      1  1  1    with certainty 1  we can derive the fuzzy constraint fuzzdlst begin ofp   end ofp    1  1  1  1    with certainty e a뷇  = 1  see figure 1 . this certainty value could be used after to conclude brucelosis from the rule when applying the modus ponens inference rule introduced below. 

1 	c o n c l u d i n g r e m a r k s 
we have presented a propositional temporal language based on fuzzy temporal constraints  and able to deal also with uncertainty within the possibilistic framework. although this is a very restricted language  it turns out to be expressive enough for a large set of applications in the medical domain and  eventually  in other domains where knowledge is of propositional nature  yet explicit account of temporallity and uncertainty are required. this language is provided with: 
1. a formal semantics based on possibilistic models to account for the uncertainty issued by the fuzziness of our temporal constraints. 
1. a sound inference system composed of a set of fuzzy temporal constraint inference rules  a possibilistic modus ponens and a pair of constraint certainty inference rules. an overall picture of the way this inference system can operate is graphically presented in figure 1. 
	godo and vila 	1 


figure 1: steps of the uncertain fuzzy temporal inference: 1. fuzzy temporal constraint inference  1. constraint certainty evaluation  rl   1. possibilistic modus ponens  and 1. constraint certainty update  r1 . 
we are currently studying the completeness of our logic. previous results on the non-fuzzy case  vila and escalada-imaz  1  seem to be a guarantee on the way to proving it. we are also working in developing correct and efficient deductive algorithms to make our language operational. 
   the approach we have presented here allows for further work on two main lines. first the extension to firstorder horn clauses  incorporating relations on the fuzzy duration functions  and second  to involve more general types of constraint networks which will be a matter of 
study for fuzzy networks as well. 
