 
we discuss the persistence of the indirect effects of an action-the question when such effects are subject to the commonsense law of inertia  and how to describe their evolution in the cases when inertia does not apply. our model of nonpersistent effects involves the assumption that the value of the fluent in question is determined by the values of other fluents  although the dependency may be partially or completely unknown. this view leads us to a new highlevel action language ard  for actions  ramifications and dependencies  that is capable of describing both persistent and nonpersistent effects. unlike the action languages introduced in the past  ard is  non-markovian   in the sense that the evolution of the fluents described in this language may depend on their history  and not only on their current values. 
1 	i n t r o d u c t i o n 
this paper is about the ramification problem in the theory of commonsense reasoning  that is  about the problem of determining the indirect effects of an action. more specifically  we are interested in what myers and smith  called the persistence of derived information-in deciding whether the indirect effects of an action should be presumed to persist  or  in other words  whether they are subject to the commonsense law of inertia. compare two examples: 
¡¡example 1  crawford  1 . if you are in the lake then you are wet. jumping in the lake has an indirect effect-getting wet. 
¡¡example 1  myers and smith  1 . if an object is on the table then it is not dangerous for the baby crawling on the floor. putting an object on the table has an indirect effect-making it safe. 
¡¡the examples look similar. consider  however  what happens in each case if the action under consideration is followed by an action with the opposite effect. after you get out of the lake  you are still wet; this conclusion can be justified by the commonsense law of inertia. after an object is removed from the table  there is no guarantee 
1 	temporal reasoning 
	v l a d i m i r 	l i f s c h i t z 
department of computer sciences 
university of texas  austin  tx 1  usa 
email: vl cs.utexas.edu 
that it is still safe from baby. moreover  if we know that originally the object was not safe  and that now it is returned to the old location  then common sense tells us that it is definitely not safe. somehow  the law of inertia does not apply. 
¡¡the ramifications similar to example 1 are by now well understood. formal accounts of this case of the ramification problem  in various contexts  were given in 
 ginsberg and smith  1    winslett  1    baker and ginsberg  1    baker  1    lifschitz  1    lin and 
shoham  1    kartha and lifschitz  1 . in the more difficult case of  noninertial ramifications   illustrated by example 1  little progress has been made. myers and smith  identified the problem  gave a few instructive examples and sketched an approach based on default logic. but their paper does not contain an actual formalization of any of the examples. 
¡¡in section 1  we present a new informal analysis of noninertial ramifications. this discussion leads us  in section 1  to a high-level syntax  similar to the one used in  gelfond and lifschitz  1  and  kartha and lifschitz  1   that distinguishes between the two kinds of ramifications  and then  in section 1  to an action language that allows us to formalize both example 1 and example 1. the new language extends the action language ar from  giunchiglia et a/.  1  and is called ard-for actions  ramifications and dependencies. the properties of ard are investigated in section 1. 
1 	dependencies 
there is nothing peculiar about the fact that some fluents are  inertial  and others are not. for example  the law of inertia is often restricted to  primitive fluents  and is not applied to their propositional combinations in  myers and smith  1  and  baker  1 . several examples when fluents change  by themselves  are given in  lifschitz and rabinov  1 . in  lifschitz  1   a subset of fluents is designated as a  frame   and a fluent is assumed to be inertial only if it belongs to the frame. 
¡¡but if we simply declare the fluent safe x  noninertial  then any action will be able to affect its value  even the trivial action wait. common sense tells us that this fluent can be affected by an action if that action affects the location of x  but not otherwise. 
¡¡it appears that safe x  is similar in its behavior to the noninertial fluents that have an explicit definition in terms of the location of x  except that we do not know what this definition is. if the top of the table is one of n possible locations of x then we are free to assume about any of the other n - 1 locations that  being there  x would or would not be safe. there are 1n-1 possible  functional dependencies  between safe x  and location x   and we seem to implicitly assume that one of them holds  without specifying which one. 
¡¡in connection with a similar example  crawford  writes: 
if we want derived consequences not to persist then we probably have to rethink our approach to developing semantics. the problem is that the persistence of fluents now seems to depend on their history-how they came to have the value they now have. as far as i know no current approaches allow this. 
indeed  traditional approaches to the semantics of actions have a  markov property  1 which can be informally described as follows: if the current values of all fluents mentioned in the problem are completely specified then no additional information about the values of these fluents in the past will allow us to make additional predictions about their future values.  this concept will be made precise in section 1.  in example 1  assume that all objects under consideration are currently on the table  and consequently safe. then we know the current values of all fluents location  x  and safe x . there is no way to decide on the basis of this information whether heavy hammer will be safe after we put it on the floor. but if we assume  in addition  that at some point in the past heavyhammer was on the floor and was not safe  then we can predict that the fluent safe heavyhammer  is going to change its value. we see that a formalism with the markov property would not allow us to represent the safe example. 
¡¡the idea of a  possibly unknown  dependency outlined above seems promising because it can give rise to  non-markovian  formalisms. from this perspective  the state vector of an action domain includes both  explicit  components-the values of the fluents available in the language-and an  implicit  part  the dependencies that characterize the dependent fluents. this implicit part of the state vector does not change as the actions are performed  but it can affect the values of the transition function of the system. additional information about the past can be used to learn the values of the implicit components  and consequently to arrive at new predictions. 
1 	formalization of the examples 
example 1 can be easily represented in the language ar 
 giunchiglia et a/.  1   or even in its dialect aro from  kartha and lifschitz  1 . an aro language is characterized by a set of  action names   such as jumpln and jumpout  and a set of  fluent names   such as inlake 
:
¡¡¡¡this terminology is suggested by a vague analogy with markov chains in the theory of probability. 
jumpln 

figure 1: the transition diagram for example 1. 
and wet. some fluent names are designated as  inertia!   or forming a  frame  ; in this example  both inlake and wet are inertial. 
¡¡the condition if you are in the lake then you are wet and the effects of the actions can be represented by the following  domain description : 
always inlake  wet  jumpln causes inlake   1  
	jumpout 	causes  inlake. 
the first line of  1  is a  constraint ; the other two lines are  effect propositions.  
¡¡according to the semantics of  description  1  represents a certain transition system. the input symbols of the system are the action names jumpln and jumpout. the states of the system are the valuations- functions from fluent names to truth values-that satisfy the formula inlake  wet. if we agree to represent a valuation by the set of fluents to which it assigns the value true then the set of states can be written as 
	.  	 1  
the transition diagram of this system is depicted in figure 1. 
¡¡besides constraints and effect propositions  aro has also  value propositions  that represent conditions on the values of fluents in specific situations  such as 
	inlake 	a 	wet 	after 	jumpln  	 1  
	- inlake a 	wet after jumpln; jumpout. 
for instance  the second value proposition expresses that performing the sequence of actions jumpln; jumpout in the initial state will bring the system to a state which satisfies - inlake a wet. both value propositions shown above are  entailed1 by domain description  1 . 
¡¡in order to formalize example 1  the language ar1 needs to be extended. we will introduce  besides inertial fluent names  a second special category   dependent  fluent names. thus  in the extended language  a fluent name can be designated as inertial or dependent  but not both. the language aro corresponds to the special case when there are no dependent fluent names. 
¡¡for simplicity  we drop the argument in safe x  and consider only two locations-the top of the table and the rest of the world. the action names are putontable and removefromtable. the fluent names are ontable and safe; ontable is inertial and safe is dependent. the domain description consists of the following propositions: 
safe depends on ontable  
	always 	ontable  safe  	 1  
putontable causes ontable  removefromtable causes -ontable. 
	giunchiglia and lifschitz 	1 


figure 1: the transition diagram for example 1. 
the first line of  1  is a proposition of a new kind  a 
 dependency proposition. 1 the fact that the domain description includes this proposition and no other dependency propositions beginning with safe tells us that the value of this fluent in any situation is determined by the value of the fluent ontable. this assumption is nonmonotonic  in the sense that it can be defeated by adding other dependency propositions to  1 . 
	in the extended language  a  state  is a pair. 	its 
 explicit  component is what is considered a state in aro-a- valuation that satisfies the constraints of the given domain description. the  implicit  component  is a  dependency   i.e. a set of valuations which are considered to be possible. for instance  the valuations that satisfy ontable 
according to the semantics of the extended language described below  two dependencies can be used in this case as the implicit components of states. the dependency {v1 v1} represents the case of a doll  which is safe no matter where it is located. the dependency {v1  v1 } represents a hammer  which is safe only when it is on the table. we will see that domain description  1  has the following states: 
		 1  
   the difference between 1 and 1 is the difference between a doll and a hammer that are out of reach of the baby. the explicit components of these states are the same  but their dependencies are different. 
¡¡the transition diagram of this system is depicted in figure 1. note that the system is deterministic; executing any action in any state leads to a uniquely determined state. however  the values of the fluents ontable 
1
¡¡¡¡dependency propositions are somewhat similar to the formulas inessential p q  used in  myers and smith  1 . the authors' intention was to express  that fluent q is inessential in any justification of fluent p.  
1 	temporal reasoning 
and safe do not determine the state uniquely  and consequently do not predetermine the values of the fluents in the next state. 
1 t h e a c t i o n l a n g u a g e ard 
in this section  we assume that the reader is familiar with the description of the language aro in  kartha and lifschitz  1 . about the language ar  giunchiglia et ai  1  it suffices to know that it differs from ar1 in two ways. first  fluents in ar do not have to be propositional; their values can come from any domains. second   release  propositions are replaced in ar by  indeterminate effect propositions  whose syntax is similar  but the semantics is somewhat different and is better suited for the task of formalizing nondeterministic actions. 
1 	s y n t a x 
an ard language is characterized by 
  a nonempty set of symbols  that are called fluent names  
  a function  associating with every fluent name f a nonempty set domf of symbols  that is called the domain of f  
  two disjoint subsets of fluent names; the elements of one are called inertial  and the elements of the other dependent  
  a nonempty set of symbols  that are called action names. 
an independent fluent name is any fluent name that is not dependent; in particular  all inertial fluent names are independent. 
an atomic formula is an expression of the form 
 f is v  
where f is a fluent name and v e domf- a formula is a propositional combination of atomic formulas. 
¡¡there are five types of propositions in ard-value propositions  constraints  determinate and indeterminate effect propositions  and dependency propositions. a value proposition is an expression of the form 
	c after a 	 1  
where c is a formula  and a is a string of action names. a constraint is an expression of the form 
	always c 	 1  
where c is a formula. a determinate effect proposition is an expression of the form 
	a causes c if p 	 1  
where a is an action  and c and p are formulas. an indeterminate effect proposition is an expression of the form 
               a possibly changes f if p  1  where a is an action name  f an inertial fluent name  and p a formula. finally  a dependency proposition is an expression of form 
	f depends on f' if p 	 1  

where f is a dependent fluent name  f' any fluent name  and p a formula. 
a domain description is a set of propositions. 
¡¡the following abbreviations will be used. in formulas  some parentheses will be omitted  as customary in propositional logic. if a in a value proposition  1  is empty  we will write this proposition as 
initially c. 
otherwise  the members of a will be separated by semicolons. in effect propositions  1    1  and in dependency propositions  1   the part if p will be dropped if p is the propositional formula true. a fluent f is propositional if domf - {false  true}; for a propositional fluent f  we will abbreviate the atomic formula 
f is true 
by f. 
¡¡with these notational conventions   1  and  1  become domain descriptions in the language ard. the following enhanced formalization of example 1 illustrates the use of nonpropositional fluents. let l1 ...  ln  n   1  be distinct symbols. replace the propositional fluent 
ontable in the language of  1  by the fluent location  whose domain is { l 1   . . .   l n } ; ontable will be treated as an alternative notation for l1. the new domain description is 
safe depends on location  always  location is ontable  	safe  
putontable causes  location is ontable   remove from table causes -  location is ontable . 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ h  if n = 1 then  1  is essentially the same as  1 . 
¡¡here is a further enhancement  illustrating the use of p in dependency propositions  1 . we would like to express that the closet is a safe location if its door is closed. specifically  if the object is in the closet  then its safety depends on whether or not the door is closed; if 
it is then the object is definitely safe. this can be done by extending  1  as follows. we add to the language the inertial propositional fluent name doorclosed and the action names closedoor  opendoor. the following propositions are added to  1 : 
safe depends on doorclosed if  location is incloset   always  location is incloset  a doorclosed   safe  
closedoor causes doorclosed  
opendoor causes -doorclosed 
 incloset stands for l1 - in this new domain description  safe depends on location and doorclosed if the object is in the closet  and only on location otherwise. opening the door may affect the safety of the object only if it is in the closet. 
1 	semantics: dependencies and states 
a valuation is a function v defined on the set of fluent names such that  for every fluent name f  v f  € domfany valuation v can be extended to atomic formulas as follows: 
	giunchiglia and lifschitz 	1 

                                                    1  the first of them is entailed by domain description  1   but the second is not. if we add the  initial condition  initially -ontable a safe  1  to  1  then the extended domain description will entail both propositions in  1 . 
1 	some properties of ard 
it is not difficult to verify that  in the absence of dependent fluents  the semantics of ard is equivalent to the semantics of ar. in this case  the set of all states in the sense of ar  is the only maximal coherent dependency. 
several properties of ar1 established in  kartha and 
lifschitz  1  can be proved for ard as well. clearly  adding a value proposition to a domain description can only make the set of its models smaller  and hence the set of value propositions entailed by it bigger  a  restricted monotonicity property  in the sense of  lifschitz  1  . any formula can be replaced by an equivalent formula without changing the set of models  and explicitly defined fluent names can be eliminated. 
¡¡a constant in a domain description d is a dependent fluent f such that no dependency proposition in d begins with f. in any model of d  the value of a constant after executing any sequence of actions is the same as in the initial situation. 
1 temporar reasioning 
acknowledgements 
we are grateful to michael gelfond  matthew ginsberg  neelakantan kartha  norman mccain  david smith and hudson turner for useful discussions related to the subject of this paper. this work was partially supported by national science foundation under grant iri-1. 
