 
the ai lab at chicago has begun development of a new set of software agents designed to manage the flood of data colloquially called the  information superhighway . our approach takes its lead from case-based technology  riesbeck and schank  1; hammond  1; kolodner  1  in that we are building systems that emphasize the use of examples over explicit queries or questions for communicating with the user. 
1 	introduction 
one of the important prospects for the national information infrastructure  gore  1  is the wide-spread availability of on-line data and information services on a large scale. however  existing means of information access will not scale up to a network of this size. we believe that access to appropriate information  contacting the right source at the right time  is the most significant obstacle to making a large-scale information infrastructure work. we have been examining two kinds of systems aimed at this problem: preference browsers  called find me systems  that help users navigate through information spaces and either find or construct responses to fit their needs and information retrieval engines  called faq finder systems  that use a natural language question-based interface to distributed information sources  specifically files organized as question/answer pairs such as faq files. 
　two features distinguish these systems. the first is that they are derived from the case-based ideas of using retrieve and adapt as the core problem solving model. the second is that they use existing archives and databases as resources to be  mined  on demand rather than 
　　*this work was supported in part by the office of naval research under contract n1-k-1 
as fodder for batch processors that learn new concepts or construct new knowledge bases independently of a user. this too draws from the case-based philosophy of waiting until a problem arises to solve it. in this video  we will demonstrate both find me and faq finder and examine how the techniques of case-based reasoning transfer over to the task of information retrieval. 
1 	find me systems 
one important class of information access problem is prrference-based browsing  moving around in an information space  guided by a user's personal preferences. tasks of this type include shopping for consumer items  selecting videos or television shows  and selecting personnel out  of a large pool of candidates. it is usually not possible for a user to articulate all of the factors that might contribute to a decision in such a domain. this makes these domains poor candidates for standard feature-based database search  which requires that users create a query that encodes the desired properties they seek. however  it is much easier for a user to respond to an example if given one. in making personnel decisions  it is easier to evaluate an example  to say   this person would be ok  but i'd prefer someone more experienced   than it is to decide what kind of specific query would get the desired result. in effect  people cannot  say what they like.  but arc able to  know it when they see it.  
　we have designed an approach to this problem that allows users to see and respond to examples within different parts of the search space as a means of moving within it  hammond et a/.  1 . the choice of where to go next is dependent on users' evaluation of the example they are currently examining. a consumer might say 
 i like this car  but i really need more luggage space.  such feedback tells the system in what direction to push the search next. ideally  an interaction with a find me system would be like a conversation with a helpful clerk  
	hammond  burke  and lytinen 	1 

a conversation that is always mediated through reference to a particular object: the example currently under consideration. because these systems extract features from examples  they allow users to navigate through a space of of possibilities  finding what they want  without ever having to build explicit queries. retrieval depends instead  on a human/computer  conversation  about specific examples that the systems offer up to the user. 
1 	t h e c e n t r a l ideas 
one of the core ideas of the f i n d me systems is to develop user interfaces that are metaphorically linked to known artifacts. just as the macintosh environment makes use of the desk-top metaphor  we have constructed interfaces that are analogs to existing artifacts that aid search within a domain. 
　the second major insight that we bring to knowledge navigation is that we can use the differences between a presented example and a user's target to formulate a description of the target itself which is then used to access a knowledge base of further examples  an iterative process of exploring the space of examples. 
   finally  we have designed the overall find me notion with an eye to avoiding hierarchical search of a space. to assist the user's search  find me systems have active clerks that constantly view a user's current p