revealing collection structure through information access interfaces 
	marti a. hearst 	jan o. pedersen 
xerox palo alto research center 
1 coyote hill road palo alto  ca 1 
 1  1 
{hearst pedersen } parc.xerox.com 

   information access research at xerox parc focuses on amplifying the users' cognitive abilities  rather than trying to completely automate them. this framework emphasizes the participation of the user in a cycle of query formulation  presentation of results  followed by query reformulation  and so on. this framework is intended to help the user iteratively refine a vaguely understood information need. since the focus is on query repair  the information presented is typically not document descriptions  but rather intermediate information that indicates relationships between the query and the retrieved documents. we have developed information access tools intended to supply some of this functionality  and describe two of these here. 
¡¡as an illustration  suppose a user is interested in medical diagnosis software. assume that initially the user has available a large  unfamiliar information source. in our example  this source is the 1 gigabyte tipster text collection  harman  1 . because the collection is unfamiliar  the user will be unsure whether it contains relevant information  and if so  how to access it. 
   to address this situation  we have developed a browsing method  called scatter/gather  cutting et a/.  1; 1   that allows a user to rapidly assess the general contents of a very large collection by scanning through a dynamic  hierarchical representation that is motivated by a table-of-contents metaphor. initially the system automatically scatters  or clusters  the collection into a small number of document groups  and presents short summaries of the groups to the user. these summaries consist of two types of information: topical titles  titles of documents close to the cluster centroid  and typical terms  terms of importance in the cluster . based on these summaries  the user selects one or more of the groups for further study. the selected groups are gathered  or unioned  together to form a subcollection. the system then applies clustering again to scatter the new subcollection into a small number of document groups  which are again presented to the user. with each successive iteration the groups become smaller  and therefore more detailed. the user may  at any time  switch to a more focused search method. figure 1 shows a portion 

figure 1: a portion of a top-level view of the scatter/gather algorithm over the tipster corpus. 
of the top level clusters on the tipster collection. 
¡¡by browsing the collection in this manner  the user obtains an idea about the technical contents of the corpus  and can choose whether or not to further explore here or try another text collection. from the titles and terms retrieved  it becomes apparent that the collection contains commercially oriented discussions of technology  rather than predominantly academic ones. from this overview information  the user can conclude that this is indeed a promising collection for the user's information need. 
¡¡once a premising collection has been identified  the user can issue a search. in a typical information retrieval system  documents satifying the query are returned and are rank-ordered according to some function of the number of hits for each term  salton  1 . but this kind of ranking is opaque to the user; it is not clear how well each term is represented in the retrieved documents. 
	to 	address 	these 	issues  	the 	tiiebars 	interface 
 hearst  1  allows the user to make informed decisions 
	hearst and pederson 	1 


figure 1: the tilebar display on a query about automated systems for query diagnosis. 
about which documents and which passages of those documents to view  based on the distributional behavior of the query terms in the documents. the goal is to simultaneously and compactly indicate  i  the relative length of the document   ii  the frequency of the term sets in the document  and  iii  the distribution of the term sets with respect to the document and to each other. each document is partitioned in advance into a set of multiparagraph subtopical segments using an algorithm called texttiling  hearst  1 . 
   figure 1 shows an example run on a query about automated systems for medical diagnosis  run over the ziff portion of the tipster collection. each large rectangle indicates a document  and each square within the document represents a coherent text segment. the darker the segment  the more frequent the term  white indicates 1  black indicates 1 or more hits  the frequencies of all the terms within a term set are added together . the top row of each rectangle correspond to the hits for term set 1  the middle row to hits of term set 1  and the bottom row to hits of term set 1. the first column of each rectangle corresponds to the first segment of the document  the second column to the second segment  and so on. 
   the tilebars representation allows the user to sort the retrieved documents according to which aspects of the query are most important. for example  in the figure the query is formulated as:  patient or medicine or medical  a n d  test or scan or cure or diagnosis  a n d  software or program . this formulation allows the interface to indicate the role played by each conceptual part of the query: the medical terms  the diagnosis terms  and the software terms. in figure 1  the user has indicated that the diagnosis aspect of the query must 
1 videos 
be strongly present in the retrieved documents  by setting the minimum term distribution percentage to 1% for the second termset. the document whose title begins ''va automation means faster admissions  is quite likely to be relevant to the query  and has all three term sets well-distributed throughout. by contrast  the document whose title begins  it's hard to ghosibust a network ...  is about computer-aided diagnosis  but has only a passing reference to medical diagnosis  as can be seen by the graphical representation. if the user decides that medical terms should be better represented  the constraint on this term set can be adjusted accordingly. 
   note that a system that simply ranks the documents does not make these kinds of distinctions available to the user. the graphical representation allows the users to rapidly assess the structure of the retrieved documents with respect to the query  to better aid their decisions about which documents to view  or how to refine the query. 
