 
the human mind is capable of absorbing and processing large volumes of information. most of this processing  however  occurs at a precognitive level  the results of which serve to alert the cognitive mind to areas of potential interest. the multidimensional user-oriented synthetic environment  fluse is an open-ended software shell that provides a new approach to interacting with computer-based information. by using a real-time  device-independent software design and incorporating both cognitive and experiential models of human perception  fluse greatly enhances a person's ability to examine  interact with  and understand relationships in complex information space. a jluse shell may be wrapped around data  models  simulations or even complete programs. using a design  based on human functionality  it provides tools for the presentation  exploration  navigation  manipulation  and examination of information. users experience a highly interactive environment  capable of dynamically mapping information into visual  auditory or kinesthetic representations. 
1. i n t r o d u c t i o n 
　　richard hamming said  the purpose of computing is insight  not numbers.  today  as the information age moves forward  computers touch all aspects of our lives. far from achieving  insight   however  there is often a feeling that we are slowly sinking under the enormous volumes of data. helping people to explore  question  and understand complex information is an important criterion for future computational environments. highly interactive human-computer environments can allow practical solutions to some problems far more rapidly than either human or computer operating independently. 
　　while a computer excels at performing routine types of computations  it is relatively inefficient at subjective problems such as complex decision making. the mind  on the other-hand  is the most advanced device ever developed for information correlation  pattern recognition  and anomaly detection. all of our senses are superbly designed to collect  correlate  and analyze continuous streams of information; to discard irrelevant information at high speeds; and to make intuitive connections. 
　　in 1  sandia national laboratories began a project to develop a new approach for interacting with computerbased information. as a result of this effort  a highly interactive  software shell  }luse  multidimensional useroriented synthetic environment  has been developed. this shell permits users to create immersive  experiential environments to facilitate the flexible and humanistic exploration multivariate information. 
1. the human interface model 
　　user interaction with synthetic  immersive environments present an exciting and relatively uncharted area. enhancing precognitive visual perception requires attention to such factors as head-tracking  peripheral vision  shadow variation  and stereo vision. the auditory sense can be used both as an independent information channel and to enhance other channels. data sonification can be used to provide auditory queues or baselines against which other occurrences can be compared  e.g.  the ticking of a clock vs. the movement of data or objects . if utilized appropriately  and unobtrusively   auditory information representations can be monitored at a precognitive level  leaving the cognitive mind free to independently examine other information. one important concern  however  is achieving balance and not overloading any single sensory channel. 
     in concert with the idea of a humanistically organized software environment  five areas of human-computer interaction have been defined and investigated. they are exploration  navigation  presentation  interaction  and 
examination. these five areas serve to define a functional arena for interactive environments and provide the foundation for device and model independent tools. 
1 exploration 
　　this domain involves techniques for moving within and between various models and representations of information. to facilitate this modality  fluse creates a virtual craft. 
this craft can be characterized as a private  extended office that travels with the viewer through the environment. 'ihe visual representation of the craft provides the user with a personal frame-of-reference within the information space. the craft functionality  e.g.  hovercraft  plane  tethercraft  provides the means to explore spatial  temporal  and other dimensions within the information space. ♀luse also recognizes time as a potentially independent dimension of exploration. in data where time is a parameter  the system permits the user to control both the speed and direction of time flow. another means of exploration is by teleportation. 
	maples and peterson 	1 
instantaneous teleportation between marked spatial  temporal and n-dimensional locations is provided. 
1 navigation 
　　these methods assist users in maintaining both location and reference  e.g.  to keep from becoming lost . one such tool is the navigational map that is displayed on the side wall of the craft. this 'you-are-here' map automatically shows the position of every defined object in the space as well as the location and orientation of the craft. since this map is maintained in real-time  it captures the location and motion of both object and craft positions. n-dimensional markers provide another navigational tool. markers are stored as n-dimensional reference points. users may use any portion of a marker's descriptor as a reference information for teleportation. in addition  doorways or portals provide a way of moving between different information spaces. 
1 presentation 
　　presentation refers to ways of representing complex information. these include both visual and auditory representations  as well as tactile  force-feedback and kinesthetic techniques. within the virtual craft  users may invoke cockpit displays  which allow a virtual transparent bubble around the craft to be used for translucent displays of information. such displays are controlled dynamically and travel with the craft. cockpit displays permit the user to expand the dimensionality of the space by adding additional  nonobtrusive  information displays. since they can be peripherally located in close virtual proximity to the user  the detail and/or perspectives can be controlled by simply moving the head or body  e.g.  leaning closer or turning . 
1 interaction 
　　interaction relates to command and control structures that permit users to communicate  and directly interact  with both the system and application program  e.g.  to select options and interact with the environment . to facilitate parallel human operations and minimize distracting elements  a humanistically efficient interactive environment should permit the mapping of operations to different areas of the human senses. this permits sub-cognitive input to be maximized and sensory conflict to be minimized. 
　　in 1-d environments reading can conflict with spatial concentration. synthetic speech generation  however  can be used to transform most written or textual information into conversational speech. the auditory and visual channels operate quite harmoniously in parallel  and listening to status or information doesn't normally create visual conflicts. analogously  the act of requesting status or controlling state functions  e.g.  turning things on and off  is often more efficiently performed by voice command rather than by locating buttons  either physically or virtually . 
1 examination 
　　this domain includes capabilities that permit the transformation  correlation  and overlay of information. it typically is the most cognitive of the five functional areas. examination frequently involves asking questions relating to an information base. one way of posing such questions is by means of the virtual  on-board computer. 
　　mathematical transformation is often used to examine and compress information  particularly when it varies over large dynamic ranges  e.g.  semi-log  log or polar plots . this capability also exists in the jluse environment  but techniques have been conceptually and mathematically extended to encompass more types of information and to include non-visual representations. for example  non-linear scaling can be used to require all objects of information are visible  regardless of size or distance. similarly control of viewer and craft size permits either macroscopic overviews or microscopic examinations  note that such changes may require corresponding adjustments to the interpupilary distance . 
1 . s h a r e d 	e n v i r o n m e n t s 
　　permitting multiple people to both independently and simultaneously explore the same synthetic environment is a unique aspect of immersive technology. the shared memory architecture of jluse is designed to enable and extend this capability. the architecture is based on a distributed  asynchronous communication model. the design supports heterogeneous operation at each site and minimizes the network synchronization and update traffic. the system not only supports multiple users  but permits each to maintain a 
　　personalized or private 'cockpit' within the shared space. the cockpits' information displays are individually configured and not accessible by others in the environment. 
1 . 	c o n c l u s i o n s 
fluse has been developed and tested over the past three 
years and has been very successfully applied to a wide variety of applications  e.g.  cad models  explosive welding simulations  medical data  seismic information  finite element analysis  circuit simulation  structural analysis  kinematic evaluation  topological data  and has been wrapped around complete programs. the system currently supports flat screen  stereo  and vr operation  with full head-tracking   voice recognition  sound synthesis  data sonification  and various commercial interactive devices. the fact that all jluse applications run on any configuration or subset of these hardware devices  down to a monitor  keyboard and mouse  illustrates the hardware independence of the design. 
　　the humanistic basis of the software design has proven enormously effective  both in enabling people to interact with computer-based information and in speeding up the analysis and decision making process. one of the greatest surprises in applying fuuse to different applications has been the frequency with which it permitted people to discover important aspects of their own applications of which they were previously unaware. 
l fiuse  pronounced 'muse'  is trademarked; patents are pending. 
1
work performed at sandia national laboratories is supported by the u.s. department of energy under contract 

de-ac1al1 
1 	videos 
