. 
any belief function can be decomposed into a confidence and a diffidence components. each components is uniquely decomposable into simple support functions that represent the impact of the simplest form of evidence  the one that only partially supports a given subset of the frame of discernment. the nature of the inverse of dempster's rule of combination is detailed. the confidence component translates the impact of 'good reasons to believe'. it is the component classically considered when constructing a belief. the diffidence component translates the impact of 'good reasons not to believe'. 
keywords: uncertainty  belief functions  simple support functions  dempster's rule of combination and decombination. 
1. introduction. 
in this paper  we take it for granted that the transferable belief model  tbm  is appropriate to represent quantified beliefs. hence beliefs are quantified by belief functions and belief functions are combined by the unnormalized dempster's rule of combination  denoted the  c -combination  when the sources of evidence that induce them are distinct  smets  1  smets and kennes  1 . 
   in section 1  we study a canonical decomposition of a belief function into elementary and distinct components such that their  c -combination restores the original belief function. in section 1 and 1  we analyze dempster's rule of combination and define the decombination process. in section 1  we discuss the meaning of these elementary components. we present the concepts of 'absorbing belief state'  of 'debt of belief  of 'latent belief structure'  and of confidence and diffidence components of a belief state. in section 1 we present a mathematical generalization of this decomposition. in section 1 we compare our canonical decomposition with shafer's original proposal. in section 1  we solve the decomposition problem for the dogmatic belief state. 
   note: in the tbm  belief functions are unnormalized. it means that we do not require m 1  = 1 and bel is defined 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 


	smets 	1 


1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
 this reduction remembers the positive introspection described in epistemic logic . the same holds for evidence 1. 
   with evidence 1  you believe at level 1 what the source says and the source says  do not believe {a} . the reduction 
cannot be achieved as in the previous cases as one has  you believe at 1 that you should not believe {a} . it only means that if you had some belief in {a}  you should delete it. it is exactly what is achieved by the 1{a}  1 . you had a belief 1 given to {a} and it is removed. so the issf {a} 1 / 1 
corresponds to  the support given to the fact that you should not believe the focal element {a} . you have  some good reason not to believe something   where the strength of good reason is equal to the belief / reliability / support you gave to the source. 
   example 1: the pravda bias. you are in 1  away from home  and read in a copy of an article published in a journal that the economic situation in ukalvia is good. you do not know which journal the paper was copied from and you never heard about ukalvia. so you had no a priori whatsoever about the economic status in ukalvia  and now after having read the document  you might have some reasons to believe that the economic status is good. the 'some reasons1 reflects the strength of the trust you put in the information published in a journal. then a friend in which you have full confidence mention to you that ukalvia is a region of the ussr and that the document was published in the pravda. by experience  you have some reasons not to believe what the pravda says when it describes the good economic status of ukalvia; it might just be propaganda. 
   the reasons to believe  called the confidence  that the economic status in ukalvia is good result from the information presented in the initial document and your general belief about journal information. the reasons not to believe it  called the diffidence  result from what you know about the pravda. if both 'reasons' counter-balance each other  you end up in a state of total ignorance about the 
economic status in ukalvia. 
   it might be that the confidence component is stronger than the diffidence component. then you will end up with a slight belief that the economic status in ukalvia is good  but 
the belief is not as strong as if you had not heard that the 
journal was the pravda and ukalvia was in ussr . 
   if the diffidence component is stronger than the confidence component  then you are still in a state of 'debt of belief  in the sense that you will need further confidence component  some extra information that support that the economic status in ukalvia is good  in order to balance the remaining diffidence component. in such a case  if you are asked to express your opinion about the economic status in ukalvia  you might express it under the form: 'so far  i have no reason to believe that the economic status is good  and i need some extra reasons before i start to believe it'. 
1. latent beliefs. 
a way to represent belief states where both confidence and diffidence are involved consists in creating a structure of 'latent' beliefs and a structure of 'apparent' beliefs. a latent belief structure is represented by a pair of belief functions  x  y  where x.ye b and b is the set of belief functions over ¦¸. x and y are respectively quantifying the confidence and the diffidence component of the latent belief structure. let 
	smets 	1 

1 	reasoning under uncertainty 

pal n.  bezdek j. and hemasinha r.  1  uncertainty measures for evidential reasoning i: a review. int. j. approx. reas. 1-1. 
shafer g.  1  a mathematical theory of evidence. 
princeton univ. press. princeton  nj. 
shenoy p.  1  conditional independence in valuationbased systems. int. j. approx. reasoning 1-1. 
smets ph.  1  the combination of evidence in the transferable belief model. ieee-pattern analysis and machine intelligence  1-1. 
smets ph. and kennes r.  1  the transferable belief model. artificial intelligence 1-1. 
1. conclusions. 
thanks to our canonical decomposition  we can represent a complex belief state as the result of the combination of elementary and distinct states of belief. each elementary belief state is represented by a ssf. each ssf represents either 'good reasons to believe' or 'good reasons not to believe' a given event or proposition. each ssf can be seen as a weighted proposition and a state of belief is represented by a set of independently weighted propositions. it means we have built a weighted propositions  logic where user can write propositions and give weights independently to each of them. the result will be a complex state of belief  which latent belief structure is well defined. 
acknowledgments. 
the author is indebted to milan daniel for useful discussions. 
research work has been partly supported by the action de recherches concert1es belon funded by a grant from the 
communaute  franchise de belgique and the esprit iii  basic research action 1  drums ii  funded by a grant from the commission of the european communities. 
bibliography. 
dempster a.p.  1  upper and lower probabilities induced by a multiplevalued mapping. ann. math. statistics 1: 1. 
kennes r.  1  computational aspects of the m1bius transform of a graph. ieee-smc  1: 1. 
	smets 	1 
