 
a dempster-shafer belief structure provides a mechanism for representing uncertain knowledge about a variable. a compatibility relation provides a structure for obtaining information about one variable based upon our knowledge about a second variable. an inference scheme in the theory of evidence involves the use of a belief structure on one variable  called the antecedent  and a compatibility relationship to infer a 
belief structure on the second variable  called the consequent. the concept of monotonicity in this situation is related to change in the specificity of the consequent belief structure as the antecedent belief structure becomes more specific. we show that the usual compatibility relations  type 1  are always monotonic. we introduce type ii compatibility relations and show that a special class of these  which we call irregular  are needed to represent nonmonotonic relations between variables. we discuss a special class of nonmonotonic relations called default relations. 
1. introduction 
　　in many reasoning environments we are required to represent our knowledge about a variable in a probabilistic manner. however it is often the case that our knowledge about the probability distribution of these random variables is not complete  we are not sure of the assignment of the probability weights to the individual outcomes of the variable. the mathematical theory of evidence  dempster  1; dempster  1; shafer  1; shafer  1; 
lowrance and garvey  1; gordon and shortliffe  1; smets  1; yager et al.  1  allows for the representation and manipulation of this nonspecific type of knowledge. a number of different semantics can be associated with this theory  dempster   shafer  and smets and kennes . while in this paper we shall favor the one introduced by dempster the basic ideas presented in this work are valid in the other interpretations. 
　　within this theory  a belief structure  a basic probability assignment function  bpa   provides a knowledge 
1 	reasoning under uncertainty 
scheme for representing our incomplete knowledge about the probability distribution of a variable. one manifestation of this situation is that our knowledge of the probabilities of these type of variables is usually an interval rather then a point  it lacks specificity. increased knowledge results in a narrowing of these intervals. a second concept which plays a central role in this theory is the idea of a compatibility relation. a compatibility relation provides information about the allowable solutions to one variable given information about a second variable. it is closely related to the concept of a rule in expert systems. 
　　the inference scheme in this theory involves the inputting of a belief structure on one of the variables  called the antecedent or primary variable into compatibility relation and to obtain a belief structure on the secondary variable. a compatibility relation is called monotonic if as we gain more information about the distribution of the primary variable we don't lose information about the secondary variable. the originally compatibility relations introduced by shafer only allowed the representation of monotonic relationships. in this work we propose a representation of compatibility relation to allow for the representation of nonmonotonic knowledge in the framework of the theory of evidence. 
1. 	dempster-shafer 	structure 	and information 
　　in this section we briefly review some ideas from the theory of evidence necessary for our development. assume v is a random variable which can take its values in the set x. a belief structure or dempster-shafer structure  d-s structure  on x is a mapping m  called a basic probability assignment   bpa   where m: 1x -   1  1  such that 
 1  ‘ m a  = 1 and  1  m 1  = 1. 
acx 
　　assume b is any subset of x. two important measures are associated with b in the framework of this theory. the first measure  called the measure of plausibility  denoted 
p1 b   is defined as 


	yager 	1 


1 	reasoning under uncertainty 

	yager 	1 

1 	reasoning under uncertainty 


1. 