 
we study complexity of methods using rigid variables  like the method of matings or the tableau method  on a decidable class of predicate calculus with equality. we show some intrinsic complications introduced by rigid variables. we also consider strategies for increasing multiplicity in rigid-variable methods  and formally show that the use of intelligent strategies can result in an essential gain in efficiency. 
1 introduction 
automated reasoning methods for first-order classical logic can generally be divided in two classes. 
　methods of the first class use universal variables  resolution  robinson  1   the inverse method  maslov  
1  . variables in these methods are local to a clause  formula  sequent  and can be considered as universally quantified in this clause  respectively formula or sequent .  maslov et a/.  1; maslov  1  characterized these methods as local methods  see also  mints  1  . 
　methods of the second class use rigid variables  the tableau method  beth  1   the mating or the connection method  andrews  1; bibel  1   model elimination  loveland  1   sld-resolution  kowalski  1; apt and van emden  1   slo-resolution  demolombe  1; rajasekar  1  . variables in these methods are local to a set of clauses  formulas  sequents  and can be considered as universally quantified in this set of clauses  respectively formulas or sequents .  maslov et a/.  1; maslov  1  characterized these methods as global methods. in this paper  we shall call such methods rigid-variable methods. 
　both kinds of methods have their advantages and disadvantages which are well-known. there are papers comparing resolution and tableau-like calculi  for example  eder  1; 1   see also  bibel and eder  1  . 
   * computing science department  uppsala university  box 1  s-1 uppsala  sweden. supported by a tfr grant. url page: http://www.csd.uu.se/ voronkov. email: voronkov csd.uu.se. 
1 	automated reasoning 
recently  there have been proposals combining both kinds of methods in one calculus  for example the equality elimination method  degtyarev and voronkov  1b; 
1a; 1a  or a modification of model elimination  moser et a/.  1 . 
　although there are many implementations of rigidvariable methods  there are almost no papers investigating the intrinsic complexity of problems arising in rigidvariable methods. in this paper we study several complexity problems related to rigid-variable methods on a decidable fragment of predicate calculus with equality. we show that the use of such methods can introduce essential complications even for this relatively simple fragment. we also demonstrate that methods with rigid variables can gain from the intelligent use of strategies for multiplicity. in addition  we show that a recent result of  voda and komara  1  on the herbrand skeleton problem is related to an inadequate formulation of the problem  and pose a new open problem. 


　the number μ used in the procedure  the number of copies of 	which can be used  is usually called mul-' 
       of course  there are various modifications of the procedure  for example  the goal formula may be non-prenex. in this case the notion of multiplicity is more complicated. our results can also be generalized to more complex notions of multiplicity. however  we shall only consider prenex existential formulas  for which the notion of multiplicity is defined as a positive integer number. 
　we informally call a strategy for multiplicity any procedure which selects the initial multiplicity and increases multiplicity in the procedure. the standard strategy for multiplicity is the strategy which sets μ initially to 1 and increments it by 1 on any further step. a strategy for multiplicity is called formula-independent iff it does not depend on the input formula. 
　there are various algorithms for checking  for a given formula   whether there is a substitution making this formula provable. instead of studying concrete procedures  we shall study the intrinsic complexity of the problem which can be formulated as follows. 
problem 1  herbrand skeleton  given a quantifier-free formula  x  and a positive integer μ  are there term sequences t  ...  in such that the formula 
　 degtyarev et a/.  1a  give an informal survey of several decision problems arising from the herbrand theorem  including the herbrand skeleton problem. it is clear that problem 1 is decidable if and only if the following problem is decidable. 
problem 1  formula instantiation  given a quantifier-free   is there a term sequence t such is provable  
　note that the formula instantiation problem is repeatedly used in the procedures used by the method of matings or the tableau method. 
　the decidability of these problems is equivalent to the decidability of sreu. unfortunately  it turned out that sreu has almost no decidable fragments which are general enough. some known results on sreu are the following. 
  sreu is undecidable  degtyarev and voronkov  
1b . 
  sreu with ground left hand sides is undecidable 
  sreu with ground left hand sides and two variables is undecidable  veanes  1 . 
  sreu with one variable is dexptime-complete 
the case of one variable is hardly useful in automated reasoning. when all function symbols have arity   1  formula instantiation is equivalent to monadic sreu  i.e. sreu in the signature where all function symbols have arity   1. the decidability of monadic sreu is 
	voronkov 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	voronkov 	1 


a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s 
i thank anatoli degtyarev  yuri gurevich and margus veanes. some ideas of this paper appeared as a result of our discussions. i thank an anonymous referee who pointed out serious inaccuracies in the preliminary version of this paper. 
