 
this paper proposes a distributed vision system as a perceptual information infrastructure for robot navigation in a dynamically changing world. the distributed vision system  consisting of vision agents connected with a computer network  monitors the environment  maintains the environment models  and actively provides various information for the robots by organizing communication between the vision agents. in addition to conceptual discussions and fundamental issues  this paper provides a prototype of the distributed vision system for navigating mobile robots. 
1 	introduction 
many researchers are tackling to develop autonomous intelligent mobile robots which behave in a real world in robotics and artificial intelligence. for limited environments such as offices and factories  several types of mobile robots have been developed. however  it is still hard to realize autonomous robots behaving in dynamically changing real worlds such as an outdoor environment. to develop such robots which can adapt to the dynamic worlds is the original purpose of robotics and artificial intelligence. 
attention control 
as discussed in technical papers on active vision  ballard 1   the main reason lies in attention control to select viewing points according to various events relating to the robot. two kinds of the attention control exist; one is called temporal attention control and the other is spatial attention control. if the robot has a single vision  it needs to change its gazing direction in a time slicing manner to simultaneously execute several vision tasks. the control of gazing direction is temporal attention control. for example  the robot has to detect free regions even while gazing at the targets. we  human  solve this complex temporal attention control with its sophisticated mechanisms of memory and prediction. further  the vision fixed on the robot body sometimes cannot provide proper information for the vision tasks. 
1 	ai challenges 
for example  when a robot estimates collisions with a moving obstacle  the side view in which both the robot itself and the obstacle are observed may be more proper than the view from the robot. this view point selection is called spatial attention control. 
difficulties in autonomous robots 
to realize the attention control is difficult with current technologies for autonomous robots. the following reasons can be considered. 
  active vision systems need a flexible body for ac-quiring proper visual information like a human. however  vision systems of previous mobile robots are fixed on the mobile platforms and it is generally difficult to build mobile robots which can acquire visual information from arbitrary viewing points in a 1d space. 
  an ideal robot builds environment models by it-self and uses them for executing commands from humans operators. however  to build a consistent model for a wide dynamic environment and maintain it is basically difficult for a single robot. we  humans  sometimes need helps of other persons to acquire information on the environment. 
　one of the promising research directions to solve the above-mentioned problems is to develop an infrastructure which provides sufficient information for the robots. this paper discusses such an infrastructure. the infrastructure in this paper differs from the infrastructure for mobile robots which move in factories. our purpose is not to develop systems which support individual functions of the robots such as guide lines and landmarks for locomotion  but to develop a perceptual information infrastructure  pi1  which actively provides various infor-
mation for real world agents  such as robots and humans. that is  
the pi 1 monitors the environment  maintains the dynamic environment models  and provides information for the real world agents 
　as the pi1  this paper proposes a distributed vision system  dvs . the dvs consists of multiple cameras which have own computing resource and communication 

links with others. the camera  called vision agent  va   provides visual information required by the vision-guided mobile robots. the vas at various locations provide sufficient visual information for attention control of the robots  and they maintain dynamic environment models by organizing communication between them. of course  we can use other sensors in the infrastructure. the camera  however  is the most compact and low cost passive sensor to acquire various kinds of information and many interesting vision research issues are still remained. another purpose of this research approach is to deal with the issues and develop real applications of computer vision through the dvs. 
　in addition to conceptual discussions and research issues  a prototype of the dvs and experimental results using it are shown. the author has confirmed the dvs can robustly navigate the mobile robot in a complex real world. 
related works 
recently novel research approaches using distributed sensors and robots have been proposed in robotics. for example  the robotic room proposed by mizoguchi and others  mizoguchi 1  support human activities with sensors and robots embedded in a room. their interests are to design mechanisms and develop sensor system for executing well-defined local tasks. on the other hand  the purpose of this paper is to propose a flexible sensor system utilized by various kinds of robotics systems as an information infrastructure. 
　several vision systems which utilize multiple cameras has been reported  especially  in multimedia. moezzi and others proposed the concept of immersive video and developed a vision system using precisely calibrated cameras for building a precise geometrical model of an outdoor environment. pinhanez and bobick  pinhanez 1  developed a system which dynamically selects cameras providing proper views for broadcasting a tv show. we  however  consider a demerit of the systems is to use calibrated cameras and geometrical models of the world. geometrical representations of environments obtained by the calibrated cameras lack robustness and flexibility of the systems. in order to solve the problems  this paper proposes an alternative approach for modeling dynamic environments  which dynamically and locally estimates the camera parameters and directly represents robot tasks. 
　in distributed artificial intelligence  several fundamental works dealing with systems using multiple sensors have been reported. lesser  lesser 1  proposed a distributed vehicle monitoring testbet  dvmt  as an example of distributed sensing problems  and durfee  durfee 1  proposed partial global planning which is a planning method for globally analyzing signals provided by multiple signal processing agents. the dvs  basically  can be considered as a kind of the distributed sensing systems  such as the dvmt  but deals with vision sensors and communicates with robots. and further  the purpose in the dvs is not to globally analyze the signals  

figure 1: distributed vision system 
but to navigate mobile robots with local information by representing the navigation tasks in the va network. 
1 	distributed vision system 
1 	concept of distributed vision 
in order to simultaneously execute the vision tasks  an autonomous robot needs to change its visual attention. the robot  generally  has a single vision sensor and a single body  therefore the robot needs to make complex plans to execute the vision tasks with the single vision sensor. active vision proposed by ballard  ballard 1  is a research direction to solve the complex planning problem with active camera motions bring proper visual information and to enable real-time and robust information processing. that is  the active vision system needs a flexible body to acquire the proper visual information like a human. however  the vision system of previous mobile robots is fixed on the mobile base and it is generally difficult to build autonomous robots which can acquire visual information from arbitrary viewing points in a 1d space. 
　our idea to solve the problem is to use many vas embedded in the environment and connected them with a computer network  see fig. 1 . each va independently observes events in the local environment and communicates with other vas through the computer network. since the vas do not have any constraints in the mechanism like autonomous robots  we can install a sufficient number of vas according to tasks  and the robots can acquire necessary visual information from various viewing points. as a new concept to generalize the idea  the author proposes distributed vision that multiple vision agents embedded in an environment recognize dynamic events by communicating each other. in the distributed vision  the attention control problems are dealt as dynamic organization problems of communication between the vision agents. 
　the dvs is not a standard computer network. it is an extended computer network which bridges between physical worlds and virtual worlds building in the computer network. current computer networks transmit only data  such as images and characters. however  as the services and functions of the computer networks are extended  more efficient and intelligent communication between computers are required. the author calls such 
	ishiguro 	1 


figure 1: from an autonomous robot to robots integrated with environments 
a future computer network perceptual information in-
frastructure  pi1 . the pi1 observes physical worlds  maintains dynamic models in the computer network and supports robots and humans. the dvs is one example of the pi1. 
　in robotics  the pi1 enables robust and flexible robotic systems by offering necessary information and develops a new research area. as shown in fig. 1  a previous autonomous robot consists of a mechanical body and software agents. that is  the intelligence produced by the software agents. on the other hand  the intelligent information processing of robots supported by the pi1 is done by agents embedded in the environment. development of robots integrated with environments is an important research direction for realizing useful robotic systems. 
1 	design policies for the dvs 
the vas are designed based on the following idea: 
tasks of robots are closely related to local environment s. 
for example  when a mobile robot executes a task of approaching a target  the task is closely related to a local area where the target locates. this idea allows to give vas specific knowledge for recognizing the local environment  therefore each va has a simple but robust information processing capability. 
　more concretely  the vas can easily detect dynamic events since they are fixed in the environment. a visionguided mobile robot of which camera is fixed on the body has to move for exploring the environment  therefore there exist a difficult problem to recognize the environment through the moving camera. on the other hand  the va in the dvs easily analyzes the image data and detects moving objects by constructing the background image for the fixed viewing point. 
　all of the vas  basically  have the following common visual functions: 
  detecting moving obstacles by constructing the background image and comparing with it. 
  tracking detected obstacles by a template matching method. 
1 	ai challenges 
  identifying mobile robots based on given models. 
  finding relations between moving objects and static objects in the images. 
　the dvs  which does not keep the precise camera positions for robustness and flexibility  autonomously and locally calibrates the camera parameters with local coordinate systems according to demand  the detail is discussed in section 1 . that is  the vas iterate to establish representation frames for communicating with other agents. 
　the vas identifies objects with the motions observed in the images in addition to the visual features since they can provide reliable motion information from the fixed viewing points. the author considers the dvs can solve the correspondence problem more robustly and flexibility than the previous vision systems. 
　the dvs organizes communication between vas in order to execute given tasks. the design policy that a va executes particular subtasks in the local environment allows to solve the organization problem in a hierarchical manner. that is  global tasks given to the dvs  generally  can be decomposed into the subtasks and the vas execute them. however  the subtasks often need to be simultaneously executed and the combinations often change according to various situations. therefore  the vas should be globally and locally organized to execute the global tasks. the organization of vas is the most important research issue of the dvs. 
1 	fundamental issues 
1 communication between vas 
remarkable difference of the dvs with previous computer systems is the dvs has two kinds of communication. in addition to communication with a computer network  vas in the dvs communicate by observing common events. when two vas which have own local internal representations simultaneously observe a robot from different viewing points  they may synchronously update their local internal representations. the vas share symbolic and non-symbolic information through the computer network and the observations  respectively. it is an important research issue how to establish sophisticated and flexible communication links through the two types of communication. the author is especially interested in the non-symbolic communication which is difficult to deal with in previous frame works. 
1 	dynamic environment model 
the robust detection of dynamic events enables to hierarchically represent the environment. we  basically  consider static environment models should be generated from dynamic environment models representing the dynamic events. the dynamic environment models give meanings to static objects represented in the static models. for example  a gray region in the images  which is a road in the outdoor environment  is defined as a region where the robot can move. the dvs which can easily detect the dynamic events is a promising system for realizing the hierarchical environment models. 
1 	organization of vas 
the dvs needs to organize the vas for acquiring the dynamic environment models. let us imagine a dvs navigating a mobile robot. in order to avoid moving obstacles and detect free regions  the mobile robot needs visual information provided by vas locating around it  and in order to go toward a destination  it also needs information about subgoals from vas locating along the robot path. that is  the vas should be locally and globally organized in order to provide proper information for the robot navigation. in the organization process  the dvs represents given tasks by organizing the vas. for realizing the organization  it is necessary to develop new methods which deal with the total process including image understanding by the vas  task understanding  and task execution through the symbolic and non-symbolic communication links. 
1 	distributed model 
the dynamic environment models are not shared by all 
vas  but distributed over vas. robots access to the dynamic environment models through dynamic organizations of the vas. for example  when a robot avoids a moving obstacle  the dvs continuously organizes the vas located around it and navigates it. further  if troubles occur in a va  other vas take the place of the va. to distribute the models in the va network is important for realizing flexibility and robustness of the dvs . 
1 	a prototype of the dvs 
this section discusses a developed prototype of the dvs 
 tanaka 1 . the prototype system briefly deals with the fundamental issues discussed in section 1  but it does not completely solve them. the issues are carefully dealt with in the feature works. 
1 	mobile robot navigation 
the outline for mobile robot navigation by the dvs is as follows. first  a human operator teaches tasks by manually controlling a robot. the human operator does not directly give task models or behavior models of the robot  but gives examples to the dvs. while the robot moves  each va tracks it within the visual field with simple image processing functions discussed in section 1. then the dvs decomposes the given example paths into several components which can be maintained by each va and memorizes then by organizing the vas. after organizing the vas  the dvs autonomously navigates the mobile robot while the vas communicate each other. all of the vas monitor the robot motions and send messages to other vas according to the memorized organization patterns for global and local tasks. 
1 	the architecture 
a va consists basic modules and memory modules as shown in fig. 	1. 	for the basic modules  the 

figure 1: the architecture of the dvs 
va has image processor  estimator estimator of camera parameters   planner  communicator  and controuer{communication controller . for the memory modules  it has a knowledge database for image processing  memories to memorize global and local tasks  and memories to maintain relations with other vas for executing the global and local tasks. in this experimentation  the global task is to navigate toward goals and the local task is to avoid obstacles. 
　image processor detects moving robots and tracks them by referring to the knowledge database which stores visual features of robots. estimator receives the results and estimates camera parameters for establishing representation frames for sharing robot motion plans with other vas. planner plans robot actions based on the estimated camera parameter and sends them to the robot through communicator. the robot corrects the plans  selects proper plans  and executes the plans. the selected plans are sent back to the vas and memorized. the memorized plans are directly applied in the same situations of the vas and the robot by controller. 
1 	global and local organization 
for selecting and integrating the robot motion plans from vas  all plans at a time should be represented with a common representation frame. in the case of the dvs  the robot motion is represented with a x - y robot path-centered coordinate system. the coordinate transformation from the camera frame of a va to the robot path-centered coordinate system is represented with two parameters a and b. since the vision data is very noisy and the obtained plans are simple  the dvs assumes orthographic projection for the obtained image and represents the coordinate transform with only two parameters of camera rotations. as a more sophisticated method  it is possible to use an automatic calibration method proposed by hosoda and others  hosoda 1 . 
　fig. 1 shows data flows between functions for globally and locally organizing vas. estimator computes a  b and their error estimates aa and a/  for the coordinate transformation  estimating and updating camera parameters . planner plans robot motions with the obtained coordinate system  planning a robot motion . 
	ish1guro 	1 


1 	ai challenges 

a complex environment. that is  the dvs solves the attention control problems for the autonomous robots discussed in section 1 with a different but more robust manner. 
1 	conclusion and research plan toward pi1 
the dvs is an alternative approach for realizing robust behaviors of intelligent robots. by organizing vas  the dvs tightly couples robot actions and observations by the vas. the previous autonomous robot has constraints of the hardware  the size and the number of sensors. on the other hand  the dvs does not have such constants and it is a promising approach for realizing real systems. 
　the purposes in this research approach are to solve the fundamental problems of the dvs  to develop real systems and to establish key technologies of pi1. especially  to develop systems for real applications is important. it will extend possibility of robotics and computer networks and be able to make users realize usefulness of computer vision techniques. the plan of this research is as follows: 
1. develop a dvs for navigating robots with a model town as a testbed  see section 1 . 
1. study the fundamental issues of mobile robot navigation  see section 1 . 
1. develop a dvs for observing and supporting human behaviors. 
1. study the fundamental issues of the human behavior support. 
1. extend the dvs to the pi1 which supports various real world agents and develop a pi1 in the university campus. 
　results for the fundamental problems can be estimated with traditional evaluation criterion  such as originality and applicability. on the other hand  evaluations for the developed infrastructure is not so easy since the system should be collectively evaluated with various criterion. for the evaluations  the author considers it is important to disclose the details of the system development  which cannot be reported in technical papers  with the world-wide web  see http://www.lab1.kuis.kyotou. ac.jp/vision/ . 
　recent developments of multimedia computing environments have established huge number of cameras and computers in offices and towns. they are expected to be more intelligent systems as the pi1 discussed in this paper. the pi1 is a key issue in the next decade. 
acknowledgment 
the author would like to thank prof. toru ishida for his stimulating discussions and constructive criticism  and mr. goichi tanaka for his programming work. 
