 
deduction  induction  and analogy pervade all our thinking. in contrast with deduction  understanding logical aspects of induction and analogy is still an important and challenging issue of artificial intelligence. this paper describes a logical formalization  called production  of common conjectural reasoning of both induction and analogy. by introduction of preduction  analogical reasoning is refined into  preduction + deduction  and 
 empirical  inductive reasoning is refined into  preduction + mathematical induction . we examine generality of preduction through applications to various examples on induction and analogy. 
1 introduction 
deduction  induction  and analogy are most common patterns of our thinking. while deduction infers a property about a specific individual from a general property which every individual satisfies  inductive reasoning infers an unknown property which every individual will satisfy commonly from specific properties about individuals. analogical reasoning infers an unknown property about an individual from known properties about similar others. because of their generality and importance in our intelligent activities  understanding their reasoning processes is indispensable for embodying artificial intelligence. 
   more formally  inferences by deduction  induction  and analogy are typically represented as table l1. deduction d.l  expresses   d.l.l  a is p.  d.1  all pthings are q. therefore  d.1  a is q.  induction i.l  which we call mathematical expresses the usual axiom schema of induction in the arithmetic axioms.   1.1  the case of 1 satisfies p.  1.1  if the case of x satisfies p  the succeeding case of x also satisfies p. consequently   1.1  any case will satisfy p.  induction  1  expresses more empirical reasoning than  1 ; the same 
¡¡¡¡1 deduction  d.l  is a derivative rule from v-elimination and modus ponens. 
1 	automated reasoning 
consequence is inferred not from a general assertion like  1.1  but from an observation that  1.1  every case of 1 to n satisfies p. analogy  a.l  and  a.1  express   a.*.l  the base case b satisfies p.  a.*.1  the target case t is similar to b. thus   a.*.1  t also satisfies p.'' they are different in that the similarity between a target and a base is explicit as a property s in  a.1 . 

table 1: deduction  induction  and analogy 
   in this paper  we especially focus on two logical aspects of induction and analogy; their consistency and their relationship on inference. in contrast with  d.l  and  1   each inference rule of  1    a.l   and  a.1  has at least one critical logical defect. the former  each of  d.l  and  1   preserves consistency  i.e.  only consistent theorems are inferred from consistent axioms   while the latter  each of  1    a.l   and  a.1  does not. in spite of this fact  the latter inference rules seem to be natural to our common sense. for example  when we infer a general rule from individual observations  where knowledge as  1.1  comes from  can we directly recognize the knowledge from observations  although we may recognize knowledge such as  1.1  from our environments  we do not recognize such an  1.1  at least from our daily life. from our view  it is the heart of our empirical induction to infer  1.1  from  1.1  and  1.1   and it is the process which we should investigate and formalize. 
   conjectural reasoning which always brings a consistent conclusion at present but possibly inconsistent in 

the future immediately implies that it is non-monotonic. analogy and empirical induction often bring us conclusions turned to be wrong after we know more. in such cases  their conclusions are invalidated in our belief. this non-monotonicity is quite common to our reasoning. mccarthy introduced ctrcumscription  mccarthy  1  for the purpose of formalizing non-monotonicity in common-sense reasoning. circumscription of a predicate p makes its extension minimized; anything is not p unless it is stated p by given axioms. helft helft  1  used minimization of all predicates to formalize inductive reasoning. by means of minimizing all predicates  
want to deduce a useful conclusion from the generalization. inductive reasoning  and analogical reasoning  should be naturally interpreted as a particular expansion of the extension of a predicate rather than minimization. our approach follows circumscription just for formalization of non-monotonicity  but does not inherit the idea of minimality. 
   relation between induction and analogy is another point to be investigated. analogy  a.1  can be viewed as a two-step argument davies and russell  1 ; 
tion with s t  in  a.1   we obtain  a.1 . a similar idea is suggested in  peirce  1; mostow  1 . unlike to their views  we consider there is a common inferential structure behind induction  1   analogy  a.l   and  a.1 . analogy includes a projection of information from a similar known object to an unknown object. induction similarly includes a projection of information from known previous cases. we discuss more about this common denominator in the next section. we formalize this type of projection based on a transitive relation between objects. we call the formalization preduction because the introduction of preduction allows empirical induction and analogy to be broken into a stable part   1  and  d.l   and the precedtng more conjectural part corresponding to the preduction  figure 1 . 
   formalizing consistent preduction has at least two significant points. one is  of course  to allow us to use empirical induction and analogy free from inconsistency. if consistency of preduction guaranteed  because of consistency of deduction and mathematical induction  the whole processes of empirical induction and analogy would become consistent. 
figure 1: common structure to analogy and induction 
   the other is to bring us a better understanding of logical aspects of induction and analogy by stepping into their insides. their inferences are reduced into two clear pieces; a common denominator  preduction  and each of their residues  mathematical induction and deduction that are well investigated. it allows us to focus on an unexplored central part of thinking related to induction and analogy by removing differential and well-explored parts from them. 
   this paper is organized as follows. section 1 gives a formal view about the common denominator between induction and analogy. section 1 proposes a form of preduction. section 1 shows its generality by applying the form to various examples over induction and analogy. section 1 proposes its model theory and shows that the form preserves consistency. section 1 concludes this. 
1 common denominator 
figure 1 illustrates two typical processes by analogy and by induction from another point of view than their logical aspects. in analogical reasoning  an unknown property p' about a target case is inferred by finding  based on a property s' of the target case  a base case which satisfies a corresponding property s to s'  and by pro-
jecting a relevant base case property p to the target case. in inductive reasoning  we see a similar inference which is made possible by a result of induction rather than induction itself. by a result of induction  an unknown repetition of inference is different  we can identify these structures where information is mapped from a base case into a target case. 
   now  in order to formalize a more general common structure related to both analogy and induction  we abstract these in two ways: number of repetition and pa-
	arima 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	arima 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 
acknowledgments 
i would like to thank norman foo  his research members and takeshi ohtani for their helpful comments. 
