 
several qualitative notions of epistemic dependence between propositions are studied. they are closely related to the ordinal notion of conditional possibility. what this paper proposes is a systematic investigation of how the fact of learning a new piece of evidence individually affects previous beliefs. namely a new piece of information a can either leave a previous belief untouched  or cancel it from the set of accepted beliefs  or even refute it. on the contrary  a can justify a new belief  not previously held  or fail to justify it. we provide axiomatizations of epistemic independence and relevance and show the close links between qualitative independence and the theory of belief change. it turns out that qualitative independence and agm belief change operations have the same expressive power. lastly  it is briefly suggested how qualitative independence can be applied to plausible reasoning. 
1. introduction 
it has been known for some time that the agm revision theory  named from alchourron  gardenfors and makinson; see gardenfors  1    and the preferential approach to nonmonotonic reasoning are two sides of the same coin. in recent years we have shown that this tight link could be explained in the setting of possibility theory  using setfunctions satisfying the single axiom iii a v b  = max ii a   1 b    together with qualitative conditioning. the contribution of this paper is to show that there is a 
 third side  of the coin  viz. qualitative independence. the notion of epistemic independence naturally arises in the framework of reasoning under uncertainty and belief change. most prominently  probabilistic conditional independence  between variables  plays a key role in bayesian nets. more recently several authors  delgrande and pelletier  1; benferhat et al.  1; dubois et al.  1  have advocated the interest of qualitative independence notions for nonmonotonic reasoning. gardenfors  1  and farinas del cerro and herzig  1  have investigated the complementary notion of relevance in relation to belief change. the aim of the paper is to provide an exhaustive typology of the forms that independence and relevance can assume in the setting of an ordinal approach to uncertainty  like the one underlying major belief change and nonmonotonic inference theories. 
in the paper  a  b  c ... stand for events belonging to a 
boolean algebra of subsets of a set w. t and f are 
1 	automated reasoning 
propositional constants denoting the true and false events respectively. let us assume that our representation framework enables us to distinguish between three states of cognitive attitudes regarding c: i  c is an accepted belief  ii   c is an accepted belief  i.e.  c is refuted   iii  neither c nor  c is accepted  i.e.  total ignorance about c . hence c and  c cannot be held as accepted beliefs simultaneously. intuitively  an event c is said to be independent of another event a when one's opinion about c is not affected by learning a. 
   any definition of independence or relevance in such a setting can be expressed in terms of five basic notions corresponding to the possible effects of learning a on the belief status of c  table 1 . as already said an important distinction has to be made between propositions c that are a 
   priori believed and those which are a priori ignored. independence may then refer either to the lack of influence of a on a believed proposition c that remains accepted  line 1   or on the contrary  to the lack of influence of a on an ignored proposition that remains ignored  line 1 . we shall speak of  qualitative independence  in the former case  and of  uninformativeness  in the latter. 


preserved via conjunction or disjunction  and this behavior is the one that was found natural by philosophers of probability such as keynes or gardenfors. it is also worth noticing that due to the ternary structure of states of belief  it cannot be expected that independence and relevance be complementary notions. 
   for the sake of brevity  proofs of propositions are omitted. moreover  definitions of independence and relevance are not given here with respect to a given context. however  the extension to ternary relations   a is relevant/independent w.r.t. to c  given evidence e   is straightforward  and used in section 1. 
1. relevance and independence 
1. the probabilistic framework 
suppose that a cognitive state is represented by means of a probability-like set-function. the standard definition of probabilistic independence is in terms of invariance with respect to conditioning: c is independent of a iff prob c i a  = prob c . it follows from the axioms of probability theory that independence then satisfies: 
 symmetry  if c is independent of a then a is independent ofc. 
 negation  if c is independent of a then c is independent of  a. 
 truth  	a and t are independent. 
probabilistic independence has been criticized quite early by several authors such as keynes: its symmetry  and the lack of properties with respect to conjunction and disjunction have been found debatable in an epistemic perspective. following keynes  gardenfors  1  has discussed conjunction criteria for dependence and independence. 
 ccd¡ê  if c depends on a  and c depends on b  and a a b ¡Ù f  then c depends on a a b 
 ccil  if c is independent of a  and c is independent of b then c is independent of a a b. 
later  gardenfors  1  has proposed that the concept of relevance should satisfy four minimal requirements  up to a fifth axiom  superfluous in our representational setting  stating that relevance is syntax-independent : 
rl: a is relevant for c iff c is not independent of a 
r1: if a is relevant for c then  a is relevant for c 
r1: t is independent of c 
r1: if c is contingent  = neither t nor f  then c is relevant for c 
these postulates equate relevance with dependence  i.e.  the complement of independence   and insist on negation insensitivity  so that f is not relevant for c . gardenfors  1  shows that under r1-r1  ccil + ccd¡ê leads to trivialization in the probabilistic framework. 
   an alternative attitude is  rather than rejecting ccd*  to accept regularities w.r.t. conjunction and disjunctions  such as ccdl and ccil  and drop rl and r1. namely  we shall object to negation insensitivity in some contexts  and we shall question the postulate that there is no middle way between relevance and independence. we shall choose a representation framework where the three cognitive attitudes  acceptance  rejection and ignorance  can be distinguished  viz. qualitative possibility theory  an ordinal setting for representing uncertainty in a way that directly extends classical logic with levels of acceptance. this framework has strong connections with belief change  dubois and prade  1  and ordering-based nonmonotonic reasoning  gardenfors and makinson  1; benferhat et al.  1 . 
1. the possibilistic framework 
in this section  we briefly recall the notions of possibility measure and distribution  zadeh  1  and of conditional possibility  dubois and prade  1 . possibility theory provides a simple uncertainty representation setting where ordinal information about events derives from a complete transitive ordering of elementary events  the interpretations of a language . dual rankings of events  or formulas  are induced in terms of possibility and certainty. 
   a function ii from a set of events into any finite totally ordered set l  with top 1 and bottom 1  is a possibility measure if it satisfies the following decomposability axiom: ii a v b  = max ii a   ii b  . this axiom enables an ordering on events to be recovered from an ordering of elementary events. the quantity n a  = 1 - ii  a  is called the necessity of a  and represents a level of certainty  or acceptance  of a. 1 -     is just a notation for the orderreversing function on l if l = {1 = l1   l1 ...   ln = 1}  
1 -  li  as ln+1-i vi . in can be checked that min n a   n - a   = 1; a is said to be accepted iff n a    n - a   or equivalently n a    1. and we have the reasonable axiom of acceptance saying that if a is accepted and so is b  then a a b is accepted too  since n a a b  = min n a   n b   holds. if a is not accepted  n a  = 1   it does not entail that it is rejected  n -ia    1 . this makes it clear that possibility theory can express the three possible attitudes that we want to distinguish. 
   every possibility measure can be viewed as an encoding of a comparative possibility relation on events       defined by a   b if and only if 1 a  ¡ê 1 b   dubois and prade  
1 . as shown in  farifias del cerro and herzig  1  hajek et al.  1; boutilier  1   such a notion of comparative possibility is equivalent to that in  lewis  1 . 
   conditional possibility can be defined similarly to conditional probability  changing the bayes identity p a a c  =p c i a    p a  into a more qualitative counterpart: 
fi a a c  = min il c i a   ri a  . 
the use of minimum is justified by the ordinal nature of the possibility scale. the conditional possibility tl c i a  is then defined as the maximal solution of the above equation. this choice of the maximal solution is due to the principle of minimal specificity which urges to select the least informative or committed possibility measure  i.e.  the one 
	dubois  et al. 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 


	dubois  et al. 	1 


1 	automated reasoning 


	dubois  etal. 	1 
