 
decision making based on the comparison of multiple criteria of two or more alternatives  is the subject of intensive research. in many decision making situations  a single criterion consists of more than one piece of information  and therefore might be regarded as a lump of aggregated information. this paper proposes a general method for aggregating information. to accomplish information aggregation we have developed a fuzzy expert system. results from an application of our approach in the domain of coronary heart disease risk assessment  chdra  indicate the value of the information aggregation process of the system. we also show in this paper  how a case-based reasoning  cbr  system can greatly benefit- in its time performance and ability to manage uncertainty-from the information aggregation method. 
1 introduction 
decision making situations very frequently require an ability to compare multiple criteria of two or more alternatives  chen and hwang  1 . in many cases a single criterion has a complex structure  but even if the meaning of such a complex criterion can be represented in terms of simpler ones  the need for a higher level entity persists  wilensky  1 . 
　　as an example  consider a job application scenario  where a manager is confronted with the decision to choose between two candidates  a and b. let us suppose the manager decides to employ candidate a. then  when asked to explain his decision  he might say that comparing the two candidates  a has better prepared and also showed a better personality profile. a closer look at the applicants' documents will probably show  that candidate a indeed has better references  more ex-
perience and better working skills than b. furthermore  
1 	case-based reasoning 
asked in more detail about the better personality pro-
file  the manager might answer that candidate a had better communication skills and was more confident during the interview-therefore his decision was right. 
so: 
  all information about the candidates is expressed by rather vague or imprecise linguistic terms. 
  to explain his decision  the manager uses the linguistic terms better prepared and better personality 
profile  rather than details {better references  more experience  better working skills  better communication skills  more confidence . 
  the manager would possibly have arrived at the same choice  candidate a  if his only information was that candidate a is better prepared and has a better personality profile than candidate b. 
our observations are: 
 1  many decision making situations require the capability to manage and process vague or imprecise information  perhaps via linguistic terms. 
 1  in many decision making situations  information can be crudely but usefully classified as higher level information  and lower level information respectively. 
　in cbr for example  complex case features represent higher level information  and primitive case features represent lower level information respectively. higher level information can be composed of:  a  lower level information   b  other higher level information  or  c  a mixture of both information types. in our job application scenario  the higher level information better preparation aggregates the lower level information better references  more experience and better working skills. 
and so: it is possible to arrive at useful decisions using information at various levels. 
　a study of this analysis might lead to a hierarchical structure of information as it is shown in figure 1. 

figure 1: hierarchical structure of information. 
　the purpose of this paper is to propose a method that aggregates available lower level information to units of higher level information. in many cases  the lower level information will be imprecise or vague  and so the proposed method should be able to manage uncertainty  bonissone  1 . we therefore have used an expert system shell to develop a fuzzy expert system that accomplishes such aggregation. the applicability and usefulness of this approach was tested in the domain of chdra. we show that our fuzzy expert system is able to manage the uncertainty contained in the aggregation process  and that its reasoning process  information aggregation  leads to meaningful  consistent and valuable outcomes. furthermore  we show how a cbr system can benefit from an implementation of this information aggregation method. for example  we model primitive case features and complex case features via fuzzy sets. this  significantly increases the cbr system's ability to manage uncertainty. 
the remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
section 1 briefly describes the advantages that fuzzy primitive and fuzzy complex case features provide for cbr. in section 1  we describe our fuzzy expert system and the information aggregation process in more detail. the results of applying the approach are outlined in section 1. finally  in section 1  we finish with a discussion  conclusions and future work. 
1 cbr  fuzzy primitive case features and fuzzy complex case features 
cbr is a problem-solving model that allows reasoning to be performed by using past experience  brown  1; kolodner  1  riesbeck and schank  1 . past experience-i.e.  knowledge about situations that have been solved in the past-is represented by entities  called cases. these cases are stored and organized in a memory-like construct called a case knowledge base or simply case base. reasoning in cbr systems is accomplished by retrieving the base case s  most relevant to a new situation or problem at hand  called the query case  and then adapting the solution s  to the actual problem. because the knowledge contained in a case base is basically determined by its constituents  the stored base cases  the representation of base cases is an important issue in cbr. we describe cases in a compact  characteristic fashion by abstract or salient features  here simply referred to as features. there exist two types of features  primitive features and complex features. complex features are composites of several  primitive or complex  features. 
for example  in the domain of chdra the features 
smoking and c h o l e s t e r o l have been identified  among other factors  to be main risk factors for myocardial infarction and subsequent sudden death. in the assessment process  smoking is regarded as a primitive feature  used to indicate the number of cigarettes a person smokes per day  whereas the complex feature c h o l e s t e r o l is a composite of the three primitive feature cholesterol types: total cholesterol  ldl cholesterol and hdl cholesterol. 
　cholesterol travels in the blood in distinct particles called lipoprotein. the two major types of lipoproteins are low-density lipoproteins  ldl  and high-density lipoproteins  hdl . ldl  often called 'bad' cholesterol  delivers the cholesterol to the arterial walls with the ultimate consequence of narrowing the arteries  slyper  1 . hdl  often called 'good' cholesterol  protects against heart disease by removing excess cholesterol from the blood  gordon et al.  1 . in a fasting blood test  a clinician first finds out what a person's total  cholesterol level is. if the total cholesterol level is too high then further measurements of ldl and hdl are required  note: a high hdl value 'compensates' a high total cholesterol value  and therefore  a person's cholesterol can be still described as normal . in this paper we use 'cholesterol' when we are discussing generally  and c h o l e s t e r o l when we talk about a complex case feature; but they mean the same thing-an aggregate or composite of three cholesterol type values. 
　possible instances of smoking and c h o l e s t e r o l might be given by  smoking/ 1cigarettes per day    and  cholesterol/ total 1 mmol/1     ldl 1 mmol/l     hdl 1 mmol/1   . 
　frequently  it is not possible to obtain or assess a value of a feature precisely  dubitzky et al.  1 . in situations like this  use is often made of linguistic terms. for example  it is not possible to 'measure' a person's cholesterol value  because it is a composite of three cholesterol type values. but  asked about it  the doctor might describe the person's cholesterol to be simply as normal  rather than state: total 1  ldl 1 mmol/1  and hdl 1 mmol/1. even in situations where precise values are obtainable  humans often fall back upon to use vague or imprecise linguistic terms. for example  the doctor might describe a ldl value of 
1 	mmoi/1 	simply 	as 	normal  	and 	one 	of 
schuster  et al. 


figure 1: fuzzy primitive and fuzzy complex case features. 

1 mmol/l simply as alarming. furthermore  there is no exact boundary between a normal and an alarming ldl value; that is  the transition between normal and alarming is gradual or fuzzy  rather than abrupt or crisp  zadeh  1; klir and folger  1 . in this work we use fuzzy set theory to model primitive features and complex features  and therefore those features will be called fuzzy primitive features  and fuzzy complex features respectively  na and park  1; dubitzky et al.  1 . figure 1 illustrates the aforementioned chdra example in a cbr context. it shows  a query case consisting of the primitive feature smoking and the fuzzy complex feature cholesterol  where the fuzzy complex feature cholesterol is a composite of the fuzzy primitive features total and ldl  for the sake of simplicity the fuzzy primitive feature hdl is omitted in figure 1 . the cases: base case 1  base case 1 and base case 1 in figure 1 constitute a simplified case base. 
　the reasoning process performed should retrieve the base case s  most relevant to the query case. therefore  corresponding feature-value pairs for smoking  tot a l and ldl of the query case and the base case s  have to be compared and to be aggregated to an overall similarity score. 
1 information aggregation via a fuzzy expert system 
instead of performing the reasoning task by comparing each single feature value  smoking  total  ldl and hdl  of the query case and the base case s   our approach allows us to compare features on a fuzzy complex feature level. this means that only the feature values smoking and cholesterol of the query 
case and the base case s  are used. this reasoning process has two main advantages: firstly  for a very large case base the promise of better performance; secondly  sometimes data at primitive feature level is not available  but a description is available on complex feature level. for example  patients may not know the value of 
1 	case-based reasoning 
each cholesterol type  but possibly remember that during their last health test the cholesterol was normal. 
　to make information on fuzzy complex feature level available  we have developed an inference process based on fuzzy set theory that maps  aggregates  fuzzy primitive feature values to fuzzy complex feature level. for example  the two fuzzy primitive feature values 
 total/1  and  ldl/1  in figure 1  might map on fuzzy complex feature level to  cholesterol/ good  . such a mapping  aggregation  should satisfy the following requirements: 
 1  the aggregated values on complex feature level should be intuitively appealing to an expert's understanding of the problem in question. 
 1  using aggregated values on complex feature level in a decision making process should lead to meaningful  justifiable and consistent results. 
　to manage the proposed information aggregation process  the normal steps of knowledge acquisition  knowledge representation  and design of an inference engine were realized. 
　within the knowledge acquisition process for our application the knowledge engineer and the domain expert were involved to extract the domain knowledge for its use in the fuzzy expert system  e.g.  establishing the various fuzzy sets for the different cholesterol types . the basis for the knowledge acquisition was a data set  consisting of 1 records. one record for each person initially held values for total cholesterol  ldl cholesterol and hdl cholesterol  as well as the two ratios total/hdl and ldl/hdl. these two ratios are also important because they provide more meaningful indicators of coronary heart disease risk than total cholesterol per se  kinosian et el.  1 . the expert was asked to provide expertise for determining each person's cholesterol value  and so was asked to indicate one of the fields  dangerous  alarming  normal and good  for each data record as illustrated in table 1. 


table 1: cholesterol values  taken from 1 persons. associated with each data record is an expert's decision  representing the expert's interpretation of the person's cholesterol value. 

　typically the category that a cholesterol type value or ratio value belongs to is expressed in intervals  pyorala et al.  1 . for example  a total/hdl ratio between 1 and 1 is considered as good  and one below 1 is regarded to be even better. there is no doubt that such a representation is not intuitive to a human's understanding of the problem. in our understanding  the transition from good to better should be gradual  rather than abrupt. to represent such categories  the three different cholesterol types  and the two ratios are modeled via fuzzy sets. as an example  figure 1 shows the fuzzy sets for the cholesterol type total  and for the ratio total/hdl. 

figure 1: fuzzy sets for  a  the cholesterol type total and  b  the ratio total/hdl. 
　the knowledge representation scheme used for the proposed information aggregation process was that of production rules  formulated as if-then statements  where the if-part of a rule  the antecedent  is the input  and the then-part of the rule  the consequent  is the output of the fuzzy expert system. here  the rule base consisted of four rules only. as an example  figure 1 shows a typical rule used in the fuzzy expert system. 
　a crucial concept of the proposed fuzzy expert system is  that all rules apply at all times  but some may have more influence than others. this means that if more than one rule is active  the separate responses have to be combined to a composite output. this idea is central to fuzzy logic systems. 
　if  total is dangerous  or  ldl is dangerous  or  hdl is dangerous  or  ratio total hdl is dangerous  or  ratiojldl hdl is dangerous  then cholesterol is dangerous 
figure 1: example rule. 
therefore  the inference process performed by the fuzzy expert system consists of three sub-processes:  a  scaling of the fuzzy input   b  combination of the output  and  c  defuzzification of the output. there exist different methods for all three sub-processes  and it is part of the knowledge engineer's work to find the methods appropriate to the actual problem. scaling was done via the correlation-product encoding  the combination step via sum combination and finally  for the defuzzification of the output  the center of gravity method is applied. as an example  figure 1a shows the fuzzy sets for the system's output  cholesterol   and figure 1b shows a possible output activation. 

figure 1:  a  fuzzy sets for the cholesterol output  and 
 b  activated cholesterol output and defuzzification via the center of gravity method. 
schuster  et al. 


table1: expert's decision and system output for each cholesterol data record. 

　figure 1b also illustrates that the two fuzzy sets normal and good have been activated by the rules  and that the defuzzification of the output via the center of gravity method results in an output value of 1. the location of this value in figure 1b also shows  that the aggregated cholesterol should be interpreted as normal 'with a tendency' to good. the tendency of an output is indicated here by a plus  +  or a minus  -  sign  attached to the corresponding fuzzy set and derived as illustrated in figure 1a. the output value  1  intersects with the fuzzy sets normal and good. when the value intersects with two or more fuzzy sets like this  we take and qualify by 'tendency' the fuzzy set where the output value intersects with the highest score. in this example  the system's output would look like  cholesterol/n-   and should be interpreted as: 'the aggregated cholesterol value of the person is normal with a tendency to good . such a result is intuitively appealing and close to a human expert's explanation in such a situation. in the next section  we investigate the usefulness  the validity and the consistency of the system's output. 
1 results 
after the inference process was accomplished for all 1 data records  the fuzzy expert system output of each record was compared with the expert's judgment of the record in question. table 1 is similar to table 1  but additionally contains two columns for the system's output. the first column displays the center of the gravity  cog  of the system output  and the second column shows  the system's decision on the cholesterol for the corresponding record. 
　the results have been evaluated in two steps. in the first step the number of direct matches was computed  and in the second step the number of 'tendency' matches. a direct match was considered to be the case when the expert and the system evaluated the data record belonging to the same category. for example  this is the case for the first and the last record in table 1. both the expert and the system evaluated the first record to be alarming and the last record to be dangerous. record two in table 1 represents a tendency match. the expert considers the cholesterol of record 1 to be alarming  whereas the system's response is d-  which means dangerous with a tendency to alarming  see figure 1a . this is a meaningful result because  as pointed out be-
1 	case-based reasoning 
fore  the transition from alarming to dangerous is gradual. 
　our approach led to the following results. a direct match happened 1 times  and a tendency match 1 times. therefore  the system derived 1 meaningful results  i.e. in 1% of the sample. the inference process was not to be expected to establish a direct match of 1% for a number of reasons. firstly  asked about the same situation or problem twice  e.g. repeated after some weeks   even a single expert's decision-making diverges very often. secondly  when several experts are available  it is very likely  that they will disagree in some cases. thirdly  during knowledge acquisition  the expert was enforced to chose one of the four categories  dangerous  alarming  normal  good  for a record invoking one of the weaknesses of a discrete choice; very often it is not possible to express intermediate values. 
1 discussion  conclusions and future w o r k 
a general method to aggregate information has been presented. based on fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic the aggregation process was implemented in a fuzzy expert system. the aggregated information  derived by the fuzzy expert system is meaningful  valuable and consistent. according to  hall and kandel  1   the proposed fuzzy expert system displays most of the characteristics of 'class one' expert systems; e.g.:  a  the domain of the problem is limited and very well defined   b  an expert was available during the development   c  the complexity of the problem is not extreme in the eyes of the knowledge engineer  and  d  the uncertainty prevailing in the domain was manageable. 
　we applied this process to a specified problem  but its applicability to similar problems is manifest  e.g. at 
the moment the approach is tested on a data set of cancer patients   and therefore  its potential is obvious. the integration of the proposed information aggregation method into a cbr environment is very promising because the reasoning process in cbr can benefit in two ways:  1  in cases with a lack of data  e.g. unavailable data at the primitive feature level  the higher level information  available at the fuzzy complex feature level  can be used in the reasoning process  and so the cbr system's capability to handle uncertainty increases significantly; and  1  cbr systems with a large case base will improve in their performance in the time domain. 

record carries data about a patient suffering a cancerous disease. the support the proposed information aggregation method can provide to the cbr system will be investigated from the point of view of management of uncertainty and performance. there is also work underway to use the aggregation method in a multiple expert scenario and to relate this work with the theory of evidence. 
