 
robocup challenge offers a set of challenges for intelligent agent researchers using a friendly competition in a dynamic  real-time  multiagent domain. while robocup in general envisions longer range challenges over the next few decades  robocup challenge presents three specific challenges for the next two years:  i  learning of individual agents and teams;  ii  multi-agent team planning and plan-execution in service of teamwork; and  iii  opponent modeling. robocup challenge provides a novel opportunity for machine learning  planning  and multi-agent researchers it not only supplies a concrete domain to evalute their techniques  but also challenges researchers to evolve these techniques to face key constraints fundamental to this domain: real-time  uncertainty  and teamwork. 
1 introduction 
robocup  the world cup robot soccer  is an attempt to promote ai and robotics research by providing a common task  soccer  for evaluation of various theories  algorithms  and agent architectures  kitano  et al.  1; kitano et al.  1a; 1b . defining a standard problem in which various approaches can be compared and progress can be measured provides fertile grounds for engineering research. computer chess has been a symbolic example of the standard challenge problems. a salient feature of computer chess is that progress can be measured via actual games against human players. 
　for an agent  a physical robot or a synthetic agent  to play soccer reasonably well  a wide range of technologies need to be integrated and a number of technical breakthroughs must be made. the range of technologies spans both ai and robotics research  such as design principles of autonomous agents  multi-agent collaboration  strategy acquisition  real-time reasoning and planning  intel-
* corresponding author: hiroaki kitano  sony computer 
science laboratory  1-1 higashi-gotanda  shinagawa  
tokyo 1  japan  kitanoflcsl.sony.co.jp robocup home page: http://mrw.robocup.org/robocup. robocup mailing list: robocupflcsl.sony.co.jp 
ligent robotics  sensor-fusion  and so forth. robocup consists of three competition tracks: 
real robot league: using physical robots to play soccer games. 
software agent league: using software or synthetic agents to play soccer games on an official soccer server over the network. 
expert skill competition: competition of robots which have special skills  but are not able to play a game. 
　robocup offers a software platform that forms the basis of the software or synthetic agent league. the goal is to enable a wider range of research in synthetic  or  virtual reality''  environments  that are today proving to be critical in training  entertainment  and education  tambe et al.  1 . the software agent league also promotes research on network-based multi-agent interactions  computer graphics  and physically realistic animation - a set of technologies which potentially promotes advanced use of internet. 
1 technical challenges in robocup 
robocup offers significant long term challenges  which will take a few decades to meet. however  due to the clarity of the final target  several subgoals can be derived  which define mid term and short term challenges. one of the major reasons why robocup is attractive to so many researchers is that it requires the integration of a broad range of technologies into a team of complete agents  as opposed to a task-specific functional module. the long term research issues are too broad to compile as a list of specific items. nevertheless  the challenges involve a broad range of technological issues ranging from the development of physical components  such as high performance batteries and motors  to highly intelligent real time perception and control software. 
　the mid term technical challenges  which are the target for the next 1 years  can be made more concrete  and a partial list of specific topics can be compiled. following is a partial list of research areas involved in robocup  mainly targeted for the mid term time span:  1  agent architecture in general   1  combining reactive approach and modeling/planning approach   1  real-time recognition  planning  and reasoning   1  reasoning and action in dynamics environment   1  sensor fusion   1  multiagent systems in general   1  behavior learning for complex tasks   1  strategy acquisition  and  1  cognitive modeling in general. 
　in addition to these technologies  providing a networkbased soccer server with high quality 1d graphics capabilities requires advancement of technologies for the real time animation of simulated soccer players and networkbased interactive multi-user server system. these are key technologies for network-based services in the coming years. 
　the robocup challenge shall be understood in the context of larger and longer range challenges  rather than as a one-shot challenge. thus  we wish to provide a series of short term challenges  which naturally leads to the accomplishment of the mid term and long term challenges. robocup challenge is organized into three ma-
jor classes;  1  synthetic agent challenge   1  physical agent challenge  and  1  infrastructure challenge. the robocup synthetic agent challenge deal with technologies which can be developed using software simulator  which is described in this paper. the robocup physical agent challenge intends to promote research using real robot  and thus requires longer-time frame for each challenge to be accomplished. details of this challange is described in  asada et al.  1   and carried out together with the robocup synthetic agent challenge but in more moderate timeframe. the infrstructure challenge will be presented to facilitate research to establish infrastructure aspect of robocup  ai  and robotics in general. such challenge includes education programs  common robot platforms and components standard  automatic commentary systems and intelligent studio systems for robocup games. 
1 overview of the robocup synthetic agent challenge 
for the robocup synthetic agent challenge 1  we offer three specific targets  critical not only for robocup but also for general ai research. these challenges will specifically deal with the software agent league  rather than the real robot league. 
　the fundamental issue for researchers who wish to build a team for robocup is to design a multiagent system that behaves in real-time  performing reasonable goal-directed behaviors. goals and situations change dynamically and in real-time. because the state-space of the soccer game is prohibitively large for anyone to hand-code all possible situations and agent behaviors  it is essential that agents learn to play the game strategically. the research issues in this aspect of the challenge involve: 
　 1  machine learning in a multiagent  collaborative and adversarial environment   1  multiagent architectures  enabling real-time multiagent planning and plan execution in service of teamwork  and  1  opponent modelling. 
　therefore  we propose the following three challenges as areas of concentration for the robocup synthetic agent challenge 1: 
  learning challenge 
  teamwork challenge 
  opponent modeling challenge 
　evaluating how well competing teams meet these challenges in robocup is clearly difficult. if the task is to provide the fastest optimization algorithm for a certain problem  or to prove a certain theorem  the criteria are evident. however  in robocup  while there may be a simple test set to examine basic skills  it is not generally possible to evaluate the goodness of a team until it actually plays a game. therefore  a standard  highly skilled team of opponents is useful to set an absolute basis for such evaluation. we hope to use hand-coded teams  possibly with highly domain-specific coordination  to provide such a team of opponents. indeed  in a series of preliminary competitions such as prerobocup1 held at the iros-1 conference  and several other local competitions  teams with well-designed hand-coded behaviors  but without learning and planning capabilities  have performed better than teams with learning and planning schemes. of course  these hand-coded teams enjoyed the advantage of very low game complexities in initial stages of robocup - increasingly complex team behaviors  tactics and strategies will necessitate agents to face up to the challenges of learning  teamwork and opponent modeling. 
　therefore  responses to this challenge will be evaluated based on  1  their performance against some standard hand-coded teams as well as other teams submitted as part of the competition;  1  behaviors where task specific constraints are imposed  such as probabilistic occurance of unexpected events   1  a set of task specific sequences  and  1  novelty and technical soundess of the apporach. 
1 the robocup learning challenge 1 objectives 
the objectives of the robocup learning 
challenge is to solicit comprehensive learning schemes applicable to the learning of multiagent systems which need to adapt to the situation  and to evaluate the merits and demerits of proposed approaches using standard tasks. 
learning is an essential aspect of intelligent systems. 
in the robocup learning challenge  the task is to create a learning and training method for a group of agents. the learning opportunities in this domain can be broken down into several types: 
1. off-line skill learning by individual agents; 
1. off-line collaborative learning by teams of agents; 
1. on-line skill and collaborative learning; 
1. on-line adversarial learning. 
　the distinction between off-line and on-line learning is particularly important in this domain since games last for only 1 minutes. thus on-line techniques  particularly if they are to learn concepts that are specific to an individual game  must generalize very quickly. for example  if a team is to learn to alter its behavior against an individual opponent  the team had better be able to improve its performance before the game is over and a 
	kitano  et al. 	1 
new opponent appears. such distinctions in learning can be applied to a broad range of multi-agent systems which involve learning capabilities. 
1 technical issues 
technical issues anticipated in meeting this challenge are the development of novel learning schemes which can effectively train individual agents and teams of agents in both off-line and on-line methods. one example of possible learning scheme for meeting this challenge is as follows: 
off-line skill learning by individual agents: 	learning to intercept the ball or learning to kick the ball with the appropriate power when passing. 
　since such skills are challenging to hand-code  learning can be useful during a skill development phase. however  since the skills are invariant from game to game  there is no need to relearn them at the beginning of each new game  stone and veloso  1 . 
off-line collaborative learning by teams of agents: learning to pass and receive the ball. 
　this type of skill is qualitatively different from the individual skills in that the behaviors of multiple agents must be coordinated. a  good  pass is only good if it is appropriate for the receivers receiving action  and vice versa. for example  if the passer passes the ball to the receiver's left  then the receiver must at the same time move to the left in order to successfully complete a pass. as above  such coordination can carry over from game to game  thus allowing off-line learning techniques to be used  stone and veloso  1 . 
on-line skill and collaborative learning: learning to play positions. 
　although off-line learning methods can be useful in the above cases  there may also be advantages to learning incrementally as well. for example  particular aspects of an opposing teams' behavior may render a fixed passing or shooting behavior inefective. in that case  the ability to adaptively change collaborative or individual behaviors during the course of a game  could contribute to a team's success. 
　at a higher level  team issues such as role  position  playing on the field might be best handled with adaptive techniques. against one opponent it might be best to use 1 defenders and 1 forwards; whereas another opponent might warrant a different configuration of players on the field. the best teams should have the ability to change configurations in response to events that occur during the course of a game. 
on-line adversarial learning: learning to react to predicted opponent actions. 
　if a player can identify patterns in the opponents' behaviors  it should be able to proactively counteract them. for example  if the opponent's player number 1 always passes to its teammate number 1  then player 1 should always be guarded when player 1 gets the ball. 
1 	evaluation 
for challenge responses that address the machine learning issue  particularly the on-line learning issue   evaluation should be both against the publicly available teams and against at least one previously unseen team. 
　first  teams will play games against other teams and publicly available teams under normal circumstances. this evaluates the team's general performance. this involves both al-based and non-ai based teams. 
next  teams will play a set of defined benchmarks. 
for example  after fixing their programs  challengers must play a part of the game  starting from the defined player positions  with the movement of the opponents pre-defined  but not disclosed to the challengers. after several sequences of the game  the performance will be evaluated to see if it was able to improve with experience. the movement of the opponents are not coded using absolute coordinate positions  but as a set of algorithms which generates motion sequences. the opponent algorithms will be provided by the organizers of the challenge by withholding at least one successful team from being publicly accessible. 
　other benckmarks which will clearly evaluate learning performance will be announced after discussion with challenge participants. 
1 the robocup teamwork challenge 1 objectives 
the robocup teamwork challenge addresses issues of real-time planning  re-plannig  and execution of multi-agent teamwork in a dynamic adversarial environment. major issues of interest in this specific challenge for the 1 period are architectures for real-time planning and plan execution in a team context  essential for teamwork in robocup . in addition  generality of the architecture for non-robocup applications will be an important factor. 
　teamwork in complex  dynamic multi-agent domains such as soccer mandates highly flexible coordination and communication to surmount the uncertainities  e.g.  dynamic changes in team's goals  team members' unexpected inability to fulfil responsibilities  or unexpected discovery of opportunities. unfortunately  implemented multi-agent systems often rely on preplanned  domainspecific coordination that fails to provide such flexibility. first  it is difficult to anticipate and preplan for all possible coordination failures; particularly in scaling up to complex situations. thus  it is not robust enough for dynamic tasks  such as soccer games. second  given domain specificity  reusability suffers. furthermore  planning coordination on the fly is difficult  particularly  in domains with so many possible actions and such large state spaces. indeed  typical planners need significantly longer to find even a single valid plan. the dynamics of the domain caused by the unpredictable opponent actions make the situation considerably more difficult. 
　a fundamental reason for these teamwork limitations is the current agent architectures. architectures such as 
soar  newell  1   rap  firby  1   irma  pollack  1   and bb1  hayes-roth et al.  1  facilitate an individual agent's flexible behaviors via mechanisms such as commitments and reactive plans. however  teamwork is more than a simple union of such flexible individual behaviors  even if coordinated. a now well-known example  originally from  cohen and levesque  1   is ordinary traffic  which even though simultaneous and coordinated by traffic signs  is not teamwork. indeed  theories of teamwork point to novel mental constructs as underlying teamwork  such as team goals  team plans  mutual beliefs  and joint commitments  grosz  1; cohen and levesque  1l   lacking in current agent architectures. in particular  team goals  team plans or mutual beliefs are not explicitly represented; furthermore  concepts of team commitments are absent. thus  agents cannot explicitly represent and reason about their team goals and plans; nor flexibly communicate/coordinate when unanticipated events occur. for instance  an agent cannot itself reason about its coordination responsibilities when it privately realizes that the team's current plan is unachievable - e.g.  that in the best interest of the team  it should inform its teammates. instead  agents must rely on domain-specific coordination plans that address such contigencies on a case-by-case basis. 
　the basic architectural issue in the teamwork challenge is then to construct architectures that can support planning of team activities  and more importantly execution of generated team plans. such planning and plan execution may be accomplished via a two tiered architecture  but the entire system must operate in real-time. in robocup soccer server  sensing will be done in every 1 to 1 milli-seconds  and action command can be dispatched every 1 milli-second. situation changes at milli-second order  thus planning  re-planning  and execution of plans must be done in real-time. 
1 technical issues 
we present a key set of issues that arise assuming our particular two tiered planning and plan-execution approach to teamwork. of course  those who approach the problem from different perspective may have different issues  and the issues may change depending on the type of architecture employed. 
　the following is the envisioned teamwork challenge in this domain:  i  a team deliberatively accumulates a series of plans to apply to games with different adversarial teams;  ii  game plans are defined at an abstract level that needs to be refined for real execution;  iii  real-time execution in a team-plan execution framework/architecture that is capable of addressing key contigencies. such an architecture also alleviates the planning concerns by providing some ''commonscnse'' teamwork behaviors - not all of the coordination actions are required to be planned in detail as a result. the key research tasks here are: 
contingency planning for multiagent adversarial game playing: before a game starts  one would expect the team to generate a strategic plan for the game that includes contingency plan segments that are to be recognized and eventually slightly adapted in real-time. two main challenges can be identified in this task: 
  definition of strategic task actions with probabilis-tic applicability conditions and effects. uncertainty in the action specification is directly related to the identification of possible probabilistic disruptive or favorable external events. 
  definition of objectives to achieve. in this domain  the goal of winning and scoring should be decomposed in a variety of more concrete goals that serve the ultimate final scoring goal. examples are actions and goals to achieve specific attacking or defending positioning. 
plan decomposition and merge: a correspondence between team actions and goals and individual actions and goals must be set. the team plan decomposition may create individual goals that are not necessarily known to all the team players. furthermore  within the contingency team plan  it is expected that there may be a variety of adversary-independent and adversarydependent goals. the decomposition  coordination  and appropriate merge of individual plans to the service of the main team plan remain open challenging research tasks. robocup provides an excellent framework to study these issues. 
executing team plans: team plan execution during the game is the determining factor in the performance of the team. it addresses the coordination contigencies that arise during the execution  without the need for detailed  domain-specific coordination plans. execution also monitors the contingency conditions that are part of the global contingency team plan. selection of the appropriate course of action is driven by the state information gathered by execution. 
1 	evaluations 
the teamwork challenge scenario described above has been idealized by several ai researchers  at least in the planning and multiagent communities. robocup  both in its simulated and real leagues  provides a synergistic framework to develop and/or test dynamic planning multiagent algorithms. 
　specifically  we are planning to evaluate the architecture and teams in the following evaluation scheme: 
basic performance: the team must be able to play reasonably well against both the best hand-coded teams  which has no planning  and against other planning-based systems. relative performance of the team can be measured by actually playing a series of games against other unknown teams. thus  basic performance will be measured by: 
  performance against hand-coded teams. 
  performance against other teams. 
robustness: the robustness in teamwork means that the team  as a whole  can continue to carry out the mission even if unexpected changes  such as accidental removal of the players in the team  sudden change of team conposition  or changes in operation environment. for example  if one of players in the 
	kitano etal. 	1 
team was disabled  the team should be able to cope with such accidents  by taking over the role of disabled players  or reformulating their team strategy. thus  this evalution represents a set of unexpected incidents during the game  such as: 
  some players will be disabled  or their capa-bility will be significantly undermined by these accidents. also  some disabled players may be enabled later in the game. 
  opponent switch their strategy  and the team must cope with their new strategy in real time. 
  some of opponent's players will be disabled  or their performance will be significantly undermined. these disabled players may come back to the game later. 
  teammate changes during the game. 
  weather factor changes. 
　the robocup teamwork challenge therefore is to define a general set of teamwork capabilities to be integrated with agent architectures to facilitate flexible  reusable teamwork. the following then establish the general evaluation criteria: 
general performace: general performance of the team  thus the underlying algorithms  can be measured by a series of games against various teams. this can be divided into two classes  1  normal compeitions where no accidental factors involved  and  1  contigency evaluaiton where accidental factors are introduced. 
real-time operations: the real-time execution  monotoring  and replanning of the contingency plan is an important factor of the evaluaiton. for any team to be successful in the robocup server  it must be able to react in real time: sensory information arrives between 1 and 1 times a second and agents can act up to 1 times a second. 
generality: reuse of architecture in other applications: illustrate the reuse of teamwork capabilities in other applications  including applications for information integration on the internet  entertainment  training  etc. 
conformity with learning: finally  given the premises above and the complexity of the issues  we argue and challenge that a real-time multiagent planning system needs to have the ability to be well integrated with a learning approach  i.e.  it needs to refine and dynamically adapt and refine its complete behavior  individual and team  based on its past experience. 
　other issues such as reuse of teamwork architecture within the robocup community  and planning for team players that are not yet active in order to increase their probability of being useful in future moves  such as role playing and positioning of the team players that do not have the ball  will be considered  too. 
1 robocup opponent modeling challenge 
agent modeling - modeling and reasoning about other agent's goals  plans  knowledge  capabilities  or emotions - is a key issue in multi-agent interaction. the robocup opponent modeling challenge calls for research on modeling a team of opponents in a dynamic  multiagent domain. the modeling issues in robocup can be broken down into three parts: 
on-line tracking: involves individual players' realtime  dynamic tracking of opponents' goals and intentions based on observations of actions. a player may use such tracking to predict the opponents' play and react appropriately. thus if a player predicts that player-1 is going to pass a ball to player-1  then it may try to cover player-1. such on-line tracking may also be used in service of deception. the challenges here are  i  real-time tracking despite the presence of ambiguity;  ii  addressing the dynamism in the world;  iii  tracking teams rather than only individuals - this requires an understanding of concepts involved in teamwork. 
on-line tracking may feed input to the on-line planner or the on-line learning alogrithm. 
on-line strategy recognition:  coach  agents for teams may observe a game from the sidelines  and understand the high-level strategies employed by the opposing team. this contrasts with on-line tracking because the coach can perform a much higher-level  abstract analysis  and in the absence of real-time pressures  its analysis can be more detailed. 
　　the coach agents may then provide input to its players to change the team formations  or play strategy. off-line review:  expert  agents may observe the teams playing in an after-action review  to recognize the strenghts and weaknesses of the teams  and provide an expert commentary. these experts may be trained on databases of human soccer play. 
　these issues pose some fundamental challenges that will significantly advance the state of the art in agent modeling. in particular  previous work has mostly focused on plan recognition in static  single-agent domains  without real-time constraints. only recently has attention shifted to dynamic  real-time environments  and modeling of multi-agent teamwork  tambe  1b . 
　a realistic challenge for ijcai-1 will be to aim for online tracking. optimistically  we expect some progress towards on-line strategy recognition; off-line review will likely require further research beyond ijcai-1. 
　for evaluation  we propose  at least  following evaluation to be carried out to measure the progress: 
game playing: a team of agents plays against two types of teams: 
  one or two unseen robocup team from ijcai-1  shielded from public view. 
  the same unseen robocup teams from ijcai-1 as above  but modified with some new behaviors. these teams will now deliberately try out new adventurous strategies  or new defensive strategies. 
disabled tracking: tracking functionality of the agents will be turned off  and compared with normal performance. 
deceptive sequences: fake teams will be created which generates deceptive moves. the challenger's agent must be able to recognize the opponent's deceptive moves to beat this team. 
　for each type of team  we will study the performance of the agent-modelers. of particular interest is variations seen in agent-modelers behaviors given the modification in the opponents' behaviors. for each type of team  we will also study the advise offered by the coach agent  and the reviews offered by the expert agents  and the changes in them given the changes in the opponents' behaviors. 
1 managing challenges 
in order to facilitate technical progress based on the robocup challenge  we offer basic resources and opportunities. 
the robocup challenge committee: the robocup challenge committee will be formed to execute the challenge initiative. the commit.ee will include members of the international executive committee for robocup and distinguished researchers not directly involved in robocup. the committee will create specific tasks and criteria for evaluation  as well as providing technical advice for the challengers. 
resources: in the robocup home page  basic software resources and technical information can be obtained.  http://www.robocup.org/robocup  software includes the soccer server system  which is a server system for the simulation track  and various sample teams. in addition  sample test sequences will be provided. the home page also provides a set of papers and technical documents related to robocup. 
competitions: a series of robocup competitions are planned to provide opportunities to test ideas. as international events  we are planning to have 
robocup-1 in paris  the official event of the world cup   robocup-1 victoria  as a part of 
ir.os-1 conference   and robocup-1 singapore 
 as a part of pricai-1 conference . several local competitions will be organized by local committee in each region. the final evaluation and exhibit of the results will be made at ijcai-1. 
workshops: workshops will be organized at major international conferences  as well as at local workshops  in order to faciliate exchange of information  to have technical discussions  and to get feedback on the status of the challengers in relation to the overall framework of the challenge. 
1 conclusion 
the robocup challenge-1 offers a set of three fundamental challenges  focused on learning  real-time planning  and opponent modeling. learning and real-time planning of multi-agent systems were chosen as the first set of challenges because they are essential technical issues for robocup  as well as for general ai systems using a multi-agent approach. together with the physical agent challenge  these challenges will be be a basis-for the robocup challenge-1  and for longer research enterprises. 
