 
this paper aims to develop further and systemize the theory of multiple belief change based on the previous work on the package contraction  developed by  fuhrmann and hansson 1  and the general belief changes  developed by  zhang 1 . two main representation theorems for general contractions are given  one is based on partial meet models and the other on nice-ordered partition models. an additional principle  called limit postulate  for the general belief changes is introduced which specifies properties of infinite belief changes. the results of this paper provides a foundation for investigating the connection between infinite nonmonotonic reasoning and multiple belief revision. 
1 	introduction 
belief change is the process through which a rational agent acquires new beliefs or retracts previously held ones. a very influential work on belief change goes back to alchourron  gardenfors and makinson  alchourron et al. 1    who developed a formal mechanism for the revision and the contraction of beliefs  which has been now widely referred to as the agm theory. for a set of existing beliefs  represented by a deductively closed set k of propositional sentences  and a new belief  represented by a propositional sentence a  three kinds of belief change operations are considered in the agm theory: expansion  contraction and revision  denoted by a' + a  k - a and /  * a  respectively. a set of rationality postulates for belief contractions and belief revisions  based on the idea of minimal change  are given and two different tools  partial meet model and epistemic entrenchment ordering  for constructing belief change operations have been developed in  alchourron et al. 1   and  gadenfors and makinson 1    respectively. although agm's belief change operators appear to capture of what is required of an ideal system of belief change  they are not suitable to characterize changes of beliefs with sets of new beliefs  especially with infinite sets. a number of studies on extending and generalizing these operations so as to enable a treatment of belief change by sets of sentences then come out  fuhrmann 1   niederee 1   rott 1   hansson 1   fuhrmann and hansson 1   zhang 1   zhang 1 . the extended operators for expansion  contraction and revision are usually called multiple ones while the original operators are referred to as singleton ones. a framework for multiple belief changes is not only interesting but also useful. we will benefit from it at least in the following aspects: 
  the new information an agent accepts often involves si-multaneously more than one belief  or even infinitely many  especially when the underlying language is extended to the first-order logic. 
  it has been found that there are fundamental differences between iterated belief changes and simultaneous belief changes. the revisions of a belief set by a sentence a and then by a sentence b are by no means identical to the revision simultaneously by the set {a  b . a framework for multiple changes will provide a possibility to describe the relationship between two sorts of belief changes  see  zhang 1   . a ready example is the supplementary postulates for multiple revisions see subsection 1 of this paper . 
  connections between belief change and non-monotonic reasoning have been widely investigated in the literature  makinson and gardenfors 1   brewka 1   nebel 1   gardenfors and makinson 1   zhang 
1 . the key idea is translating b e k * a into ai-b and vice versa. as claimed in  gardenfors and makinson 1  this translation makes sense only on the finite level. 'the idea of infinite revision functions seems to make good intuitive sense.'  see  makinson and gardenfors 1  p.1  
¡¡there have been several proposals for multiple belief changes   fuhrmann 1   rott 1   hansson 1   fuhrmann and hansson 1   zhang 1   zhang 1  . this paper is by no means to present an alternative one. 
instead of that  we attempt to combine these approaches and develop some necessary tools to improve and systemize them. we will outline  in section 1  the two main paradigms of multiple belief changes: package contraction  developed by  fuhrmann and hansson 1    and general belief change operations  developed by 
zhang  etal. 


1 	automated reasoning 

zhang  et al. 

1 	automated reasoning 


zhang  etal. 


1 conclusions and future work 
two representation theorems for the general contraction are presented in this paper. the first one illustrates that the a g m partial meet contraction can be smoothly extended to the case of multiple changes. the second one persuades us that confining our attention only to the generalization of postulates for singleton belief change would fail to get a full characterization of infinite belief changes. this result also provides a powerful tool to investigate the connection between belief revision and non-monotonic reasoning. in  zhang et al. 1    we introduced a non-monotonic logic the semantic of which bases on the theory of multiple belief revision and one of the inference rules in which  finite supracompactness  is just the counterpart of the limit postulate. 
1 	automated reasoning 
