 
this paper studies the semantics for the class of all defeasible  inheritance  networks  including cyclic and in consistent networks using a transformation approach. first we show that defeasible networks can be translated  tractably  to default theories while preserving horty's pathoff credulous semantics for all consistent networks. using the existing methods in dealing with the semantics of default logic  we are able to provide a tractable skeptical semantics  the well-founded semantics  and a new credulous semantics  the regular semantics  both of which are defined for any defeasible network. furthermore  we show that these semantics are based on the same principle of specificity used by horty in defining his credulous semantics of defeasible networks. 
1 introduction 
two fundamental problems are to be addressed in this paper. first  the semantics of defeasible networks has previously been studied mainly under the assumption that such a network is acyclic and consistent. there is little understanding of the semantics for the class of all defeasible networks. researchers in the field have not been able to provide an acceptable semantics for any defeasible networks that may involve cycles and/or that may be inconsistent. 
　second  although a significant body of knowledge has been accumulated providing us with a good understanding of general nonmonotonic formalisms  such as default logic  autoepistemic logic  circumscription  and logic programming with negation  and their relationships  little is known about how path-based reasoning is related to other forms of nonmonotonic reasoning. for this  horty raised the question of whether it is possible  and if yes  how to specify the consequences of a network by interpreting it in some more standard nonmonotonic formalism  horty  1 . 
1 	automated reasoning 
　a number of transformations from defeasible network to a more general form of nonmonotonic reasoning have been proposed  etherington and reiter  1; gelfond and przymusinska  1; gregorie  1; haugh  1; lin  1; reiter and cirscuolo  1 . none of these proposed transformations preserves the path-off credulous semantics even for consistent  acyclic networks. only recently there had been some breakthrough. e.g. by transforming consistent and acyclic defeasible network into an abstract argumentation framework  dung and son  1   dung and son argue that the credulous semantics of consistent and acyclic network can be expressed in dung's argumentation framework. in the same paper they show that the answer set semantics of extended logic programming can be used to express the credulous semantics of consistent and acyclic networks. however  if a network is cyclic  their transformation could generate an infinite extended logic program. later  they reformulated a new semantics for default logic based on the idea of path-based defeasible reasoning and provided a translation from consistent and acyclic networks to their default logic  dung and son  1 . 
　cycles in a network are indispensable in representing certain concepts. 
　the first three nets in figure 1 summarize some of the situations where a cycle in a network may be formed. e.g. net 1 is the case where two properties may lead to each other. in the strict sense  it describes an if and only if relation. a simple case of this relation is that two different names describe the same property. in addition  since we are dealing with defeasible networks  a link from p to q could mean  normally the property p leads to the property q. for example  a professor who teaches a course on logic programming usually also teaches a course on ai  and vice versa. 
net 1 is about two properties being mutually exclusive; 
e.g. a male is not a female and vice versa. 
　net 1 shows a case where one concept leads to another which  usually  leads to the negation of the former. an example is that an edmontonian is a north american 

but a north american is usually not an edmontonian. an extreme example is that every lottery winner is a person but a person is usually not a lottery winner.1 
　note that  if a piece of information  such as  a person is usually not a lottery winner  is not presented in a network  no derivation is possible. this is because defeasible networks do not directly implement the closed world assumption. 
　net 1 shows the situation where inconsistency arises in horty's definition of defeasible inheritability. such a definition allows an extension to include contradictory conclusions  thus allowing derivations from contradicted information . alternative definitions could avoid this problem; e.g. touretzky's  touretzky  1  allows two extensions  in this case  with consistent conclusions. 
　we stress that it is the cycles  not the inconsistency described above  that causes a network to lose all its extensions: horty showed that any acyclic network possesses at least one credulous extension  but a network involving cycles may not have any credulous extension  horty  1 . 
　the problem that a network has no credulous extension is caused by the presence of conflicting information: there is a part of the network  no matter how it is interpreted there is another part that contradicts it. 
　net 1 illustrates a cyclic network that has no credulous extension. this could be understood when a is an individual  e is interpreted as edmontonian  a as albertan  and n as north american. then  it is correct to say that a north american is usually not an albertan  n --  a . however  this way of interpretating the network makes it erroneous to say that a north american 
   'some of these examples can be better represented using both defeasible and strict links. the work has been extended to networks of mixed links in a forthcoming paper by the authors. 
is usually also an edmontonian  n --  e . the network could be interpreted differently; e.g. e  a  and n are different names of the same property. then  it is the link n --  a that is erroneous. 
　in many application domains  the presence of only consistent information could be considered an exception rather than the norm. for example  in medical diagnosis  contradictions arise from many forms of knowledge incompleteness  e.g.  lack of medical knowledge  lack of individual patient symptoms  and error or misinterpretation of both collective and individual data. 
　it has been argued by many authors that inconsistent information should not result in one of the two extremes: anything or nothing. in particular  inconsistent information should be localized. for example  the contradiction out of passing and failing a student should not affect the derivation that houston is a city in texas  and should not allow us to derive that houston is a city in california. though defeasible networks seem to provide a particularly suitable form of reasoning to accommodate a notion of local inconsistency  so far there has been no investigation into this possibility. 
　when we study the semantics of networks with cycles  what principle s  should we follow  an important insight provided by this paper is that no new principle needs to be proposed. all we need is the principle of specificity that has been used all along in defining credulous semantics. net 1 illustrates this principle for an acyclic network: since the property y has conflicting inheritance from the two nodes u and v  the application of the path fl* x ti t; t1 ti  blocks the path u -  y. 

　under this principle  let us consider the network net 1 of figure 1. from a conservative point of view  one may not be able to conclude anything from this net  since if we have p{a   then we will get q a  and thus - p a . however  under the above principle  this net has a conservative extension {1 1} which concludes p a   q a   q 1    p 1 . this is because the path 1 blocks the path 1 on object node a. that is  p a  is more specific than  p a . it would be easy to understand what the net could mean in a realistic situation if we represent p as lottery-winner   q as person  a and 1 as two individuals. 
wang  you & yuan 1 


1 	automated reasoning 

	wang  you & yuan 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 

 dung and son  1  p. dung and t. son. an argument-theoretic approach to reasoning with specificity. in kr-1  pages 1 1. 
 etherington and reiter  1  
d. etherington and ft reiter. on inheritance hierarchies with exceptions. in aaai-1  pages 1. morgan kaufmann  1. 
 gelfond and przymusinska  1  
m. gelfond and h. przymusinska. formalization of inheritance reasoning in autoepistemic logic. fundamental informaticae  xiii:1  1. 
 gregorie  1  e. gregorie. skeptical theories of inheritance and nonmonotonic logics. methodologies for intelligence system  1-1  1. 
 haugh  1  b. haugh. tractable theories of multiple defeasible inheritance in ordinary non-monotonic logics. in aaai-1  pages 1. aaa1 press  1. 
 horty  1  j.f. horty. some direct theories of nonmonotonic inheritance. in m. cabbay  c. hogger  and j. robinson  editors  handbook of logic in artificial intelligence and logic programming  vol 1: nonmonotonic reasoning and uncertain reasoning  pages 1. oxford university  1. 
 kautz and selman  1  h. kautz and b. selman. hard problems for simple default logics. artificial intelligence  pages 1  1. 
 lin  1  f. lin. a study of nonmonotonic reasoning. phd thesis  stanford university  1. 
 przymusinska and przymusinski  1  h. przymusinska and t.c. przymusinski. stationary default extensions. technical report  california state polytechnic and university of california at riverside  1. 
 reiter and cirscuolo  1  r. reiter and g. cirscuolo. on interacting defaults. in readings in nonmonotonic reasoning  pages 1. morgan kaufmann  1. 
 reiter  1  r. reiter. a logic for default reasoning. artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
	 selman and levesque  1  b. 	selman 	and 
h. levesque. the complexity of path-based defeasible inheritance. artificial intelligence  1 :1  1. 
 touretzky  1  d.touretzky. the mathematics of inheritance systems. morgan kaufmann  1. 
 van gelder et al  1  van gelder  a. ross  and j.s. schlipf. the well-founded semantics for general logic programs. journal of the acm  1 :1 1. 
 you and yuan  1  j. you and l. yuan. on the equivalence of semantics for normal logic programs. j. logic programming  1-1  1. 
	wang  you & yuan 	1 
