 
we present autoepistemic description logics  adls   in which the language of description logics is augmented with modal operators interpreted according to the nonmonotonic logic mknf. we provide decision procedures for query answering in two very expressive adls. we show their representational features by addressing defaults  integrity constraints  role and concept closure. hence  adls provide a formal characterization of a wide variety of nonmonotonic features commonly available in frame-based systems and needed in the development of practical applications. 
1 introduction 
description logics  dl  have been studied in the past years to provide a formal characterization of frame-based systems. however  while the fragment of first-order logic which characterizes the most popular constructs of these languages has been clearly identified  see for example  woods & schmolze  1    there is not yet consensus on the features of framebased systems that cannot be formalized in a classical firstorder setting. in fact  frame systems  as well as dl-based systems  brachman et al  1  macgregor  1   admit forms of nonmonotonic reasoning  such as defaults and closed world reasoning  and procedural features  e.g. rules. these issues have been addressed in the recent literature  see for example  baader & hollunder  1  donini et al.t 1  donini  nardi  & rosati  1  padgham & zhang  1  
quantz & royer  1    but the proposals typically capture one of the above mentioned aspects. 
　in addition-  most implementations of dl-based systems are object-centered  which enables them to perform efficient reasoning on the properties of individuals. such behaviour can be naturally justified if one can restrict the reasoning to the individuals that are known to the knowledge base  i.e. individuals that have an explicit name . based on this intuition  an epistemic extension of dls with a modal operator k  interpreted in terms of minimal knowledge has been proposed in  donini et a/.  1 . in that formalism one can express a form of closed-world reasoning  as well as integrity constraints in the form of epistemic queries  as proposed in  reiter  1  ; in addition  by admitting a simple form of epis-
1 	automated reasoning 
temic sentences in the knowledge base  one can formalize the so-called procedural rules. 
　in this paper we propose a new framework of autoepistemic description logics  adls  which follows the lines of  donini et al.  1   extending it in two respects: we rely on the nonmonotonic modal logic mknf  lifschitz  1  and we consider several kinds of epistemic sentences to be used in the knowledge base. in mknf one can formalize default logic  autoepistemic logic  circumscription and logic programming  i.e. many of the best known formalisms for nonmonotonic reasoning. with mknf we can naturally extend the previous approach to modal dls  by introducing a second modal operator interpreted as autoepistemic assumption. moreover  reasoning methods are available for deduction in propositional mknf  rosati  1 . 
　as for the representational features of the framework  we show that adls are able to capture a large variety of nonfirst-order features. in addition to procedural rules and epistemic queries  the formalism accounts for defaults  integrity constraints inside the kb  role and concept closure  which are addressed in the paper. moreover  the whole representational power of mknf becomes available  thus making it feasible to consider new features  like autoepistemic reasoning  that are not implemented in current dl-based systems. 
　as for reasoning in adls we define methods for query answering which provide sound and complete reasoning procedures in dl-based systems admitting the above mentioned non-first-order features. it turns out that the proposed deduction methods constitute interesting decidable extensions of propositional nonmonotonic reasoning. 
　based on the above considerations we argue that adls can indeed be considered as a unified framework for the logical reconstruction of frame-based systems. 
　the paper is organized as follows. we first present the extension of dls obtained by adding the epistemic operators of mknf. we then discuss the representational features of adls by considering several forms of nonmonotonic reasoning and integrity constraints. finally  we address reasoning in these logics by providing reasoning methods for two rather general cases. 
1 autoepistemic description logics 
autoepistemic description logics  adls  are defined as an extension of dls  in which the modal operators k and a 

	1 	reconstruction of frame-based systems 
in this section we show that the expressive capabilities of 
adls allow for the reconstruction of several nonmonotonic features of kr systems. in particular  we focus on: defaults  integrity constraints  role and concept closure. 
	donini  nard1  & rosati 	1 

language with epistemic abilities. nevertheless  it would be very desirable to express ics as any other piece of information on the domain of interest  i.e. as sentences inside the kb. the difficulty that arises is precisely in the formalization of the notions of closure underlying these forms of integrity constraints. notably  ics do not add  objective information : rather  they impose conditions on the consistency of the kb. this is true in the case of first-order kbs  or kbs with a single model as in the case under consideration. in 
the case of kbs with multiple models  ics can be viewed as an a fortiori check which establishes which of the models are actually allowed. in particular  many forms of ics impose properties that must hold for the known individuals of the kb. the modal operator k appears as an appropriate way to formalize this intuition. moreover  conditions imposed by ics are consistency conditions which cannot change the content of the kb. in other words  augmenting the kb with ics can only have one of the following two possible effects: either the model of the kb remains unchanged  it satisfies the ics   or the kb becomes inconsistent  since its model does not satisfy the ics . as we shall see  the modal operator a turns out to be well-suited to this purpose. 
we now show that the combination of the modalities k and 
a provides for the formalization in adls of sophisticated constraints on the kb content. 
example 1. let us consider the ic  each known person must be known to be either male or female   which is meant to avoid any situation where an individual has been added to the 
　we remark that there is a precise correspondence between the a operator and moore's l operator of autoepistemic logic  rosati  1 . from this correspondence  the above example can also be understood as a variation of the  classi-
1 	automated reasoning 

	donini  nardi  & rosati 	1 

1 	automated reasoning 

except tor the tact that each rule is applied only to epistemic prefixed formulas. 
first  we define the notion of modal atoms of a subjec-
　we concentrate on the rules that handle subjectively quantified expressions  and on a rule that saturates the branch wrt modal atoms of e. we phrase them using k; the cases arising from the use of both modalities k and a are analogous. the rules are as follows: 
　an open completed branch b does not always represent a model. to select models according to the preference criterion  one needs to characterize the objective knowledge associated with b. in particular  one has to distinguish between the objective knowledge implied by k-prefixed and a-prefixed modal atoms  rosati  1 . to this aim  we remark that the acknowledgments 
this research has been funded by italian murst   tecniche di ragionamento non monotono  and  linguaggi per la modellizzazione concettuale dei requisiti   by ec esprit ltr project  foundations of data warehouse quality'*  and by asi  italian space agency . 
