 
structure-mapping is a provably np-hard problem which is argued to lie at the core of the human metaphoric and analogical reasoning faculties. this np-hardness has meant that early attempts at optimal solutions to the problem have had to be augmented with sub-optimal heuristics to ensure tractable performance. this paper considers various grounds for qualifying the competence of such heuristic approaches  and offers an evaluation of the sub-optimal performance of three different models of analogy  sme  acme and sapper. 
1; introduction 
metaphor interpretation and analogical reasoning are two  closely related  cognitive faculties which rely upon structure mapping to generate coherent and systematic correspondences between two domains of discourse. but since structure-mapping is clearly a graph-isomorphism 
process which must consider a combinatorial number of such correspondences to generate an optimal mapping  it is both intuitively and provably an np-hard problem. 
   a variety of computational approaches to the problem have been described in the ai literature  such as the structure mapping engine  sme  of  falkenhainer et ah 
1   the analogical constraint mapping engine  acme  of  holyoak and thagard 1  and the sapper model of  veale et al 1a b . the first of these  sme  provided an optimal  and thus potentially exponential  solution to the problem  followed by a heuristic  suboptimal greedy-merge approach  see  oblinger and forbus 1   and later  an incremental approach  see 
 forbus et al. 1  . falkenhainer et al.  provide a complexity analysis of sme that identifies several factors leading to factorial explosion  but argued that analogies producing such difficulties were unlikely to occur. at its heart the original sme is a forest-matching mechanism  which extends known results regarding the 1 n1  complexity of determining sub-tree isomorphism  e.g.  see  garey & johnson 1    akutsu  1   to forests of inter-tangled tree representations. layered on top of this forest matcher is a factorial merge process which combines the results of the polynomial sub-tree matching phase  called partial maps  or pmaps  into larger  global mappings  gmaps . this merge process is clearly 1n  where n is the number of pmaps  isomorphic sub-tree matches  involved. sme's designers state that flat representations  i.e.  non-nested  that cause n to be large will cause sme to be overly factorial  but that analogies leading to this situation would be rare or incoherent 'jumbles of unconnected expressions'  p1  1 . 
however  this is shown not to be the case. veale et al. 
 1b  demonstrate that many concepts-most notably those that underlie nouns  such as composer and war  but also story-based or narrative-structured concepts-are essentially object-centred  and are most naturally represented as a multitude of shallow trees. these trees are highly-connected in a coherent manner by means of shared arguments  common leaves . a mapping between two such domains is illustrated in figure 1 below: 

 control composer orchestra   control general battle plan  
 control composer baton   isa theatre of war theatre  
 part orchestra percussion   control general sabre  
	 control theatre manager concert theatre  	 perform soldier warfare  
 part orchestra musician   part army artillery  
 attr composer artistic   control general army  
 control musician musical instrument   part army soldier  
 part percussion drum   part artillery cannon  
 attr drum 1-overture   attr general ruthless  
 control composer musical-score  control soldier musket  
 isa concert theatre theatre   attr cannon russian campaign  
figure 1: partial domain descriptions relating to the concepts composer and general. noisy predications which do not contribute to the metaphor  composers are generals  are shown in italics. 
1 	case-based reasoning 

this type of commonly occurring metaphor exacerbates 
sme's original 1n  complexity. for example  the metaphor surgeons are butchers requires less that 1 seconds of processing time in sapper  yet generates enough pmaps to keep an optimal sme busy for many billions of years. veale et al. report the results of figure 1 for an empirical test involving over 1 object-centred representations  drawn from the domain of professions : 

figure 1: evaluation of sapper  sme and acme. the unavailability of times for sme and acme reflects the inability of these models to run in a matter of days. 
sapper out-performs sme in these domains because it is designed to seek out structure laterally from shallow trees that are connected via common elements  while sme seeks structure vertically from the hierarchical nesting of deep trees. sapper can also encode the kind of verbcentred story analogues upon which sme demonstrates its strongest competence  such as the karla the hawk and fortress: tumor stories . this paper builds upon these results to show that while heuristic  sub-optimal greedysme and incremental-sme avoid factorial time performance  they are still very sensitive to tree organization  producing poor mappings when dealing with object-centred representations. we also apply our intuitions to the sapper and acme models  demonstrating that while the latter is from the outset a sub-optimal model  it also exhibits diminished competence on hard problems. this discussion will allow us to outline in greater detail exactly what we mean by a hard analogical problem. 
1. cognitive theories of structure mapping 
acme approaches the structure-mapping problem from a different perspective than either sme or sapper  pursuing what might be called a natural computation approach to analogy and metaphor. acme models structure-mapping as a problem of parallel constraint satisfaction  in which the demands of 1 -to-1 coherence and structural systematicity are coded as soft constraints  or pressures  on the system. ultimately  it is a sub-optimal approach which offers no guarantees of mapping quality. 
¡¡acme employs a hopfield-style connectionist network to encode mapping constraints  see  hopfield and tank  1  . every structure-mapping hypothesis-either between a source and target predicate or between a source and target entity-is coded as a distinct neuron. likewise  structural entailments among these hypotheses are coded as bi-directional excitatory links between the corresponding nodes  while inhibitory links are used to connect mutually exclusive hypotheses. 
   such an arrangement is the connectionist equivalent of a 1-cnf sat formula  raising the question of acme's logical soundness. indeed  it happens that the use of bi-directional linkages in acme-which makes all implications mutual implications-means that an acme representation is logically unsound. because argument mappings can dictate predicate mappings  acme is sound only when the source and target structures are trees 
 hence argument mappings do imply predicate mappings   but as noted  structure mapping is polynomially bounded anyway in such situations. 
   overall  the complexity prognosis of acme is not good: as a feedback-based neural network  there is no guaranteed polynomial bound on its time performance. yet  because the network size is polynomially-bounded  i.e.  1 n1  nodes and 1 n1  linkages  where n is the number of distinct symbols in the source domain   the theoretical results of  brack and goodman 1  apply  who prove that a hopfield-style network of polynomial size can only optimally solve np-hard problems if np = 
p. so  since an acme network realistically embodies a polynomial algorithm  why should it be allowed to consume an exponential amount of time doing so  
1. sapper: a memory-situated model 
the sapper model of  veale et al 1a b  views semantic memory as a localist graph in which nodes represent distinct concepts  and arcs between those nodes represent semantic / conceptual relations between those concepts. memory management under sapper is pro-
active toward structure mapping  that is  it employs rules of structural similarity-called triangulation and squaring-to determine if any two nodes may at some future time be placed in systematic correspondence in a metaphoric context. if so  sapper notes this fact by laying down a bridge relation between these nodes  to be exploited in some future structure-mapping session. 

veale & keane 

spread activation from node t in long-term memory to a horizon h spread activation from node s in long-term memory to a horizon h 
when a wave of activation from t meets a wave from s at a bridge t' :s' linking the target domain concept t' to the source domain concept s' then: 
find a chain of semantic relations r that links both  to t and s' to s if r is found  then the bridge  is balanced relative to t:s  so do: 
	generate a partial interpretation  pmap  	of the metaphor t:s as follows 
for every target concept t between and t as linked by r do 
put t in alignment with the equivalent concept s between s ' and s 
let 
once the set of all pmaps within the horizon h have been found  do 
evaluate the richness of each pmap 
	sort the collection 	of pmaps in descending order of richness. 
	pick the first  richest  interpretation 	as a seed for overall interpretation. 
	visit every other pmap 	in descending order of richness 
	if it is coherent to merge 	with t  i.e.  without violating 1-to-lness  then 
otherwise discard 
	when 	is exhausted  	will contain the overall sapper interpretation of t:s 
figure 1: the sapper algorithm  as based on the exploitation of cross-domain bridge-points in semantic memory. 

squaring rule: if bjk is a bridge  and if there already exist the linkages lij andllk of the semantic type l  forming three sides of a square between the concept nodes ci  cj  ck and cl  then complete the square and augment memory with a new bridge bil. 
at some future time  if sapper wishes to determine a structural mapping between a target domain rooted in the concept node t  for target  and one rooted in the node s  source   it applies the algorithm of figure 1. 
   the sapper algorithm comprises two main phases: the first of these seeks out the set of all well-formed and balanced semantic pathways  of length   1h  that originate at the root node of the target  t   and terminate at the root node of the source  s   crossing a single conceptual bridge  i.e.  the domain cross-over point  at its mid-point. each such pathway corresponds to a partial interpretation  a pmap in sme parlance  of the metaphor/analogy. the second phase coalesces this collection of pmaps  into a coherent global whole; it does this using a seeding algorithm  see  keane and brayshaw  1   which starts with the structurally richest pmap as its seed  and then attempts to fold each other pmap into this seed  if it is coherent to do so  in descending order of the richness of those pmaps. this seeding phase is directly equivalent to the greedy merge phase of greedy-sme  see  oblinger & forbus 1 . 
1 	case-based reasoning 
1. proof: structure-mapping is np-hard 
in this section we place our arguments on a solid footing by proving the np-hardness of the structure mapping problem. though the known np-complete problem lcs  largest common sub-graph  is perhaps a more immediate match  we instead employ here 1dm  1dimensional matching  as a proof basis  a problem which seeks to obtain a non-overlapping matching of points in a 1-d space. a consideration of 1dm will shed light on the worst case scenario as encountered by the greedy heuristics employed by greedy-sme. garey and johnson    define 1dm as follows: 

proof: to reformulate 1dm as a problem of structuremapping  it is necessary to represent each 1-d point as a pair of predicates  one in each of 
the source s and target t domains  such that these predicates are only allowed to map onto each other. furthermore  any isomorphic mapping must not contain two different predicate matches that arise from two points sharing one or more coordinates. we can ensure this using the following polynomial transformation: 


now  because the predicate p is uniquely tagged with the subscript xyz which ties it to a particular 1-d point  these two predicate structures can map only to each other. when so mapped during the analogy process  such a mapping results in the creation of the following structure  a pmap in sme parlance : 

in this manner a root mapping will be created for each point in m. note also that 	is unique for each pairing of 	and 	thus 	and 	are tied together and cannot be cross-mapped with any other point coordinate. suppose we have two such pmaps  and mapk = arising out of the two which share a zthese maps cannot therefore be merged to create a larger mapping as such a merge results in zi being mapped to both  a clear violation of mapping isomorphism. 
   once a maximal gmap is found for the analogy  each pair  of this gmap can then be decomposed and reassembled  in polynomial time  to recreate a point  that is added to 
m'. since the gmap is maximal  so is m'. because it solves 1dm  structure-mapping is thus np-hard. 
1. problem reorganization for tractability 
a large body of problem instances may nevertheless be tractably amenable to an optimal sapper variant. if an optimal sapper solution can be obtained for a large enough body of problem examples  these solutions can be used as ceilings to measure the competence of suboptimal heuristics like greedy merging / seeding. 
   the domain descriptions in the sapper profession corpus contain on average over 1 predications each. test metaphors in the profession corpus thus generate too many partial mappings to make optimal evaluation tractable. yet  some problem re-organization can be applied to reduce the number of pmaps to frequently make an optimal-sapper interpretation feasible  without losing the combinatorial scope of the interpretation. this reorganization process  whereby redundant areas of the combinatorial search space are pruned  is the equivalent of arc-consistency testing in satisfaction problems to a priori remove contradictory variable assignments  see  mohr and henderson  1  . 
¡¡for each metaphor  whose pmap set is denoted a conflict graph is constructed in time  by determining for each pmap the set of other pmaps with which it cannot be combined. this set is similar to the set of nogoods calculated by the sme algorithm  though it used differently to achieve more extensive reductions in performance time. the conflict set cfi for a particular pmap is thus defined as: 

compatibility between pmaps can thus be defined as: 

in contrast to sme  optimal-sapper uses this information to recognize any compatibility-based redundancies  and redistribute them accordingly before entering the punishing factorial merge-stage  as follows: 

given that the combinatorial merge stage of an optimalsapper algorithm is  each such pmap factored out a priori lowers the eventual cost another exponential notch. on our corpus of profession metaphors  we have found that problem reduction of this form reduces the number of pmaps for each metaphor by an average of 1%  pruning the search space of the most intractable instance  generals are surgeons  from to 
one more manageable by optimal-sapper  
1. experiment: sapper vs.& greedy-sme 
we can now quantify the competence of sub-optimal heuristics such as seeding and greedy-search as a percentage of optimal performance. but first  we consider the nature of the interpretations that structuremapping algorithms will generate for these test metaphors. the mapping of figure 1 is the sapper interpretation of the metaphor composers are generals  while the mapping of figure 1 is that returned by greedy-sme for the same metaphor. 
¡¡since an official implementation of greedy-sme is not yet publicly available   forbus  1    we therefore simulate greedy-sme by feeding the pmaps generated by the available optimal-sme through the sapper seeding stage. this a computationally equivalent process. 
veale & keane 

if composer is like general then drum is like cannon and powerful is like loud and loud is like powerful and conductor baton is like sword and tchaikovsky is like napoleon and libretto is like plan and narrow is like dangerous and 1th century is like french and music ecital is like cavalry charge and long is like sharp and orchestra is like army and listener is like soldier 
and w a mozart is like george patten 
and percussion is like artillery and theatre is like influential and russian is like 1th century and music composition is like bomb raid 
and musical is like healthy and music note is like enemy  soldier and sudden is like dead and piano is like snub fighter and fictional is like on target and character is like smart bomb and 1th century is like arrogant and symphony is like military propaganda and violin is like musket and musical score is like enemy army and operatic act is like medal and opera is like militaiy uniform and inspiration is like corpse figure 1: simulated greedy-sme interpretation of  composers are generals . 
a selection of the mappings in figure 1 above are displayed in an italics face to convey their 'ghost' status: 'ghosts' are essentially noisy mappings that might work in another metaphoric context but which are not systematic here. but why does greedy-sme generate so many ghosts while sapper produces none  when both employ equivalent merge processes  to see why  consider that sme and sapper agree on three tacit assumptions for seeding: first  that a goodness ordering can be placed upon the set of pmaps; secondly  that the pmap chosen as seed for the merge is rich enough to justify its own inclusion in the global mapping; and thirdly  that this seed is rich enough to nudge the overall merge process toward a good to optimal global mapping. however  greedy-sme-unlike sapper-does not generate sufficiently rich  and thus differentiable  pmaps in object-centred domains to make these assumptions work. as these domains are best represented as a broad 
1 	case-based reasoning 
forest of many shallow trees rather than a tight forest of few  deep trees  see  veale et al 1    the pmaps generated by sme for object-centred metaphors are equally shallow and numerous. in fect  these impoverished sme pmaps resemble the geometric pmaps generated in section 1 when reposing 1dm as structure-mapping. one clearly would not expect a greedy approach to work in this geometric context as no one pmap would have enough structure to successfully guide the merge process to a good solution. 
   the competence of sapper and greedy-sme has been determined over the test corpus of 1+ profession metaphors  where the optimal-sapper of section 1 is used as a savant: a mapping of a sub-optimal interpretation is considered valid if it is also contained in the optimal sapper interpretation. the sub-optimal competence of sapper and greedy-sme is thus calculated as 1 *  no. of valid mappings  /  total no. of mappings . if this validity criterion seems overly strict and all-or-nothing  it needs to be for tractability reasons. if one were to evaluate a noisy interpretation on the basis of its largest systematic subset  the partition of the interpretation into signal and noise would in itself be an intractable problem of combinatorial dimensions. comparative results are displayed in figure 1 below: 
competence 1% 1% 1% 1% % of times optimal 1% 1% 1% 1% figure 1: comparative trials of sapper and suboptimal greedy-sme with a random control. 
greedy-sme performs disappointingly on these trials  significantly trailing even the random control trial  in which a random merging of coherent sapper pmaps is generated as an interpretation for each metaphor. these results speak for the importance of structurally rich pmaps  for when these are rich enough even a random coalescence of pmaps will generate a good interpretation. but if the set of pmaps is structurally impoverished  as with sme in object-centred domains  not even a best-first sorting will compensate. these random trials indicate that a system's true competence is to be found in the processes which generate pmaps  more so than in those which combine them. 
1. where the hard analogies are 
what do the results of section 1 say about the identifiable qualities of hard analogies/metaphors  clearly  when employing an optimal mapping 

algorithm  the number of distinct roots in the forest-oftrees representation of each domain is a direct indicator of the exponential requirements of the algorithm. what can be said of the hardness of analogies as perceived by sub-optimal approaches such as sapper and sme  
   in complexity terms no problem instance is-strictly speaking-hard to a sub-optimal structure matcher  as the number of pmaps is largely irrelevant in a o n1  greedy merging / seeding process. however  if one measures hardness in terms of the likelihood of generating a quality  i.e.  ghost-free and accurate  interpretation  the best indicator of hardness is the average structural richness of each pmap  i.e.  the average number of mappings in each pmap . the lower this average richness  the more probable it is that any two pmaps can be coherently merged  and thus the more likely that the final interpretation will be noisy and ghost-ridden. in contrast  the higher this average  the more probable it is that a final interpretation will be near optimal  and less likely to contain ghosts  as each pmap merge operation will have a greater chance of failure . 
   if we have side-lined acme's sub-optimal approach to structure-mapping in this paper  it is due to the belief that acme represents an excessive approach to the problem. recall that acme can be characterized as a 1sat problem  where network nodes mirror sat variables  and network linkages mirror sat clauses  from the ratio of acme nodes to linkages for any given metaphor/analogy  we can determine the equivalent sat ratio of clauses to variables as 1 n1   thus making an acme problem hugely over-constrained  see  mitchell et al. 1  . given the large networks which acme can construct for a hard problem    1 nodes   existing relaxation techniques based on constraint prioritization do not seem practical  see  bakker et al. 1  . acme thus reduces to a difficult subclass of maximal 1-sat  with the size of that subset of clauses it must leave unsatisfied growing exponentially with the extent of network over-constraint  which itself grows quadratically with metaphor size. in this case  suboptimality certainly thus not imply tractability. 
   in closing  we note that the profession corpus upon which our experiments are based is available from the following url  in sapper  acme and sme formats:  bakker et al. 1  r. bakker  f. dikker  f. 
templeman  and p. wognum. diagnosing and solving 
over-determined constraint satisfaction problems  in the proceedings of ijcai'1  the thirteenth international joint conference on artificial intelligence. morgan kauffinan  1. 
 bruck and goodman  1 . j. brack and j. w. goodman. on the power of neural networks for solving hard problems  journal of complexity 1  pages 1  1. 
 falkenhainer et al. 1  b. falkenhainer  k. d. foibus  and d. gentner. structure-mapping engine. artificial intelligence  1  pages 1  1. 
 forbus et al. 1 . k. d. foibus  r. ferguson and d. gentner. incremental structure-mapping  in the 
proceedings of the sixteenth annual meeting of the cognitive science society  atlanta  georgia. hillsdale  nj: lawrence erlbaum  1. 
 forbus  1 . k. d. foibus  personal communication  august 1. 
 garey and johnson  1  m. r. garey and d. s. johnson. computers and intractability: a guide to the theory of np-completeness. freeman  ny  1. 
 holyoak and thagard  1  k. j. holyoak and p. thagard. analogical mapping by constraint 
satisfaction  cognitive science 1  pp 1  1. 
 hopfield and tank  1  j. j. hopfield and d. w. tank.  neural  computation of decisions in optimization problems. biological cybernetics 1  pp 1  1. 
 keane and brayshaw  1  keane  m. t. and m. brayshaw. the incremental analogical machine: a computational model of analogy. in d. sleeman  ed.   european working session on learning. pitman  1.  mitchell et al. 1  d. mitchell  b. selman and h. j. levesque. hard and easy distributions of sat problems  in the proceedings of aaai'1  the 1 conference of the american association for al  1. 
 mohr and henderson  1  r. mohr  and t. henderson. arc and path consistency revisited. artificial intelligence 1  pages 1  1. 
 oblinger and foibus  1  d. oblinger  and k. d. foibus. making sme pragmatic and greedy  in the 
proc. of the twelfth annual meeting of the cognitive science society. lawrence erlbaum  1. 

http: //www. compapp. dcu.ie/~tonyv/metaphor  html  veale et al. 1a  t. veale  b. smyth  d. o'donoghue and m. t. keane. representational myopia in cognitive 
