 
in teaching case-based argumentation skills  the cato program  an intelligent learning environment  guides students' assessments of partial matches between problems and cases by generating alternative interpretations of the similarities and differences. cato's factor hierarchy captures information about the significance of similarities and differences given the normative purposes of the domain classification. its algorithms for emphasizing or downplaying significance tailor interpretations to the comparison context  block interpretations strongly contradicted by other factors and strategically determine how and how abstractly to characterize a difference. an empirical evaluation confirmed cato's effectiveness in teaching basic argumentation skills. 
1 introduction 
　traditionally  researchers in case-based and analogical reasoning have regarded as an obstacle the fact that cases can be described at various levels of abstraction. carbonell abandoned a transformational approach to analogy in favor of a derivational approach because of the problems of recognizing analogous problems despite apparent differences in the language or levels of abstraction of their descriptions  carbonell  1 . describing cases at different levels of abstraction also frustrates isomorphism in structure-mapping approaches to analogical reasoning. forbus acknowledges the obstacle as a limitation in 
mac/fac. either the cases all have to be described in the same way and at exactly the same levels of abstraction or else the mappings will fail  forbus  et al. 1  p. 1 . 
　in argumentational or interpretive cbr applications  however  multilevel case descriptions are not just an inconvenient obstacle for computerizing analogical reasoning. they are an integral part of why and how experts reason with cases. experts assess cases and similarity in terms of a general domain model  to the extent there is one. they fit new cases into the domain model and into the body of cases  grouping a new case with similar examples and reconciling it with negative examples. the level of abstraction with which to describe a case is an important degree of freedom in fitting it into a general model and reconciling it with other cases. the importance of similarities and differences varies as cases are characterized abstractly in different ways and levels; the general model helps experts assess the importance of shared and unshared case features viewed more abstractly or less. by choosing the groupings and characterizations carefully  an expert may even extend the general domain model. 
　this is certainly true of legal case-based reasoning in which the general principles and policies of a legal domain inform a determination of what case features and which analogical similarities and differences are important  burton  1 . since quantitative weighting schemes are either inappropriate for or not sufficiently context-sensitive to be applied in legal argument  ashley & rissland  1   one needs to reason explicitly in terms of some model of why similarities and differences are significant. in law  however  the general model of a domain is often weak enough  and there is enough uncertainty about how cases fit the model and each other  that characterizing cases at different levels of abstraction is often done strategically; the level of abstraction an arguer chooses in asserting that cases are the same or different reflects the arguer's purpose. 
　in designing a program  cato  to teach first year law students basic skills of making case-based legal arguments to classify new cases  we have partially addressed three of four problems associated with comparing cases at multiple levels of abstraction  the problems of:  1  representing cases at multiple levels   1  reasoning symbolically about partially matched cases in light of the possible abstract descriptions  and  1  modeling the strategic uses of case description. students learn how to argue that the complaining party should win  or lose  its claim in a new case by drawing analogies to past cases where the corresponding side won  or lost  and by distinguishing or otherwise counteracting similar cases with the opposite result. cato teaches students  among other things  how to characterize a problem abstractly in arguing that a particular side should win and how to characterize the significance of particular differences between the problem and past cases so as to emphasize or downplay that significance. the lessons should help us address the remaining problem  1 : identifying and retrieving cases described at different levels of abstraction. 
　in making competing arguments that a partially matched case is close enough to a problem or not  cato alternatively interprets the differences in terms of more abstract characterizations contained in its domain model  the factor hierarchy. this graph captures information about the plausible significance of similarities and differences given the domain's normative purposes. it enables the program to determine which abstractions help an argument  hurt the argument  or are indifferent. although cato's case 
	ashley & aleven 	1 
　
representations do not include multiple levels of abstraction  
cato does compare cases at multiple levels of abstraction. its algorithms  for downplaying and emphasizing differences and for making issue-based arguments  select  from among all the abstractions at multiple levels and along multiple paths which may apply to a case  just the right ones  i.e.  the focal abstractions  for characterizing the case in various argument moves. cato's algorithm for selecting focal abstractions implements strategic criteria so that the resulting arguments avoid contradictions and exposure to counterattacks. when there is conflicting evidence whether an abstraction applies  cato applies its general knowledge in the factor hierarchy to resolve the conflict by blocking certain interpretations  if possible. if not  its case-based arguments play out the conflict. 
　as compared with either casey or grebe  cato employs an alternative approach and a different kind of model to guide interpretation of partial matches. casey reasons symbolically about differences between a problem and an explained  diagnosed case in terms of the strong causal diagnostic model used to generate the past case's explanation and evidence principles for characterizing whether differences are important.  koton  1 . grebe represents cases at multiple levels of abstraction in a structural sense. each case's explanation is like a small structural model indicating which features are relevant to which conclusions. grebe attempts to bridge gaps in the mapping of explanations by importing inferences from other case explanations and legal rules  branting  1 . 
neither casey nor grebe have anything like a factor 
hierarchy that represents how features strengthen or weaken a conclusion and why  information which informs cato's arguments emphasizing or downplaying differences. although cato's model cannot solve problems by itself as casey's can  that is to be expected given the differences between casey's medical domain and cato's legal one. while grebe may compare cases at multiple levels of structural abstraction  it does not make sense to ask whether it strategically selects a level of abstraction at which to characterize similarity or differences as cato does in selecting focal abstractions. grebe uses a different kind of model to make a different kind of argument. 
1 cato's factor hierarchy 
students use cato to analyze argumentation problems in a traditional casebook chapter on trade secret misappropriation  a legal regime protecting confidential commercial information from unfair access and use by competitors. students may retrieve cases from cato's database of 1 trade secret cases. a special query language helps students formulate constraints that a case must satisfy to be useful in an argument and translate them into queries to retrieve relevant cases. 
1 factor representation 
　in cato  legal cases are represented by a short textual description of the facts and decision  i.e.  the case squib  and a set of indexing factors. factors represent stereotypical collections of facts which tend to strengthen or weaken a plaintiffs legal claim  ashley  1 . cato's 1 computer-aided education representation is illustrated in figure 1  showing a squib's description of the facts of the mbl case and figure 1  box 1 indicating the set of six factors indexing the case. 
　facts: chemi-flex  a division of plaintiff  had developed  over a number of years  a molding process for manufacturing urethane belts. defendant diekman was a former employee. when he first worked for plaintiff  diekman had signed an employer-employee agreement which contained a confidentiality and non-competition clause. however  when he was rehired in 1  he refused to sign such an agreement. following his second tenure with chemi-flex  defendant formed two companies and began to design centrifugal molding machines and designs for other belt-producing equipment. plaintiffs employees were not aware of what information plaintiff considered to be confidential. some employees  but not all  signed nondisclosure agreements. plaintiffs plans  designs and customer data were not locked up; customer names and orders were not marked confidential; process formulas and machines were shown  without restriction  to employees  outside consultants and others; no licensing or confidentiality agreements were signed by outside parties with access to the process and formulas; and the entire process  formula and machinery were open to a team of engineers from a stockholder corporation of plaintiff. customer names and specifications were on orders and requisitions located in various places in the plant. the use of plaintiffs process was known in the industry  although the process is not specifically discussed in any industry literature. 
figure 1: squib's facts for mbl  usa  corp. v. diekman 
　typically  legal disputes involve some factual strengths for the plaintiffs claim  the pro-plaintiff factors  and some weaknesses  the pro-defendant factors. in mbl  some factors favor the plaintiff  p : the defendant had entered into nondisclosure and noncompetition agreements  at least  at one time   f1 and f1  evidence that plaintiff took at least one kind of measure to protect the security of its confidential information  f1. on the other hand  the agreement did not specifically indicate what information was regarded as secret  f1  some of the information had been disclosed to outsiders  f1  and in any event  some of the information was already known in the industry  f1. 
　in law  there is no algorithmic or statistical technique for combining strengths and weaknesses to come to a decision. instead  lawyers make arguments by analogy to past cases presenting the same combinations of strengths and weaknesses  arguing for a similar result in the problem. 
1 constructing arguments 
cato's recipe for constructing such an argument is illustrated in figure 1  which shows on the right side a set of steps for justifying a favorable decision for a side on a legal issue associated with his claim. on the left is an outline of an argument in favor of plaintiffs trade secret misappropriation claim in the mbl case focusing on one of two issues: that the information is a trade secret. pursuant to the recipe  each issue argument attempts to capitalize on the related factual strengths and overcome the weaknesses. accomplishing each goal requires finding and citing appropriate cases satisfying certain constraints. as the capitalized text indicates  in order to emphasize the strengths and downplay the weaknesses  the arguer needs to find cases which satisfy the specified constraints. 
　

figure 1: factor comparison of mbl case with the elcor case  boxes 1   1  and with the sperry case  boxes 1  1  
　
　cato's factor hierarchy provides information relating factual strengths and weaknesses  i.e.  factors  to those legal issues for which they are relevant. cato uses this information in constructing its descriptions of the constraints on cases which would be useful in an argument  i.e.  the capitalized text in figure 1.  excerpts of the factor hierarchy are shown in figure 1. base-level factors at the bottom of the hierarchy are linked through intermediate legal concerns to high-level legal issues at the top. the nodes representing intermediate concerns and top-level issues are called  abstract factors . each represents two opposite conclusions  one favoring plaintiffs and one favoring defendants. the links represent a  defeasible  support relation between the nodes. links may be strong  thick  or weak  thin   indicating the level of support they provide  and are marked as to whether they support the same side as the primary conclusion of the parent node  +  or the opposing conclusion  - . cato uses the link strength to determine whether to block certain inferences  discussed below.  currently  the factor hierarchy contains 1 baselevel factors for trade secret law  1 abstract factors  1 of which are legal issues  and 1 links. 
　cato's query language helps students translate argument constraints directly into queries for relevant cases from its database. for example  students could find cases relevant for plaintiffs argument on the trade secret issue using queries such as   and f1 f1   and   or f1 f1   or f1 f1  . among the cases returned by the queries are the elcor and 
sperry cases. figure 1 shows a factor comparison between the mbl case and each of the elcor and sperry cases which confirms that they satisfy the first query's constraints and thus are eligible to be used in the argument of figure 1. 
　deciding whether to include these cases in the argument necessitates reasoning about partial matches. as figure 1 indicates  each case only partially matches mbl. each case has numerous distinctions with respect to mbl. distinctions are those unshared factors that tend to make the cited cases {elcor or sperry  stronger for plaintiff than mbl. in particular  if the case is employed in the argument  the opponent could respond to it by distinguishing it  that is  pointing out these relevant differences. are the problem and cited case really the same or different  are the distinctions between them really important  do they warrant not including the cases in the argument  
1. reasoning techniques for partial matches 
　cato's factor hierarchy and techniques for emphasizing or downplaying distinctions help students frame answers to these questions  and thus reason about partial matches  by generating examples of arguments to consider. figure 1 shows several arguments cato makes to emphasize or downplay a particular distinction  f1 unique-product  p   between mbl  or versions thereof  and the elcor and sperry cases. in both elcor and sperry  the plaintiffs products were unique  no other competitors marketed products like that. since pro-plaintiff f1 was not in mbl  the defendant could distinguish these cases  pointing out that mbl was correspondingly weaker for plaintiff. this distinction is  indeed  important. as cato's arguments in boxes 1 and 1 of figure 1 indicate  cato can make strong arguments on behalf of defendant emphasizing the distinction but cannot make any argument for the plaintiff downplaying it. 
　in emphasizing a distinction  one has to find abstract interpretations to use as  focal points  for characterizing the two cases as very different. one interprets the distinction's significance in a case  shows factors in that case which support the interpretation  i.e.   corroborating factors    and shows factors in the other case supporting a contrary characterization  i.e.   contrasting factors  . in downplaying a distinction  by contrast  the goal is to dismiss the distinction  finding an abstract interpretation to use as a focal point for characterizing the two cases as the same. 
　in cato's algorithm for emphasizing a distinction  the key is selecting the focal point for emphasizing a distinction d in case ci in favor of side s  either plaintiff or defendant.  a focal point is a 1-tuple comprising an abstract factor p to use as a focal abstraction for characterizing the distinction's significance  a set x of contrasting factors  and a set y of corroborating factors. set x comprises con-s factors in the other case c1. set y comprises pro-s factors in ci. p is the most specific common ancestor in the factor hierarchy of d and the factors in x and y. 
	ashley & aleven 	1 
　

figure 1: sample cato issue-based argument  left  and recipe for making it  right .  factors and abstract factors are indicated in square brackets.  
　
to emphasize distinction d of case ci as compared to c1  where d favors side s : 
1. select candidate focal points to emphasize d: 
a. find all combinations of a focal abstraction p and a set of contrasting factors x in c1 such that pis a most specific common ancestor of d and the factors in x. 
b. find all combinations of a focal abstraction p and a set of corroborating factors y in ci such that p is a most specific common ancestor of d and the factors in y. 
1. organize candidate focal points 
a. join candidate focal points with same focal abstraction p. 
b. filter unsuitable factors and focal points. for each candidate:   check if contrast exists between c1 and c1 for p's ancestors. 
   if candidate has no contrasting factors  check if closed-world assumption is appropriate that pro-s conclusion associated with p is absent in c1. 
   remove contrasting or corroborating factors shared by ci and c1.  shared factors not useful to draw contrast.  c. consolidate candidate focal points whose focal abstractions are ancestor and descendant. 
d. order the focal points by estimated strength:  1  x is not empty.  1  y contains other factors beside d.  1  the rest. 
1. generate text for surviving focal points with templates. 
　the algorithm  and the one for downplaying a distinction in  aleven and ashley  1   supports three  smart  techniques for reasoning symbolically about the significance of similarities and differences:  1  tailor interpretations to fit the context of comparison.  1  block interpretations strongly contradicted by other factors.  1  strategically interpret similarities and differences. 
　tailoring interpretations: cato achieves a measure of context sensitivity in comparisons by virtue of the factor hierarchy's structure in which individual factors may relate to more than one abstract factor and by the emphasize distinction algorithm's identifying abstract factors  p  as focal points which are the most specific common ancestors  msca  of the distinction to be emphasized  d   the contrasting factors  and the corroborating factors.  see  kolodner  1  for other uses of msca.  by  context sensitivity   we mean knowing which similarities and 
1 	computer-aided education 
differences are most salient in different circumstances and why: which should a reasoner focus upon  how should it characterize them  and which should it ignore. although a normative concern may imply generally that a particular factual circumstance is significant  in the context of a 
particular problem and case  that assessment may be affected by the co-occurrence of other factual circumstances and other concerns  the arguer's rhetorical viewpoint and the dialectical role in which the arguer is engaged. 
　the effect of tailoring an interpretation of a difference may be seen in figure 1. each box shows an argument emphasizing the same distinction involving f1 between the mbl case  and two variations of mbl  and the elcor and 
sperry cases  respectively. the arguments focus on different interpretations of the distinction in terms of abstract factors f1  f1  or f1. depending on the context  one or other of these abstract factors is the focal abstraction. for instance  in box 1  cato interprets f1's significance in elcor  c   in terms of abstract factor f1 as showing that in elcor  plaintiffs information was not known outside its business  whereas in mbl  c1  it was. in box 1  f1 is significant in sperry  ci  because it suggests the defendant in sperry got the information through improper means  unlike mbl  c1 . in comparing mbl and elcor  the algorithm finds that f1 is the most specific common ancestor of f1s and the contrasting factors in mbl  f1 and f1. in comparing mbl and sperry  however  the algorithm finds that by selecting the more abstract f1  additional corroborating factors can be brought to bear in a broader contrast distinguishing sperry as a case turning upon improper means  namely f1  f1  and f1. the decision  to adopt f1 as the interpretation  is made in the algorithm's consolidation step  1c. 
　other evidence of cato's context sensitive interpretations is in figure 1. comparing boxes 1 and 1 shows the effect on the mblielcor comparison of making mbl stronger for plaintiff by adding f1  so that the defendant saved product development time or expense by accessing plaintiffs information. cato now makes an 
　

figure 1; excerpts from cato's factor hierarchy argument downplaying the f1 distinction interpreting it in terms of f1  a new focal abstraction indicating that the information was valuable. boxes 1 and 1 show the effect on the mbl i sperry comparison of making mbl stronger for plaintiff by adding f1  so that the defendant brought plaintiffs product-development tools with him to the defendant. cato again says the f1 distinction shows possible improper means in sperry  but this time cato downplays the distinction  arguing on the basis of f1 that the mbl hypo and sperry are the same. 
　
　blocking interpretations: link strengths in the factor hierarchy are designed to block certain interpretations in appropriate circumstances. the hierarchy will characterize a similarity or difference in terms of only those abstractions not strongly contradicted by other factors. evidence of blocking can be seen in figure 1  box 1  involving the mbl problem as modified by adding f1. as a result of blocking  cato  arguing for defendant  does not characterize the 
mbl factors as evidence that defendant's means were not improper  as it does in box 1. where defendant brought plaintiffs product development tools  one does not want to argue that no improper means were used  f1  solely on the basis of plaintiffs disclosures to outsiders  f1  and competitors' having knowledge of the information  f1 . f1 is itself evidence of improper means. f1 should block the interpretation that f1 and f1 are evidence of no improper means. in the factor hierarchy  figure 1  a strong negative link from f1 to f1 blocks the weak positive link from f1 through which pro-defendant factors f1 and f1 in mbl are related to f1. 
　strategic interpretation: cato's algorithm for emphasizing distinctions  and for downplaying them  takes strategic considerations into account in deciding which abstraction path to follow in the factor hierarchy and how abstractly to characterize a distinguishing factor. one wants to characterize a distinction broadly enough to take advantage of all relevant contrasting and corroborating factors. one also wants to focus on distinctions that hold up at more abstract levels and avoid characteriziations so broad as to destroy the contrast or allow obvious objections. 
　an example of a strategic choice using the factor hierarchy is choosing a narrower interpretation of a distinction where a broader interpretation does not lead to a contrast  as shown by comparing boxes 1 and 1 in figure 1. after hypothetically modifying the mbl problem so that the defendant took product development information  f1   cato can still emphasize the f1 distinction but this time does not focus on the improper means aspect  f1   as it did before in the mbl/sperry comparison  box 1 . this would not be an effective way to draw a contrast  since in the modified problem there is also evidence of improper means  as cato now points out in the new argument downplaying f1 . instead  cato again interprets f1 in terms of f1  an abstract factor  lower down  in the factor hierarchy  see figure 1 . cato eschews a broader interpretation in favor of a narrower one that more clearly contrasts with the other case  even though that means certain corroborating factors in the broader interpretation cannot be used. 
   how does cato use strategic considerations to decide which path to use and how far up or down the factor hierarchy to go in interpreting a distinction  the answer lies in heuristic policies embodied in cato's algorithm for emphasizing a distinction. the policies ensure that a sufficient contrast between the cases exists  with respect to both the focal abstraction itself  steps 1 .a and 1 .b  and its ancestors in the hierarchy  step 1.b . 
　as a result  cato decides not to use f1 in box 1 for emphasizing the distinction  because there is no suitable contrast with respect to this abstract factor. f1 must either 
	ashley & aleven 	1 
not be supported for plaintiff in mbl  or supported for defendant as well. however  it is supported for plaintiff in mbl  by f1   but not supported for defendant. as noted above  pro-plaintiff factor f1 in mbl blocks the prodefendant inference from f1 and f1 to f1. abstract factor f1  however  does satisfy the requirements of both heuristic policies. the two cases have opposing factors related to f1 itself  pro-plaintiff f1 in sperry  prodefendant f1 and f1 in mbl . also  they contrast suitably with respect to ancestors of f1: the path from f1 to f1 to f1 does not contain abstract factors supported for plaintiff in mbl  satisfying the second heuristic policy. 
figure 1: cato's arguments emphasizing / downplaying distinctions 1 evaluation 
an experiment with 1 first-year law students compared cato's instructional effectiveness to that of an accomplished legal writing teacher teaching the same material in a traditional way  aleven & ashley  1 . the subjects were randomly assigned to experimental and control groups. all subjects read a traditional trade secret law casebook chapter. 
　the control group attended six classroom session of 1 minutes in small groups of about eight students. the human instructor discussed the casebook cases and presented a framework for analyzing trade secret problems. during two sessions  students made oral arguments about two problems in a moot court setting in which the instructor played the role of  judge . students prepared for the moot court sessions in two 1 minute practice sessions outside of class. 
　in the experimental group's nine 1-minute sessions  students learned to use cato's tools to address the argumentation problems at the end of each section of the casebook following instructions in four workbooks. students worked with cato in pairs. after sessions introducing students to cato's tools and to factors and their interpretations  students used cato to analyze 
1 	computer-aided education 
problems in terms of factors  retrieved cases to test certain hypotheses about the importance of certain factors  and then worked with a legal dispute much like the mbl case. they determined which factors apply  retrieved and compared cases as in figure 1  practiced argument moves with the problem like those in the argument recipe of figure 1 and in emphasizing and downplaying distinctions as in figure 1  organized and wrote a multi-case argument and compared it with cato's argument  as in figure 1 but incorporating actual cases.  
　all subjects took a pre-test and post-test of basic argument skills. we also administered a more advanced take-home post-test involving a memo-writing assignment  considerably beyond the sophistication of the cato instruction  using a previous semester writing assignment grade as a control. the legal writing instructor graded the exams in a blind test. 
basic argument skills memo writing 	| pre-test post-test prev. post-test 	| exper. gr. avg. 1 c-1 c+ 1 1 b- control 1 gr. avg. 1 d 1 c 1 1 b+ 1 table 1: pre-test and post-test scores  maximum is 1  
　
　as shown in table 1  on the basic argument skills tests  in both groups the improvement from pre- to posttest was statistically significant  t-test  p   .1 . there was no significant difference between the two groups  and their improvement scores  i.e.  post-test score minus pretest score  did not differ significantly between the two groups  t-test  p   .1 . on the memo-writing assignment however  the control group did better  and the difference was statistically significant. the previous semester's assignment showed no statistically significant difference. 
1 discussion and conclusion 
cato instruction lead to a significant improvement in students' basic argumentation skills  comparable to that achieved by a legal writing instructor teaching small groups. the subjects were all from a special program for students judged most in need of individualized attention  and the human instructor  the director of that program  was experienced and successful in teaching such students. 
the memo-writing post-test shows a limitation on 
cato's efficacy. while both groups learned basic argumentation skills  the control group integrated these skills better in a complex assignment. the human taught skills indirectly and holistically by engaging students in oral arguments without focusing on elements of argumentation. by contrast  cato taught students basic elements with examples gradually combining more elements. cato's exercises to help students integrate the components came at the end; few students had enough time to practice them. as a result  we need additional time and techniques for integration. for example  with an lcd projector  instructors could demonstrate complex arguments and techniques with cato in class which students could then practice with cato at home. 
　cato tackles some general problems of abstraction in case description. it illustrates  and the evaluation lends some support to the utility of  three techniques in comparing partially matched cases at multiple levels of abstraction  the use of:  1  factors to represent relevant similarities and differences   1  a factor hierarchy to represent the significance of factors abstractly in terms of the purposes of the classification  and  1  a set of criteria for selecting focal abstractions. implemented in cato's algorithms for emphasizing and downplaying differences and for making issue-based arguments  these criteria enable cato to select the right path and level of abstraction for characterizing a case. 
　cato's approach helps frame the remaining problems of representing  recognizing and retrieving cases described at different levels of abstraction. given the range of choice in characterizing a case abstractly  and the underlying strategic considerations  any multilevel case representation must preserve flexibility of interpretation. multilevel descriptions also complicate the problem of evaluating which candidate cases are best. the value of a case lies in its uses in arguments. multilevel characterizations expand the ways a case may be used in arguments and responses. those possible uses need to be folded into the retrieval process. bankxx's heuristicallyguided argument search employing complex argument evaluation functions  rissland  et al. 1   or factoring adaptation cost into retrieval  smyth and keane  1  may provide models. in an educational context like cato's  however  the uses of retrieved cases in arguments need to be played out explicitly for students to understand and learn from them. 
