 
we consider the frame problem  that is  characterizing the assumption that properties tend to persist over time. we show that there are at least three distinct assumptions that can be made. we show the first assumption  which have been widely studied  is not naturally captured by circumscription. the first assumption is   there is as little change as possible between one situation and the next . this is closely related to temporal projection. 
the second assumption is that actions have as few effects as possible. this has arisen in causal approaches. we show this assumption cannot be captured by any circumscription policy  as it compares models with different domains. we consider a third assumption-there are as many frame axioms true as possible-which can be captured by circumscription. all three assumptions differ  which we show by giving examples. 
all agree on a small class of theories  those axiomatized by effect axioms and a class of sentences we call compatible binary domain constraints. further  for a similar class of theories a deduction theorem holds  allowing observations  or facts about particular situations  to be brought through the non-monotonic consequence relation. this justifies approaches based on separating  observations  from  effects   and applying projection to the effects  to solve problems based on causality reasoning. 
1 	the frame problem 
reasoning about change is central to much of common sense reasoning. to reason about change we clearly need to represent what changes after an action is completed. what is not so immediately obvious is that we also need to allow the reasoner to infer what does not change after an action. the simplest way to specify what changes and what does not would be to write each set down. however this seems wasteful  and worse  seems likely to introduce 
1 	temporal reasoning 
inconsistencies. it seems clear that just specifying what changes is sufficient-everything else doesn't change. we can generate the properties that do not change from the list of properties that do change. if we do this we are guaranteed that our lists will be consistent. moreover  usually fewer things change than don't change  and thus we will have much less to specify. 
　the idea that we need specify just the positive instances of change has given rise to a problem: how do we generate all the instances of properties that stay the same  this is how i formulate the frame problem. 
　since its inception the frame problem has mutated. some people view it as the problem of correctly determining the consequences of a set of sentences describing some changing domain. this might include concurrent  nondeterministic  under-specified or continuous actions. we do not deal with this extended notion here. 
　we do keep in mind one modification to the original statement of the frame problem. we do not just want to encode the things that change and don't change compactly  we also want to be able to add new changes by adding new sentences. this requirement forces us to use some non-monotonic reasoning. this requirement is called elaboration tolerance costello  1a  by mccarthy l1 . 
1 	the situation calculus 
to look at the frame problem we need a logical language to represent time  events  and the properties that hold in the world. we propose to use the situation calculus  a formalism for reasoning about events in the world. the paper that introduced situations  mccarthy and hayes  1  defined them as follows   a situation 1 is the complete state of the universe at an instant of time . the basic mechanism used in the calculus to define a new 
situation is the result function  

　in this formula s is a situation  and e is an event  and sf is a new situation that results when e occurs. a function or predicate of a situation is called a fluent. 
1 	frame axioms 
as we mentioned earlier  a certain problem arises when we formalize domains in this language. assume there is an axiom that states what happens to the location of a block when an action move is performed. 

 sentences of this form are called effect axioms. if another property  colour  is added  the axiom which described what effect the action had on the location does not give us any information on what happens to the new fluent colour. the usual intent is that the new fluent remains unchanged by the action  but this is not always the case. to specify that the colour of the block does not change we must write: 

 to express all the fluents that do not change  an axiom would be needed for each action/fluent pair. these axioms stating that fluents do not change are called frame axioms. having to specify all this lack of change seems 
extravagant  and more importantly it seems unnecessary to have to write these out individually. it seems that it should be possible to generate these frame axioms automatically. the frame problem is the problem of characterizing these frame axioms. 
1 	plan of paper 
we first define the situation calculus and circumscription  the language and non-monotonic framework we consider. a fuller exposition of these can be found in  mccarthy and hayes  1  and  mccarthy  1 . we then consider the projection problem. we give the preference on models that it suggests  and show that it is not naturally captured by circumscription. we show it is captured by a il{ formula   that is a formula all of whose second order quantifiers are universal  which is not in the form of circumscription. 
　next we consider the causality assumption  that actions have as few effects as possible. we show that this cannot be captured by any circumscription policy. 
　we consider the  frame  assumption  that there are as many frame axioms as possible. we show that this can be captured by a form of circumscription that allows free predicate variables. 
　we then consider the various other proposals for capturing these defaults that have been suggested. we show that causal reasoning  as proposed by gelfond and lifschitz l1  corresponds to the causality assumption. we show that for a restricted class of theories  chronological minimization corresponds to projection  and present 
a new counter-example  a simple theory  with only facts about the initial situation and disjunction of effects axioms  where chronological minimization does not give the correct results. 
　we show that for the restricted class where chronological minimization applies  an explanation closure axiom 

　this justifies the approaches of sandewall  lifschitz and others that have solved causal reasoning problems by dividing a theory in two  and applying projection type reasoning to a part  and re-conjoining the reserved sentences. 
1 	the situation calculus 
the situation calculus of order n  lsit  is a language of nth order logic with equality  with three disjoint sorts: fluent names  actions  and situations1. it contains exactly one predicate constant  holds  in addition to equality  one function constant result a  s  which returns a situation  a function sit g  from predicates of fluents to situations  and one situation constant so  plus a set of fluent constants  and a set of action constants . when we wish to specify the action and fluent constants we write  we shall sometimes add a predicate ab a f s . 
1 	circumscription 
non-monotonic logics are logics where the consequences of a set of sentences are not necessarily consequences of supersets of that set of sentences. 
　this paper uses circumscription as its non-monotonic machinery. circumscription is a form of non-monotonic logic introduced by mccarthy . it expresses the non-monotonic consequences of a finitely axiomatizable theory a in a language l  under a certain circumscriptive policy  as a sentence of second order logic. a circumscriptive policy is a choice of a finite set of formulas of l to minimize 
1 	the projection problem 
the projection assumption is the default that there are as few changes from one situation to the next as possible. the critical change between this assumption  and the naive approaches that fall victim to the yale shooting problem  is that situations that differ on what fluents hold  before the action we consider  are not compared. 
　when we consider the set of changes that happen when an action occurs  it would not make sense if the two situations from which we measure have different properties. 
     1  we use s with primes and indices to range over situations  and a and / to range over actions and fluent names  and g to range over unary predicates of fluents. 
	costello 	1 


1 	temporal reasoning 

　we note that these models are assumed to obey the rule of explanation closure above. 
theorem: 1 
the assumption of the causality problem is not expressible in circumscription. 
proof: 
　circumscription does not compare models of differing cardinality  but to minimize universals it is sometimes necessary to enlarge the domain  adding a new object that witnesses the existential. 
　consider the theory in   axiomatized by holds f  1  the non-monotonic consequences of this should include 

 however  in any model where all situations are denoted by closed terms  the following will be satisfied  

 thus  to deny this effect axiom  we need to add a situation not denoted by any closed term. i 
1 	the  frame  problem 
we now consider another assumption  one which to our knowledge has not been previously considered. we prefer models where there are more frame axioms true. this seems like a very natural approach. we first consider how to represent this assumption. 
definition: 1 
the ordering on models that models the assumption of the frame problem is defined as follows. we prefer models where there are more frame axioms true. frame formulas are of the form  where n and p are sets of fluent constants: 

theorem: 1 
the assumption of the frame problem is not expressible in circumscription. 
proof: no finite set of first order sentences describes the same order on models as the infinite set of formulas described above. 
theorem: 1 
the assumption of the frame problem is expressible in circumscription  if we allow the minimized formulas to contain second order variables. 
proof: if we allow a unary predicate variable for fluents g the class of formulas above can be parameterized by g  as: 

the circumscription formula is then  

＊ 
　to the best of the author's knowledge this approach  of preferring models where there are more frame axioms has not been previously considered. 
1 	examples 
we show  via examples  that each approach is distinct. 
example: 1 
the first example concerns reasoning forwards in time. for simplicity we consider a language with only one action a  and one fluent-name f. 
		 1  
　we consider that a conclusion that should be drawn from this theory  if we assume the causality assumption is  

　in contrast the  frame  assumption will not entail this  as this does not add a new frame axiom. the only  nontrivial  possible frame axioms are  

 thus the frame assumption will add exactly these two sentences  which do not entail the negation of the effect axioms above. 
　we mention for completeness that the standard example for the distinction between projection and causality is the stanford murder mystery  where both the causality and frame assumption give that the gun was loaded initially  while the projection assumption does not. 
example: 1 
the first example concerns reasoning backwards in time. for simplicity we consider a language with only one action a  and two fluent-names f1  f1. we are told that f1 holds at the second situation  result a  1 . we are also told that f  does not hold at the first situation. finally we are told that a causes f  is f1 holds. 
	costello 	1 

　a domain constraint is a sentence in lsit whose only situation terms are universally quantified variables. a binary domain constraint is a formula of the form  for fluent constants 
axiomatized by binary do-

　the causality problem has been addressed by lin and reiter l1   kartha and lifschitz l1  and sandewall l1  among others. we consider their approaches  and show how they attempt to avoid the result of the previous theorems. 
1 	nested abnormality and filter entailment 
lifschitz and sandewall suggest extensions to circumscription  or non-monotonic systems that are based around minimal entailment. sandewall's systems  are based on filter preferential entailment. kartha and lifschitz  bases their system on nested abnormality theories lifschitz  1 . both these formalisms have the property that they necessarily divide the theory they are non-monotonically completing into subsets  based on some syntactic property. in particular they divide observations from causal rules or effect axioms. however  if a causal rule is disjoined with and effect axiom this cannot be achieved. they then solve the projection problem  and conjoin observations to solve the causality problem. 
preferential entailment 
sandewall uses the term filter preferential entailment to denote a type of semantic entailment. he imagines a case where we have a theory divided into two parts  t and to. he divides the theory into two sets of sentences  so he can apply a selection function to one set  and then conjoin the other set to get the final theory. if is a selection function  that is it maps a set of models to a subset of those models  then the non-monotonic consequences of 

　the primary intuition behind sandewall's preference on models is similar in spirit to chronological minimization. changes occur preferentially later in time. we now show that our projection assumption can sometimes give the same results as chronological minimization. 
　in the case of temporal projection  when we do not have facts about the initial situation  and where we have only effect axioms and domain constraints  the same results can be achieved by not comparing situations that differ  as we earlier propose. not comparing situations that differ on what is the case seems obvious. apples should not be compared with oranges. 
1 	temporal reasoning 
proof: we first note that the axiom of explanation closure is validated under both assumptions. 
　secondly we see that for a given model  and a situation s  by explanation closure  we can determine what holds in the following situations by looking that the initial situation  in some model  where the fluents that initially hold in  are the same as hold at situation s in m. as we have only effect axioms and binary domain constraints  there will always exist such a model. 
thus it suffices to look at only one step of projection. 
however  when we just do one step  we minimize change in both cases. 
nested a b n o r m a l i t y theories 
lifschitz in  suggest a very similar idea to sandewall's. rather than describing the idea in semantic terms  lifschitz uses the notation of circumscription. 
　he divides his theory into several parts. to each part he applies a circumscription. he does this uniformly by defining the predicate ab  of an appropriate arity to be predicate to be minimized. all predicates are varied by default. 
 deduction theorems  
to a large extent both of these approaches attempt to solve the problem of causality by solving the projection problem  and then adding back certain facts. this is why they need to be able to syntactically divide theories into two sub-theories. 
   we now prove a theorem showing that solving the projection problem for theories without observations  and adding observations is equivalent  for closed situation terms  to solving the causality problem. a similar theorem can be established for the frame assumption. 

proof 
　all consistent theories t axiomatized by effect axioms and binary domain constraints are consistent with the statement of explanation closure  subject to the above proviso. as minimal entailment is cumulative  thus we may add explanation closure to the left hand side. 
　we then prove the above claim by induction on the size of the vs. if they are all s'o  then the implication its true only if it is an instantiation of a binary domain constraint  and thus the equivalence holds. 

holds f  result  a  s    explanation closure. this gives us the induction step to prove the above claim. i 
thus the approaches of kartha and lifschitz  and 
sandewall  which claim to do causal reasoning  are in fact doing temporal projection. they simulate causal reasoning because for the class of problems they consider  the above theorem applies. 
1 	lin and shoham's approach 
this approach quantifies over circumscription. they take the consequences of a theory to be the intersection of the consequences of a set of circumscriptions. lin and shoham  lin and shoham  1  suggest a solution that again returned to minimizing the total amount of change  but they suggested that this should be minimized one situation at a time. for every situation  and possible set of fluents that could hold at that situation  they calculate what the minimal amount of change between that situation and its successors could be. they then add the conditional that if those fluents held at the situation  then the successors will be exactly those that have minimal differences. the major drawback with this approach is that it can become inconsistent when given disjunctive information. however  lin and shoham show that it behaves correctly for a limited class of theories  essentially those where what holds in the initial situation uniquely determines what is holds in all later situations. 
1 	conclusion 
we considered three distinct defaults about temporal reasoning. the first  projection has been considered before by lin and reiter  and giunchiglia. the second  minimizing the effect axioms that hold  corresponds to causal reasoning. this has been considered semantically by many researchers. we show for the first time that this cannot be captured by circumscription  as it compare models with different cardinalities. the third method  maximizing the set of frame axioms is novel  but perhaps is the most natural. 
　we established deduction type relationships between these approaches  explaining why current approaches that divide theories into parts behave as they do. we gave conditions for when applying projection reasoning  then adding observations  is equivalent to causality reasoning. 
a more comprehensive survey is given in  costello  
1b . however  to the best of the author's knowledge  all previous approaches either attempted to minimize change  chronologically   or minimize causality. 
1 	acknowledgments 
this research is supported in part by arpa/rome laboratory planning initiative under grant  onr  n1-1. i am grateful to john mccarthy and anna patterson who gave useful criticism on earlier drafts. 
