 
this paper proposes a planning method for a vision-guided mobile robot under vision uncertainty and limited computational resources. the method considers the following two tradeoffs:  1  granularity in approximating a probabilistic distribution vs. plan quality  and  1  search depth vs. plan quality. the first tradeoff is managed by predicting the plan quality for a granularity using a learned relationship between them  and by adaptively selecting the best granularity. the second trade-off is managed by formulating the planning process as a search in the space of feasible plans  and by appropriately limiting the search considering the merit of each step of the search. simulation results and experiments using a real robot show the feasibility of the method. 
1 	introduction 
there has been an increasing interest in autonomous mobile robot which recognizes an environment with vision and moves without guidance of human operators. a key to realize such a robot is the ability to generate a plan of vision and motion operations so that a robot may efficiently reach the destination. to design a planning algorithm for such a robot  we have to consider the following two issues: limited computational resources and uncertainty in visual data. these two issues are closely related; planning based on uncertain data usually requires more computation than planning without uncertainty because multiple possible outcomes of actions should be considered  and therefore  the limitation of computational resources tends to be critical. 
　one of the useful tools for planning under uncertainty is statistical decision theories  berger  1 . several works applied statistical decision theory to vision and/or motion planning tasks  e.g.   hutchinson and kak  1   cameron and durrant-whyte  1   dean et al.  1   miura and shirai  1  . one drawback of these approaches is that a large branching factor of a search tree  which is determined not only by the number of possible actions but also that of possible situations that arise due to the uncertainty of sensory data  makes a planning process computationally expensive. 
　regarding the limitation of computational resources  many works have recently been focusing on the concept of limited rationality  russell and wefald  1   in which the cost of planning is explicitly considered and the time for object-level planning is allocated so that the overall utility including both plan efficiency and planning cost is maximized. some of examples are: flexible computation  horvitz  1   decision-theoretic meta-level control of  object-level  reasoning  russell and wefald  1l   and expectation-driven iterative refinement  edir  using anytime algorithms  boddy and dean  1 . 
　this paper is concerned with a vision-motion planning of a mobile robot considering vision uncertainty and planning cost. fig. 1 shows an example problem. our mobile robot is going to the destination while avoiding obstacles. there is a route which passes the narrow space  we call it the gate  between the board and the partition; however the passability of the gate is initially unknown due to the uncertainty of visual data. the detour passing through the hallway is known to be passable  although it is longer. the robot estimates the gate width with stereo vision to determine the passability. the planner determines a set of observation points which efficiently navigates the robot to the destination. for this problem  we propose a planning method combines a decision-theoretic approach with consideration of planning cost. 

figure 1: an example planning problem. 

figure 1: three possible state of the gate. 
1 	basic planning strategy 
1 	plan representation 
an action is composed of a movement to the next observation point and an observation at that point. a state is represented by the current estimate of the gate width and the current robot position. due to the uncertainty in observation results  the robot cannot determine the gate width deterministically but obtains its probabilistic distribution. 
   after an observation  the robot classifies the state of the gate into one of the three states  see fig. 1 : if the robot width is smaller than the minimum value of the probabilistic distribution of the gate width  the gate is passable; if the robot width is larger than the maxim u m value of the probabilistic distribution  the gate is impassable; otherwise the passability is unknown. 
   since the actual state after an observation depends on the observation result and cannot be determined beforehand  a subplan is generated for each possible state  which is predicted using the uncertainty model of vision. fig. 1 shows an example plan for the problem shown in fig. 1. such a plan is represented by an a n d / o r tree; an or node corresponds to selection of an action; an a n d node corresponds to a possible state. the quality of a plan is measured in terms of its execution cost  which is the expectation of the total execution time for movement and observation. 
　the leaves of an a n d / o r tree are either terminal node or open node. at a terminal node  the passability 
is decided without uncertainty and  thus  the final action  i.e.  passing the gate or taking the detour  is also decided. at an open node  since the passability is unknown  the final action has not been decided yet. a plan candidate is refined by expanding  making subplans for  one of its open nodes. in expansion of an open node  the possible range of the gate width is discretized with some granularity  and a subplan is generated for each discretized state. 
figure 1: an example plan. dotted arrows indicate possible movements after observation. bold arrows indicate observation of the gate. 
1 	c o m p u t a t i o n a l trade-offs to be considered 
the planning method is designed to deal with the following two computational trade-offs: 
   search d e p t h vs. p l a n q u a l i t y : this trade-off has been investigated by several researchers  e.g.  d t a * by russell and wefald  . we consider this trade-off in generating a multi-step plan. 
   g r a n u l a r i t y vs. p l a n q u a l i t y : a finer granularity for discretization improves plan quality  but it increases the planning cost. this trade-off has little been considered  although it is important in planning under uncertainty. 
   the first trade-off is managed by formulating the planning process as an iterative refinement process  boddy and dean  1   and by appropriately limiting the iteration. to cope with the second trade-off  we represent the relationship between granularity and the expectation of the reduction of a plan cost  we call this expectation a plan improvement  as a performance profile  dean and boddy  1   zilberstein  1   and then determine the best granularity by examining the performance profile and the cost of node expansion. w i t h consideration of these trade-offs  the planner tries to minimize the total cost of plan generation and plan execution. 
1 	formulation as iterative refinement 
1 	easily-obtainable feasible plan 
in an iterative refinement framework  the planner searches the space of feasible plans  executable plans  for the final plan. this formulation entails an easilyobtainable feasible plan for any open node. there are two 
such feasible plans. one of them is to take the detour from the current position; this feasible plan is usually costly. thus we use the other feasible plan: 
the robot moves from the current position to the position just before the gate1. if the gate 
1
　　 at this position  the robot is assumed to be able to measure the gate width without uncertainty; this position is called the zero-uncertainty point  indicated as x*. 
m i u r a & shira1 


figure 1: expansion of an open node of a plan candidate. ellipses drawn with bold lines indicate open nodes. 
is passable  the robot passes it; if not  the robot takes the detour from that position. 
　each plan candidate has the temporary cost  ctemp  which is obtained by temporarily assigning the above feasible subplan to all of its open nodes. 

1 	consideration of meta-planning cost 
the above algorithm will expand a node as long as is less than cfp* even if their difference is very small. expansion in such a case  however  may be useless if the meta-planning cost is high. 
　thus  we slightly modify the termination condition. that is  if the difference is less than the meta-planning cost  the iteration process stops and the best feasible plan is returned as the final plan. the cost of metaplanning is  at present  considered to be constant. 
1 	deciding only the next action 
when the objective of the planner is not to generate a whole plan but to select the best next action  in a dynamic environment  for example   the algorithm is altered as follows. 
　let cfp*a be the cost of the best feasible plan which starts with action a. if the smallest value of  of plan candidates which start with actions other than a is larger than cfpa*  the planning process terminates and returns a as the best next action. this strategy is similar to that of dta*  russell and wefald  1 . 
1 	determining the best granularity 
we have mentioned that the granularity in discretizing the ranges of random variables  the gate width in our case  directly affects both the plan improvement and the expansion cost. the selection of the best granularity is  therefore  crucial to managing the trade-off between planning cost and plan efficiency. 
　this paper proposes to represent the relationship between the granularity and the predicted plan improvement as a performance profile  and to calculate the best granularity and the merit of expansion simultaneously. 
　currently we equally divide the range of a variable; thus  the granularity is specified with the number of divisions. let pi denote the predicted plan improvement for granularity 
the best granularity n* is given by 
 1  
where n  which is defined as follows: 
		 1  
where neand is the number of action candidates; cexam is the cost required for examining one action candidate. fig. 1 illustrates the determination of the best granularity. once the best granularity n* is determined  the merit of expansion is calculated as . 
　if there is at least one or node between the root node and an open node  the probability of reaching the open node is less than one. in this case  we multiply pi n   which is originally generated for the case that the reaching probability is one  by the current reaching probability. 


figure 1: an example situation. 
figure 1: determining the best granularity. this figure is based on  horvitz  1 . 
　every time an open node is generated  by expansion of its parent   the best granularity for the node is determined. we include the cost of determining the best granularity in the cost of expanding the parent node. 
1 	deriving performance profile 
derivation of a performance profile  pp  is one of the important issues in anytime algorithm-based approaches. in some cases  pps may be obtained from the structural analysis of the problem; in other cases  pps may be obtained from experimental data. it is  however  usually difficult to obtain pps for complex problems only with one of these methods. we  thus  derive a pp through structural and experimental analysis of the planning problem in the following steps: 
1. analyze the structure of the planning problem and extract important problem parameters which can reasonably characterize the pp. 
1. construct a generalized pp using the parameters obtained above; a generalized pp has coefficients to be estimated. 
1. calculate actual pps for an enough number of problem parameter sets  and adjust the coefficients of the generalized pp so that the pp fits well to the actual data set. 
1 	problem analysis 
the plan improvement is the difference of temporary costs of a plan candidate before and after expanding one of its open nodes. let us calculate the plan improvement using an example situation shown in fig. 1. 
　suppose that the robot is initially at xo and the next observation point is x1. the open node under consideration is the state that the gate's passability is unknown after the observation at x1. the feasible plan before expansion is to go from x1 directly to the zero-uncertainty point x*  where the robot can measure the gate width without uncertainty. expansion of this open node  i.e.  selection of a second observation point x1 for each dis-
cretized state results in a new feasible plan. 
miura & shirai 

figure 1: an example performance profile and the fitted curve. 
figure 1: log-scaled plot of data for equation  1 . 
simulations for the same problem with different computing powers  see equation  1  . notice that the higher the computing power is  the smaller is   the more precise and the less costly plan is generated. the difference of the costs is  however  rather small compared with that of the computing powers. this is because that the initial feasible plan is already a good plan in this case. 
　we then compared  in terms of the total of planning cost and execution cost  the proposed method with the fixed method  which uses a fixed granularity and a fixed search depth. fig. 1 shows a comparison result. the proposed method gives the best performance. 
　we conducted this comparison for about forty different problems; in about two-thirds cases  the proposed method outperformed others. in other cases  the difference between the best result and the result by the proposed method was less than one percent of the best result. note that in order to obtain the best result with the fixed method  we had to adjust the granularity and search depth for each problem  while the proposed method always performed well without any such adjustments. 
	1 	experiments using real robot 
this section describes preliminary results for a real planning problem shown in fig. 1. the gate width is estimated by the two vertical segments on both sides; its probabilistic distribution is calculated using an uncertainty model of stereo vision  miura and shirai  1 . 


figure 1: simulation results: circles indicate observation points; solid arrows indicate the path to the next observation point; dotted arrows indicate possible paths after observations  n* is the granularity used for discretizing the open node at the next observation point. in case of  c   the initial feasible plan is used. 


figure 1: comparison of the proposed method with fixed-granularity and fixed-search depth methods. change of the total cost according to the change of the search depth is indicated for each granularity. 
　in the experiment  the planner decides only the next action  see section 1 . then the robot moves to the planned observation point and observes the gate. the planning and action operations are iteratively performed until the passability of the gate is determined. 
　fig. 1 shows the result of a trial. from the initial image  at lower-right in the figure   the robot estimated the probabilistic distribution of the gate width; the probability of the gate being passable was 1. then the planner determined the next observation point as shown in the map. the robot moved to the next observation point  lower-left  and obtained the new image  upper-right . after this observation  the gate was determined to be passable; thus the robot moved forward and passed the gate  upper-left . 
1 	conclusions and discussion 
we have proposed a planning method for a vision-motion planning of a mobile robot under vision uncertainty and limited computational resources. we managed granularity vs. plan quality and search depth vs. plan quality 
trade-offs by:  1  considering the relationship between granularity and plan improvement which is represented as a performance profile  and  1  formulating the process of generating a multi-step plan as an iterative refinement process. the proposed method is always comparable with the best of the methods which uses fixed granularity and fixed search depth. we have also described a method to derive a performance profile through structural and experimental analysis of the planning problem. 
　in the performance profile  pp -based planning  the quality of pp has the largest importance. if the parameters  e.g.  configuration of obstacles  of the current problem are largely different from those of problems used in derivation of pps  the predicted plan improvement may not be accurate enough. in this paper  in order to increase the accuracy  we divided into the problem space into several regions and obtained a pp for each region. such a strategy might be practical if a pp which is applicable to a wide problem space is hard to find. 
　this paper has treated a relatively simple visionmotion planning problem  a single-gate problem . a future work is to apply the proposed method to large planning problems which have many gates to observe. to solve such a large problem  it is necessary to decompose the problem into a set of single-gate problems. we are now developing an efficient decomposition method. 
acknowledgments 
this work is supported in part by grant-in-aid for scientific research from ministry of education  science  sports  and culture  japanese government and by the okawa foundation for information and telecommunications  tokyo  japan. 
a 	derivation of plan improvement 
only the subplan for the open node at x1 changes by expansion. the cost c1 of the subplan before expansion 
miura & shirai 


figure 1: an experimental result:  center  the planned observation point and the trajectory taken by the robot;  lower-right  the right image obtained at the initial position;  upper-right  the right image obtained at the next observation point;  lower-left  the movement from the initial position to the next observation point;  upper-left  the movement from the next observation point into the gate. 
