 
we characterise the set of subalgebras of allen's algebra which have a tractable satisfiability problem  and in addition contain certain basic relations. the conclusion is that no tractable subalgebra that is not known in the literature can contain more than the three basic relations 
 this 
means that concerning algebras for specifying complete knowledge about temporal informa-
tion  there is no hope of finding yet unknown classes with much expressivity. furthermore  we show that there are exactly two maximal tractable algebras which contain the relation 
 both of these algebras can express the notion of sequentially; thus we have a complete characterisation of tractable inference using that notion. 
1 	introduction 
this paper improves on known results about algorithms for the problem of reasoning about temporal constraints. such reasoning is an important task in many areas of ai and elsewehere  such as planning  allen  1   natural language processing  song and cohen  1   time serialization in archeology  golumbic and shamir  1  and more  and there are several frameworks for formalising such problems  according to different needs. among the most frequently used ones are the point algebra  van beek and cohen  1   used for expressing qualitative relations between time points  the point-interval algebra  vilain  1  for expressing qualitative relations between time points and time intervals  and the famous interval algebra of allen  for expressing qualitative relations between time intervals. there are also combinations of these and extensions to handle also metric time  such as meiri's framework  meiri  1   and the works of kautz and ladkin   gerevini et ai   dechter et ai   jonsson and backstrom  and 
drakengren and jonsson . however  it was early proved that the reasoning problem for these formalisms is very hard; e.g. reasoning in allen's interval algebra is 
1 	temporal reasoning 
np-complete  vilain and kautz  1   and np-hardness carries over to more expressive formalisms. 
　these computational problems have motivated the search for various tractable fragments of the temporal formalisms  where reasoning can be guaranteed to be reasonably efficient. in particular  several subclasses of allen 's algebra have been reported tractable 
 we assume p 』 np   van beek and cohen  1; golumbic and shamir  1; nebel and biirckert  1; drakengren and jonsson  1; 1 . however  in view of the large number of possible subclasses of allen's algebra  the algebra contains 1 relations  leading to  subclasses   such results are in danger of 
appearing ad hoc. as a first reaction to this  research has recently focused on identifying maximal tractable subclasses; i.e. classes which cannot be extended without losing tractability. this direction is clearly more systematic  since any tractable subclass is included in a maximal tractable one. the first such algebra was identified by nebel and biirckert   soon to be followed by drakengren and jonsson  1  1   resulting in eighteen known maximal algebras  subsuming all algebras previously known to be tractable. still  however  this is a very small number compared to the total number of possible subclasses. 
　due to this apparent lack of systematicity  techniques have recently been developed allowing full classifications of tractability  in particular for the point-interval algebra  jonsson et a/.  1   but also for the rcc-1 algebra for spatial reasoning  jonsson and drakengren  1 . a full classification of tractability for an algebra means that we identify the complete set of tractable subclasses in the algebra. despite the success for the point-interval algebra and the rcc-1 algebra  the corresponding task for allen's algebra poses a problem more difficult by several orders of magnitude: the number of subclasses in these algebras is only  in principle  all these can be enumerated on a computer  but this is certainly not the case with the allen algebra. 
   in this context  this paper presents a significant step towards a full classification of tractability in allen's algebra. we show that any algebra that is yet to be found can contain at most three basic relations:  and  this means that in order to 


table 1: the thirteen basic relations. 
specify complete temporal knowledge  we cannot hope to find more expressive algebras than those already known. furthermore  we show that there are exactly two maximal tractable algebras which can express the important notion of sequentiality  sandewall  1 . 
　finally  note that the main results of this paper are proved using exhaustive search by computers. naturally  such proofs cannot be reproduced in a paper  but we encourage researchers in the field to repeat our proofs. all software used in the paper can be obtained from the authors. 
　the structure of the paper follows. first we present allen's algebra in section 1  after which the classification results follow. a discussion concludes the paper. the more complicated proofs are collected in an appendix. 
1 allen's algebra 
allen's interval algebra  allen  1  is based on the notion of relations between pairs of intervals. an interval x is represented as a tuple  of real numbers with  denoting the left and right endpoints of the interval  respectively  and relations between intervals are composed as disjunctions of basic interval relations  which are those in table 1  denoted b . such disjunctions are represented as sets of basic relations  but using a notation such that e.g. the disjunction of the basic intervals mand is written thus  we have that   sometimes  the disjunction of all basic relations is written t  and the empty relation is written  this also used for relations between interval endpoints  denoting  always satisfiable  and  unsatisfiable   respectively . the algebra is provided with the operations of converse  intersection and composition on intervals  but we shall need only the converse operation. the converse operation takes an interval relation i to its converse  obtained by inverting each basic relation in i  i.e.  exchanging x and y in the endpoint relations of table 1. 
by the fact that there are thirteen basic relations  we 
get possible relations between intervals in the full algebra. we denote the set of all interval relations by a  subclasses of the full algebra are obtained by considering subsets of a. there are  such subclasses. 
　although there are several computational problems associated with allen's interval algebra  this paper focuses on the problem of satisfiability of a set of interval variables with relations between them  i.e. deciding whether there exists an assignment of intervals on the real line for the interval variables  such that all of the relations between the intervals are satisfied. we define this as follows. 

a-sat is sometimes defined such that for each pair of objects  e.g. time intervals   we have exactly one relation  cf. golumbic and shamir  . in this way  the reduction needed for proposition 1 would fail  since intervals which are added are not always related. 
1 classification of a 
this section contains the parts of the classification. 
	drakengren & jonsson 	1 

1 	intractable subclasses 	in order to define the subject of our classification  define 
in order to provide the classification  we need to find t to be the set of maximal tractable subalgebras of a 
more np-complete subclasses of a than those previously not included in for any note known. our main tools for proving intractability are the that it is sufficient to restrict the attention to maximal following np-complete subclasses of a. tractable algebras  since any tractable subset can be ex-
tended to such an algebra. also note that some of the algebras known from the literature  those of drakengren and jonsson  1  1   are included in t  but this will not affect the classification  since these all contain three basic relations or less. 
1 	temporal reasoning 


	drakengren & jonsson 	1 
thus t decreases starting points and increases ending points of intervals  and does this differently for every interval. now f b  represents what can happen with the basic relation b when the transformation t is applied. 
proposition a.1 f is a description of t. proof: obvious from the definitions. d 
we can now extend the results of proposition a.1. 
1 	temporal reasoning 


