 
from the analysis of naturally occurring texts we obtained evidence for the systematic interaction between nominal anaphora and metonymies. this leads us to postulate an integrated model incorporating both phenomena simultaneously. the consideration of discourse constraints for metonymy resolution allows us to challenge the commonly held view that the interpretation of metonymies should proceed from a literal-meaning-first approach. thus  we argue for an equally balanced treatment of literal and figurative language use. 
1 	introduction 
an almost canonical definition considers an expression a a metonymy  if a deviates from its literal denotation in that it stands for an entity b which is not expressed explicitly but is conceptually related to a via a contiguity relation r. most computational studies concentrate on the fact that taking a literally often leads to intrasentential semantic or syntactic anomalies  which they take as a starting point for metonymy resolution. this approach disregards the textual embedding of most metonymies  which is reflected by the systematic interaction in the resolution of nominal anaphora and definite metonymic noun phrases. this is a surprising fact  since metonymy is generally regarded as a phenomenon of reference  which obviously may interact with other referential phenomena as well. focussing on intrasentential phenomena only  almost unequivocally implies subscribing to the literalmeaning-first  lmf  hypothesis  gibbs  1 . the most common variant of the lmf view considers the occurrence of sortal conflicts  or  deriving from that  syntactic irregularities  a necessary condition for metonymy resolution. in all other cases the literal interpretation is preferred  by default. 
　the subsequent discussion is intended to reveal various interaction patterns for metonymies and anaphora and the impact they have on the occurrence of sortal conflicts. we then conclude that restricting the resolution of metonymies to intrasentential analysis  as well as pursuing an lmf approach are both inadequate. given a definite noun phrase a  we may distinguish between the following usage patterns: 
/. a is anaphoric and ... 
1. a is not metonymic.1 hence  the literal denotation of a allows for anaphora resolution; in addition  a fulfils the required sortal constraints. 
1. a corresponds to a predicative metonymy  
 i  ten minutes before the notebook switches off  it starts beeping  
 ii  the clock frequency of the computer is reduced to 1 mhz. 
in  ii   a literal denotation is available for anaphora resolution in  i -  computer  resolves to  notebook . it does not  however  fulfil all sortal constraints  as  clock 
frequency  is a property attributed to a processor  not to a computer as such. no significant interaction between anaphora and metonymy resolution need take place. 
1. a corresponds to a referential metonymy. 
 i  we also tested the printer epson epl-1 
 ii  a  i liked the laser  as its printouts were excellent  
b  i liked the laser. 
in both cases  anaphora resolution is fully dependent on metonymy resolution. for case a   the resolution of the part-for-whole metonymy   laser  for  laser printer   can be achieved without information about the possible anaphoric antecedents of  the laser   as the analysis of the sentence reveals a sortal conflict  the combination with  its printouts  fails . thus  in a syntaxfirst approach  after syntactic processing a  quite sophisticated  metonymy resolution procedure had to precede anaphora resolution to solve this case. considering an incremental approach  anaphora resolution for  the laser  would be triggered before the information about the sortal conflict were available so that 
   1  we restrict figurative speech in this paper to metonymies. 
   1  stallard  and nunberg  discern cases of predicative and referential metonymy  depending on whether the literal or the intended referent is available for subsequent pronominal reference. 
   1  given the original discourse context of this text fragment   epson epl-1   is already known to be a laser printer. 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

the problem is reduced to case b . example b  illustrates how metonymy resolution can benefit from information about possible anaphoric antecedents of  the laser . firstly  the information may help with choosing amongst several metonymic readings - excluded are those readings  which do not allow for anaphora resolution  e.g.  the competing metonymic reading  laser  for  light  . secondly  only the information about possible antecedents can help triggering a metonymy resolution at all  as no sortal restrictions are violated. 
ii. a is not anaphoric and ... 
1. a is not metonymic. when the literal denotation of a fulfils all sortal restrictions but does not allow for anaphora resolution the necessary criteria for textual ellipsis  hahn et al.  1  are fulfilled: 
 i  we also tested the printer epson epl-1.  ii  i did not like the paper-tray. 
the parallel structure of example i.1. ii .b shows that these criteria can also be met by anaphoric noun phrases a that are referential metonymies. thus  we may get either truly ambiguous readings here or  at least  readings which cannot be distinguished without further lexical or pragmatic information  cf. lhahn and markert  1  . 
1. a is metonymic. in this case  predicative and referential metonymies are either marked by sortal conflicts or can only be recognized by very sophisticated inferential mechanisms which are not an issue here. 
　we argue for an integrated model that accounts for the systematic interdependencies between nominal anaphora and metonymies. metonymy resolution is not only crucial for anaphora resolution. discourse restrictions may even facilitate metonymy resolution and the resolution of corresponding ambiguities. they are also crucial for the distinction between predicative and referential metonymies. in addition  evidence from preceding discourse elements may override the literal-meaning-first hypothesis by referential constraints. these interaction effects are highly rewarded for  though by no means restricted to  incremental approaches to natural language analysis  as sortal conflicts may not be recognized at the time when anaphora resolution is carried out. 
1 	conceptual and semantic constraints 
the parser we use establishes syntactic structures only if conceptual and semantic constraints between the lexical items involved are met. conceptual checks identify well-formed role chains between the concepts denoted by the lexical items; semantic checks determine whether these chains mirror metonymic relationships or literal ones. the representation structures to which these checks refer are grounded in a hybrid terminological knowledge representation framework  cf.  woods and schmolze  1  for a survey . the concept hierarchy consists of a set of concept names t = {computer-
system  printer ...} and a subclass relation isaf = 
	markert & hahn 	1 


1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 


	markert & hahn 	1 

reference by using a metonymic expression  laser for laser 
printer  - and they are covered by the same algorithm. 
　textual ellipsis resolution. a crucial problem with our approach lies in the disjunction in line 1 in table 1  which is a continuous source of ambiguity. whereas it leads correctly to an ambiguity in example i.1. ii .h as explained above  it also leads to the same kind of ambiguity in example ll.l. ii  where this is clearly not wished for. the algorithm as proposed so far does not yield any criteria to prevent this kind of overgeneration. this is not an artificial problem created by our algorithm in the first place  however. rather  it mirrors the fact that the resolution of metonymies is not fully constrained by metonymic patterns like part-for-whole or producer-for-
product. this is relatively independent of applying an lmf approach or not. in  hahn and markert  1   we propose three heuristics to further constrain coercion. 
1 	evaluation 
the test set for our evaluation experiment was composed of naturally occurring texts  viz. 1 german product reviews from the information technology domain. the main part of the evaluation was carried out manually in order to circumvent error chaining in the anaphora resolution  while path finding and evaluation was done automatically. 
　the sample contained 1 metonymies  1 nominal anaphors  1 textual ellipses  all occurring in 1 utterances. table 1 contains the quantitative distribution of occurrences of metonymies in our test set. the columns indicate whether a sortal conflict  s.c.  occurred directly  known at the time of anaphora resolution and  hence  resolvable in an incremental framework   indirectly  not known at that time   or not at all. with 1%  direct sortal conflicts are below expectations  but 
lmf approaches face even more serious problems for 1 % of the metonymies which are not marked by any sortal conflict at all. we also want to point out the significant rate of co-occurrences of metonymies and anaphora  1% . thus  anaphoric processes indeed seem to facilitate the occurrence of metonymies  an observation that supports our claim to account for the systematic interaction of both processes. 

table 1: distribution of metonymic noun phrases 

　table 1: resolution rates for metonymic noun phrases table 1 depicts the resolution rates for our approach.1 
the high rate of correctly resolved anaphoric metonymies 
1 we cannot compare our results to those from other approaches   1%  lends some credit to our ranking in table 1. especially important is the fact that 1% of all anaphoric metonymies marked by an indirect sortal conflict and 1%; without a sortal conflict can be resolved by an incremental approach without backtracking - due to the timely consideration of anaphoric constraints. lmf approaches are restricted to account for only 1 anaphoric metonymies  1%  marked by a sortal conflict  cf. table 1  anaphors marked by a direct 
 1  and indirect  1  sortal conflict  respectively . 
　our resolution rates are considerably worse for definite non-anaphoric noun phrases  1%  and indefinite noun phrases  1%   the main reason being that metonymies without a sortal conflict are not recognized  as anaphoric constraints are not applicable. hence  lmf approaches are insufficient for non-anaphoric noun phrases as well. however  we do not have a solution to this problem either. 
　as shown in table 1  1 of 1 anaphors  1%  are metonymic. as 1 of them are referential metonymies  a 1% increase of anaphora resolution capacity can be achieved through the incorporation of metonymy resolution.1 none of the lmf approaches can resolve the 1 metonymic anaphors  constituting 1% of all anaphors   which are not marked by a sortal conflict. 
　the effects our algorithm has on the resolution of textual ellipses are discussed in  hahn and markert  1 . 
1 	related work 
computational approaches to metonymy resolution  up to now  have largely neglected the interdependencies between discourse processes and metonymies - regardless of whether they are based on pragmatics  hobbs et al.  1; norvig  
1; fass  1  or rooted in lexical semantics  pustejovsky  1;verspoor  1 . 
　nominal anaphora and metonymies have only been treated in a common framework by  norvig  1  and  hobbs et al.  1 .1 nevertheless  neither of them considers interaction effects. even worse  these are particularly excluded in the approach  norvig  1  has chosen. he uses a spreadingactivation model in which different types of inferences  e.g.  metonymic and anaphoric ones  belong to different inference classes. while competing inferences within one class can be ranked and the best can be selected for resolution  ranking and selecting across different inference classes are prohibited. this contrasts with our approach in which the best com-
since none of them has been empirically tested  so far. we here consider instead general problems lmf approaches are likely to face. 
   1  note that the resolution of literal nominal anaphors is not affected by our algorithm. 
1  
    stallard  1  from whom we have adapted the distinction between predicative and referential metonymies treats only intrasentential pronominal anaphora. in the lexical semantics camp  puste-
1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation jovsky  mentions discourse effects but does not go into any details. verspoor  integrates lexical and pragmatic constraints concentrating on rhetorical relations between two propositions  like causality   while she does not consider anaphoric phenomena. bination of anaphoric and metonymic inferences is chosen. another problem with norvig* s approach relates to the fact that insufficient results from the inference processes do not trigger additional computations in order to try yet another  perhaps not so obvious analysis. if  e.g.  for reasons whatsoever no anaphoric inference is found for a definite noun phrase  norvig's system does not attempt to find a less favored metonymic reading  which  nevertheless  would allow for a subsequent anaphoric interpretation. 
　in hobbs et al.'s work the interpretation of a sentence  or a sequence thereof  amounts to proving its logical form. although this allows  in principle  for the interaction between metonymies and anaphora  this problem is not yet addressed in their work. therefore  their approach to metonymy resolution is limited to explicitly marked cases of sortal conflicts. although literal interpretation is regarded as a special case of metonymy resolution  it is preferred when no sortal conflict is encountered  thus actually subscribing to an lmf model. 
　this leads us to our second point of criticism  namely that all computational approaches we know of converge on the assumption  rejected in our approach  that metonymy resolution is entirely dependent on encountering intrasentential anomalies. usually  this amounts to the requirement that sortal conflicts have to be recognized  e.g.   fass  1; hobbs et ai  1; norvig  1 ; sometimes a small range of syntactic conflicts is considered as well  e.g.  igrosz et ai  1; pustejovsky  1 . thus  a metonymic interpretation of a sentence is always rejected in favor of the literal one  regardless of discourse processes  if the literal one does not lead to a 
　deviant sentence reading. our test set indicates  however  that about one third of the metonymies it contains are not marked by a sortal conflict at all. hence  further relying on this violation condition precludes a significant range of metonymies from actually being resolved. 
　the pragmatic approaches just discussed fully subscribe to a syntax-first paradigm. the incorporation of their mechanisms for metonymy resolution into an incremental mode is precluded  as they rely on the detection of sortal conflicts. in contradistinction  our predicates in table 1  1 and 1 are all compatible with both a syntax-first paradigm and the incremental interaction of syntax  semantics and pragmatics. 
1 	conclusion 
we have introduced a model of metonymy resolution that is based on the interaction of metonymic and anaphoric resolution processes. discourse constraints supplied by information about anaphoric antecedents enable us to treat metonymies on a par with literal interpretations. this leads us to a more effective procedure than common lmf models. 
　the empirical data we got from our approach - despite the fact that such an evaluation of metonymy resolution  to the best of our knowledge  has been carried out for the first time - have led us to several follow-up questions. prime among them is a learning procedure for path patterns  one that is able to automatically determine metonymic relations starting from a given set of literal ones. 
　while our procedure is language-neutral  several constraints will also have to be assigned at the lexical or syntactic level of description. combining these levels is different from the approach by  pustejovsky  1   who pursues language-specific encoding in the lexicon only. as is evident  any approach to metonymy resolution is heavily dependent on the structural richness of the available knowledge sources  whether qualia structures in the lexicon or terminological world knowledge . the more elaborate the representational depth  the more sophisticated the metonymic relations that can be determined. this argument  however  is a truism and applies to any attempt at real natural language understanding. 
acknowledgements. k. markert is a member of the graduate program on human and machine intelligence at freiburg university  which is funded by dfg. we thank our colleagues  in particular susanne schacht and michael strube  who commented on earlier drafts of this paper. we also like to express our deep gratitude for the fruitful discussions we had with bonnie webber. 
