 
this article considers the problem of generating various calligraphy of japanese character from some limited existing fonts. we propose a generation method based on the deformable contour model g-snake. by representing the outline of each stroke that makes of a character with a g-snake  we cast the generation problem into global and local deformation of g-snake under different control parameters  meanwhile  the local deformation obeys the energy minimization principle of regularization technique. the base value of the control parameters are learned from given sample fonts. the experimental results  i.e. the generated calligraphy show such a process as a reasonable way of generating characteristic calligraphy. 
1 	introduction 
writing style varies from person to person. inherently  imitating and generating diverse calligraphy of a character automatically with a computer is always demanded. however  because of the shape variety of the strokes making up a character and the complexity of the shape deformation  it is usually difficult to capture the inner relationship between different writing style by simple rules. therefore  to cope with the situation  currently two measures are mainly adopted for calligraphy generation: one is preserving some different fonts in advance  and giving out a type of writing among them opportunely  as used in almost all editor or printing tool  and the other one is using some manually defined regulations based on some experience  as applied in many calligraphy systems 
 nakamura et al.  1  1  zhang et a/.  1.  
　obviously  the first method lacks flexibility  the number of type of calligraphy generated is font-limited  and enormous computer resources are required with the increase of amounts of the font. the second one lacks generality  it is based on trial-and-error  fine result can be obtained from it without special knowledge about calligraphy. the problem of generating different calligraphys from limited existing fonts with human intervention as little as possible is left. 
　more formally  our problem may be formulated as follows: given two sample calligraphys  and 
 construct versatile intermediate object ct 
together with the increasing of t  where   is a more violent deformation in resembling tendency from c1 to c . in a way  this is a multidimensional shape interpolation problem  and  as such  is ill-posed  in the sense that there are many possible interpolants  satisfying this very vague condition. 
　there are also some research carryed out for the shape interpolation problem  sederberg et al.  1 . as a common consent  the regularization  poggio et al.  1  technique is a powful tool of transforming a ill-posed problem into a well-posed one. by finding some natural conditions which are not explicit in the input it reduces the number of solutions. in this paper  we propose a method for dealing with the problem of generating calligraphy from limited fonts by applying regularization technique. 
　we apply regularization to our calligraphy generation problem grounded on following argument; 
a different calligraphy of a character is a deformation of its stroke contours satisfying energy minimum principle under some external constraints. 
　some deformable contour models based on the energy minimum principle of regularization have been developed and successfully applied to many aspects of machine vision. kass first established a well-known active contour model  the snake model to process low-level vision tasks such as edge detection  boundary formulation and stereo and motion matching  kass et al.  1 . to achieve the aim of contour extraction of arbitrary object under noisy image  lai and chin  1   lai gives a more innovative one  so-called generalized active contour  the g-snake model  based on the stochastic relaxation theory  geman  1 . the common feature of both models is that  for each model  there is a defined internal energy  which is used to keep the initial shape of a contour  and an imaginary external force acted on the contour. the contour is attracted by such actions to a desirable final state  where the sum of internal and external energy of 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

	wang etal. 	1 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

figure 1: decomposing calligraphy into strokes 
1 	correspondence completion 
in this stage  the partial correspondence of feature points will be turned into a full correspondence of snaxels. candidate snaxels to initialize a g-snake are selected from each route between two feature points produced at laststage for each related stroke  and an full correspondence for related stroke of two samples is established. given a space between the snaxel  the necessary number and coordinates of snaxels for a element in co to its next one can be calculated except the last one who's coming element is the first element. then  for an element in c   assuming the number of snaxel to next element should be the same as its correspondence element in co  the proper adjusted space can be calculated and snaxel can be selected from the route produced for c  in last stage. finally  a full correspondence is obtained by binding these selected snaxels orderly. 
1 	g-snake initialization 
to prepare for the deformation  using the snaxels found in the last stage  a closed g-snake is located on the contour of stroke  which contains the necessary shape infor-

figure 1: global deformation of stroke 
1 	g-snake control parameter learning 
in our system  the local deformation is simulated as the energy minimization process of closed g-snake on the outline of stroke. the function f u   describing the external energy in expression 1 is designated as a pulling force acted on snaxel on co  with direction points to its correspondence snaxel on c  and the strength in proportion to the normalizing constant / u  is described in the last section. therefore  using the correspondence table created in previous stage and putting the heads of g-snake on c  together with its corresponding global deformed 
	wang etal. 	1 

one on co  such directions and strengthes to form a force map is easily generated. then we use this force map to minimize the total energy for the g-snake  and the local regularization parameters  in expression 1 can be estimated by local minimax criterion lai and chin  1 . 
1 	generate new calligraphy 
having known global deformation parameter and local regularization parameter  we can generate a new calligraphy by giving a different control variable  deform each stroke segment globally using affine transformation under parameters  and then deform it locally by g-snake energy minimization with regulation parameter  this control the deformation from weakly to violently. 
1 	experiment results 
this section shows some examples of generated calligraphy. in order to test the robust of our algorithm  we deliberately selected four kinds of calligraphy fonts of japanese  hiragana  existing in our computer system which are called kaisho  gyosho  mini and gothic. these fonts have clearly different appearance. calligraphy of such fonts for hiragana  a  are shown in figure 1: 

figure 1: different type of calligraphy 
　using a pair of calligraphy fonts of hiragana  a  as samples  and executing the algorithm described in lastsection  some generated examples are shown in figure 1. 
　in figure 1  calligraphys of the first row is used as sample c1 and last row for c . this is done to test whether our algorithm is available for sample of any selected type. therefore  the first column in figure 1 is an progressively proceeding from kaisho to gyosho  the second column is kaisho to mini  and the third is gothic to mini. after learning global and local deformation parameters  the calligraphys in second and third row are generated by setting t to 1 and 1. 

figure 1 gives generated calligraphys for some other 
hiragana   i      u   e   and  o of japanese  the selected generation condition is: from the first row to the fourth row  the control parameter is set to be 1  1  1 and 1 respectively. we can observe from this picture that the increase of t makes the lose the peculiarity of co  simultaneously  get that of c . 

figure 1: other generated calligraphy 
　we also test our method on processing real calligraphy. the right down of figure 1 is a real calligraphy of hiragana  a  read from a scanner. by using it and existing hiragana  a  of font  kaisho   left up of figure 1  as samples  we can generate intermediate calligraphy  

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 


figure 1: generated calligraphy from real sample 
the right up and the left down shown in figure 1 with t selected as 1 and 1. 
1 	discussion 
we can know from these figures  that our algorithm do generate the medium states of samples  and the sample calligraphy can be any type of font including the real calligraphy. the deformation can be controlled by varying the parameter t. the results are similar to calligraphy written by real people. but we have to indicate that something must be improved is also left over. some generated results are not acceptable in an aristic point of view. with the increase of t  the character generated looses the rhythm of the initial character  or it is a non canonical way. because the final position of snaxel is decided with the energy minimum and due to the control difficulty of this processing  some strokes of the generated character are locally blurred. we want to overcome these shortcomings in our next system version. 
1 	conclusion 
we demonstrate the problem of generating various calligraphy of japanese character from different fonts can be modeled as global and local deformation of its stroke contour obeying the energy minimization principle of regularization technique. therefore  we apply the deformable contour model g-snake solving the calligraphy generation problem. such a method makes the generation more flexible and the generated results are more natural. some useful left work can be indicated as: extracting strokes of a character automatically  modeling the force or pressure applied on the brush and the dynamic of writing kana or kanji  interpolating writing scratch between strokes  i.e the semicursive style of writing  and the extension of the existing system to calligraph processing of chinese characters. 
