 
we present here a qualitative temporal reasoning system that takes both points and durations as primitive objects and allows relative and indefinite information. we formaly define a point duration network  as a structure formed by two point algebra  pa  networks separately but not independently  since ternary constraints are introduced for relating point and duration information. we adapt some of the concepts and reasoning techniques developed for the point algebra networks  such as consistency and minimality. we prove that the problem of determining consistency in a point duration network is np-complete. a simpler and polynomial-time decision problem is introduced for a restricted kind of point duration networks. finally we suggest how to determine consistency and find minimal point duration network in the general case. 
1 	introduction 
representing and reasoning about temporal knowledge is essential for many areas of artificial intelligence. several constraint-based systems for temporal reasoning have been proposed  mainly concentrated on two kinds of formalisms: qualitative approaches  allen  1; vilain and kautz  1  and quantitative or metric systems  dean and mcdermott  1; dechter et a/.  1 . later efforts  meiri  1; kautz and ladkin  1  have been done on integrating both qualitative and quantitative information between time points and intervals in a single constraint-based computational model for temporal reasoning. systems supporting duration reasoning have been proposed as well. allen  has designed a duration reasoning system that allows relative information 
   *this work was funded by the spanish cicyt through grant tic1 
1 	temporal reasoning 
 e.g. interval i took longer than interval j  and representing uncertainty. duration information is encoded in a network orthogonal to the interval relationship network  but total consistency of this network is not guaranteed. temporal constraints on durations are not usually managed in point-based formalims. barber  presented a duration-based temporal model with metric constraints. but this model is restricted in the sense that no disjunctive qualitative constraints are allowed. 
　we present here a qualitative temporal reasoning system that takes both points and durations as primitive ob-
jects and allows relative and indefinite information. we formaly define a point duration network  pdn for short  as a structure formed by two pa networks separately but not independently  since ternary constraints are introduced for relating point and duration information. in section 1 we adapt some of the concepts developed for the point algebra networks  such as consistency and minimality  for the new point-duration model. in section 1 we propose some reasoning task for pd networks and prove that the problem of determining consistency in a pdn is np-complete. a simpler and polynomial-time decision problem is introduced for a restricted kind of pd networks. finally we suggest how to determine consistency and find minimal network with an exponentialtime algorithm for the general case. 
1 	definitions 
in this section we review vilain and kautz's  point algebra  pa  and pa networks for representing qualitative relations between points. then we will see how we can augment pa networks with additional variables that represent durations  or elapsed time  between any two points of time  and additional relations expressing relative information concerning durations  e.g. duration between temporal points and is less than duration between points xk and xm . 
the point algebra  pa  is a relation algebra  tarski  
1  whose elements are the possible subsets of t =   where t is the set of  mutually exclusive  primitive or basic qualitative temporal relations that can be hold between any two points of time. 
　a pa network is a network of binary relations  montanari  1  where the variables x 1  ...   xn represent time points having the same domain  that may be  for example  the set q of rational numbers  and the binary relations between variables are of the form rij   where rij is a relation of the point algebra that constraints the possible values for variables x1 and xj  
1 	point duration networks  pdn  
we define a point duration network  pdn for short  as a struture  formed by two pa networks np and nd and a set of ternary constraints relating points and durations together  where 
　  np is determined by a set p = {x1 ...   xn  of point variables that take values over the rational numbers and a set t. 
other and thus we cannot solve them as independent binary constraint satisfaction problems  csp . note that we use the term network for a structure although this is not a network in a strict sense  since does not describe a binary csp. alternatively  we could also consider the problem represented by  as a general  nonbinary  and continuous domain csp whose variables are v = p u d  the domain of each variable is q  and  is the set of binary and ternary constraints. we prefer presenting the problem as two pa networks np and nd separately but not independently since it clearer expresses the different meaning of point and duration variables and constraints  and also offers the possibility of borrowing some of the representation and reasoning techniques developed in the study of point algebra and binary networks. we follow an idea suggested by allen  when he proposes a duration reasoning system whose duration information is encoded in a network orthogonal to the interval relationship network. 

	semanticaly  a consistent instantation of a network 	for every 
epd is a description of a world where we can map points 	given a 	there exists a unique pdn  to a time line  in such a way  we not only preserve the rel-	equivalent to 	which is minimal with respect to 
ative position amongst points but also the relative magnitude of separation between them.  the uniqueness is guaranteed because equivalent networks are closed under intersection  proofs can be found in  montanari  1  . is the minimal point duand the binary re-
	are called the minimal relations. 	each 
binary and primitive relation in  is feasible  van 
beek  1   i.e  we can find a consistent instantation of which satisfies the given relation. 
reasoning task with pd networks 
given a pdn  some of the reasoning task we can think 
  determining consistency. 
  find the minimal relation between two point or du-
  find the minimal network equivalent to a given one. 
　van beek  gives exact algorithms for these problems in the context of pa networks. but  as we suggested previously in section 1  these algorithms are not suitable for pd networks. we can see that with a very simple example. 
example 1 let 
bles  such that 	 anyother variables are unconstrained . there is no consistent instantation because it must be 
         it is not possible that is inconsistent although np and nd  considered as inde-
pendent pa networks  are consistent. 
consistency i n p n d 
from the above pdn reasoning task  the main one is to determine consistency since we can find a polynomial transformation from the latest tasks to the first one. this would be useful if we could check for consistency in polynomial time. but  unfortunately  this is not possible  as we show in the next theorem. let cons pdn be the decision problem of determining if a given pdn is consistent or not. 
	theorem 1 	cons.pdn is np-complete. 
proof: we follow the general procedure described by garey and johnson  for devising an npcompleteness proof for a decision problem. first we show consjpdn belongs to the class np. this is easy  since for a yes instance of the problem  a nondeterministic turing machine needs only to guess a consistent instantation and check in polynomial time that the assignments satisfy all the in a sec-
ond stage we must find a polynomial reduction of known np-complete problem to cons.pdn. we use graph 
1 	temporal reasoning 



1 	temporal reasoning 

variables and binary relations given by  

where the union is over all the consistent scenarios of  is the minimal network equivalent to 
we omit the proof since a similar one can be found in 
 dechter et al.  1 . this theorem shows we can obtain the minimal network  and minimal binary relations by generating all the simple pdn from   checking for consistency with cons-simple and taking the union of primitive and feasible relations. 
1 	conclusion 
we have presented a qualitative temporal reasoning system that takes both points and durations as primitive objects and allows relative and indefinite information. we have formally defined a pdn as a structure formed by two interconnected pa networks. this allows us to borrow and adapt some of the concepts developed for the point algebra networks  such as consistency and minimality. we have proved that the problem of determining consistency in a pdn is np-complete and a simpler and polynomial-time decision problem for a restricted kind of pd networks has been introduced which is useful for cheking consistency and finding minimal network in the general case. 
　despite the intractability of reasoning tasks with general pd networks  we think these tasks may be useful in several areas such as scheduling and planning systems. the analysis of such systems requires the ability to specify and prove relations between critical states or actions and their durations. so  several strategies may be adopted to put this pd reasoning model to work in practical systems. one may be  for instance  to reach minimality both in np and nd independently  and consecuently  accept its incompleteness. or better  find how to restrict the information in a pdn so that we can obtain polynomial-time reasoning algorithms. the restricted model  however  may be expressive enough to work well in practice. actually we are working in this direction and have found how restricting just the relations between points may lead to polinomial-time problems. we are also investigating how to integrate qualitative and metric information between points and durations and the possible aplications of these new models. 
