 
a self-organizing model of spiking neurons with dynamic thresholds and lateral excitatory and inhibitory connections is presented and tested in the image segmentation task. the model integrates two previously separate lines of research in modeling the visual cortex. laterally connected self-organizing maps have been used to model how afferent structures and lateral connections could self-organize through inputdriven hebbian adaptation. spiking neurons with leaky integrator synapses have been used to model image segmentation and binding by synchronization and desynchronization of neuronal activity. although these approaches differ in how they model the neuron  they have the same overall layout of a laterally connected two-dimensional network. this paper shows how both self-organization and segmentation can be achieved in such a network  thus presenting a unified model of development and functional dynamics in the primary visual cortex. 
1 	introduction 
several models of the visual cortex that take into account lateral interactions between neurons have recently been proposed  see sirosh et al.  1b  for an overview . in the early stages of the development of the visual cortex  lateral connections are believed to self-organize in synergy with the afferent connections to form a topological map of the input space. this process can be modeled computationally  showing how structures such as ocular dominance and orientation columns and patterned lateral connections between them form based on input-driven hebbian learning process  the laterally interconnected synergetically self-organizing map  or lissom  miikkulainen et al.  1; sirosh  1; sirosh and miikkulainen  1; 1; 1; sirosh et al.  1a  . 
　lateral connections may also play a central role in the function of the visual cortex  by modulating the spiking behavior of neuronal groups. they could cause 
1 	neural networks 
synchronization and desynchronization of spiking activity  thus mediating feature binding and segmentation. such synchronization of neuronal activity emerges in the visual cortex of the cat when light bars of various orientation are presented  gray and singer  1; eckhorn et al.  1; gray et al  1 . several models have been proposed to explain this phenomenon  von der malsburg  1; von der malsburg and buhmann  1; eckhorn et al  1; reitboeck et al  1; wang  1 . the model of reitbock et al.  is particularly interesting because of its sophisticated model of the neuron: the synapses are leaky integrators that sum incoming signals over time with exponential decay. a network of such neurons can segment multiple objects in a scene by synchronizing neuronal activity. spikes of neurons representing the same object are synchronized  and those of neurons representing different objects are desynchronized. 
　this paper shows how the leaky integrator model of the spiking neuron can be integrated with the lissom model of self-organization. the architecture is named spiking laterally interconnected synergetically self-organizing map  or slissom. slissom  1  forms a topological map from an initially random network through synergetic self-organization and  1  generates synchronized and desynchronized neuronal activity that can be used for segmenting multiple objects in the scene. the results suggest that lateral connections play a central role in both the development and function of the visual cortex. 
1 	the slissom architecture 
slissom consists of two layers of interconnected neurons: the  retina  and the  cortex   figure la . the overall organization of slissom is based on the lissom architecture  miikkulainen et ai  1; sirosh  
1; sirosh and miikkulainen  1; 1; 1; sirosh et ai  1a   and the neuron model on the leaky integrator neurons of eckhorn el al.  and reitbock et al. . lissom provides a self-organizing principle and the leaky integrator neuron introduces temporal dynamics to the slissom model. 
　each cortical neuron receives afferent connections from the input layer and lateral  excitatory and in-


figure 1: t h e s l i s s o m a r c h i t e c t u r e    a  the organization of the sl1ssom network. the bottom layer is the retina  and the top layer models the cortical neurons. there are short-range lateral excitatory connections and long-range lateral inhibitory connections between cortical neurons. each of these neurons receives input from all neurons in the retina. a sample input  consisting of three 1 x 1 input spots  is shown on the retina   b  the structure of a single neuron in slissom. leaky integrators at each synapse perform decayed summation of incoming spikes. the spike generator compares the weighted sum of the integrator outputs to a dynamic threshold  firing a spike if the sum exceeds the threshold. each spike increases the threshold  with exponential decay. 
hibitory  connections from other neurons in the cortex. each connection is a leaky integrator that performs decayed summation of incoming spikes  thereby establishing not only spatial summation  but also temporal summation of activity  figure 1 . each new spike is added to the sum of the previous ones  and the sum is exponentially decayed over time. the current sums are multiplied by the connection weight and added together 1 to form the net input to the neuron. the spike generator compares the net input to a threshold and decides whether to fire a spike. the threshold is a sum of two factors: the base threshold 1 and the decayed sum of past spikes  formed by a similar leaky integrator as in the input synapses. active spiking therefore increases the effective threshold  making further spiking less likely and keeping the activation of the system within a reasonable range  eckhorn et al  1; 
1 . 
   the overall organization of the slissom model is shown in figure l a . the cortical neurons receive input from all retinal neurons. the excitatory lateral cormec-
1
　　this differs from eckhorn et al.  and reitbock et al.  who multiplied the weighted sums from afferent connections and those from lateral connections. multiplying exerts better modulation on the neuronal activity  but disturbs self-organization by rapid fluctuation. in our experiments  modulation turned out to be possible with additive neurons as well. 
c h o e & m i i k k u l a i n e n 


figure 1: self-organization of the slissom map. the nodes in the grid show the centers of gravity of the receptive fields of the cortical neurons. nodes representing immediate neighbors in the network are connected with a line   a  the afferent weights are initially randomized and their centers of gravity are about the same.  1  after 1 iterations  the network forms a well-formed mapping of the input space  comparable to  c   the ideal grid where each node represents a gaussian receptive field located directly below the map unit. 
reduced  resulting in fine tuning of the map  miikkulainen et a/.  1; sirosh and miikkulainen  1 . the weights are adapted both during self-organization and 
segmentation. 
	1 	experiments 
the slissom experiment consists of two parts:  1  self-organization  and  1  object segmentation. during self-organization  lateral and afferent connection weights are adapted to form a topological map of the input 
	space. 	after the network has stabilized  multiple ob-
jects  1 squares  are presented to the retina. the weights adapted to the input and the network segments the objects by temporally alternating the activity on the map. 
　the retina and the cortex both consisted of 1 x 1 units. the afferent weights were initialized to have receptive fields of size 1 x 1 on the retina  centered right below 
each neuron  and then 1% noise was added to their values  figures 1a and 1a . the lateral connection weights were randomly initialized within  1   figure 1c . inhibitory connections covered the whole map  and excitatory connections linked to a square area centered at 
each neuron  figure la   with initial radius of 1  gradually decreasing to 1 in 1 iterations. at the same time  the lateral inhibitory learning rate gradually increased from 1 to 1. slow adaptation in the beginning captures long-term correlations within the inputs  which is necessary for self-organization. fast adaptation towards 
citatory  they can have inhibitory overall effects through interneurons  grinvald et a/.  1; hata et a/.  1; hirsch and gilbert  1 . the lissom model predicts that such long-range inhibition is computationally necessary for self-
organization to occur  sirosh and miikkulainen  1 . 
1 	neural networks 


figure 1: connection weights of the map neuron  1 .  a  initial afferent weights   1  final afferent weights   c  initial combined  excitatory - inhibitory  lateral interaction profile  and  d  final combined lateral interaction profile. the final weights are shown after 1 self-organization iterations. the x and y axes in  a  and  1  represent the location on the 

retina  and in  c  and  d   the location on the cortical network. 
the end facilitates quick modulation of the activity necessary for segmentation  section 1 . 
　during self-organization  single 1 x 1 square objects were presented to the network. the retinal neurons representing objects were spiking at each time step  and the settling consisted of 1 cycles of cortical activity update  equation 1 . after settling  connection weights were modified according to equation 1  based on the average firing rate over the last 1 cycles. each such presentation was counted as an iteration. after 1 iterations  both the afferent and the lateral weights stabilized into smooth profiles. afferent weights formed smooth gaussian receptive fields most sensitive to input from the retinal neuron right below the map neuron  as shown in figure 1. lateral weights formed smooth mexican-hat profiles  as shown in figure 1d. figure 1 shows the global organization of the map during the process. the final map  figure 1  closely resembles the ideal map of the input space  figure 1c . 
　once the slissom network had formed smooth and concentrated receptive fields and lateral interaction profiles  segmentation experiments were conducted on it. several input spots  again  1 x 1 squares  were presented to the retina at the same time. the spots constantly spiked on the retina for 1 time steps. for each spot  a separate 1 x 1 area on the map responded and the other areas remained silent. the lateral connection weights were adapted at each time step according to equation 1  with  based on the average firing rate over the last 1 steps. 
segmentation is evident in the total number of spikes generated within each area per time step  i.e. the multiunit activity  or mua; figure 1 . a high mua value implies that most neurons in the area are firing together  and a zero value implies that the area is silent. initially  the three areas corresponding to the three input spots are equally active  but as time goes on  they start to alternate. the spikes within the same area become synchronized  the neurons turn on and off together   and the spikes across the different areas become desynchronized  while one area is active  the other two are silent . such synchronized and alternating activity indicates that there are three separate objects in the input; in other words  it constitutes a mechanism for binding and segmentation. this result is very robust and works repeatedly for different locations on the retina and for different numbers of objects  as long as the input spots are spatially separate  see section 1 . 
1 	discussion 
several studies have shown that fast adaptation of synaptic efficacy is necessary for feature binding through temporal coding  von der malsburg  1; wang  1 . similarly in the experiments with slissom  rapid adaptation of lateral weights was found necessary for oscillatory behavior. on the other hand  self-organization requires slow adaptation so that long-term correlations can be learned. if the weights are initially random and change rapidly  they will fluctuate a lot and an ill-formed map will result. there are two possible solutions to this problem. one way is to have two sets of lateral connections  one for fast adaptation and the other for slow 
choe & miikkulainen 


figure 1: the multi-unit activities of areas responding to three different objects. the total number of spikes per time step in each of the three 1 areas are plotted over 1 time steps. although initially there is simultaneous activity in all areas  they quickly desynchronize and activation rotates from one area to another. 

adaptation  wang  1 . the other is to vary the learning rate of the synapse. it is unknown which approach is more biologically plausible; this question has yet to be settled physiologically. in this work  the learning process starts out with a slow learning rate and gradually the synapses become more plastic. this scheme does not disturb the self-organization since the activity on the map becomes more consistent and predictable as the training goes on  and the need for keeping track of the long-term correlations disappears. the two solutions are mathematically equivalent and there is no sufficient neurobiological evidence to distinguish between them at this point. the second one is simpler and was therefore chosen for this paper. 
　the muas show some overlap even when the input is successfully segmented  figure 1 . this is due to the slightly overlapping receptive fields in the model. gray et al.  observed that in the cat visual cortex  strong phase-locking occurred when the receptive fields were clearly separate. apparently when they overlap slightly  phase locking becomes less well defined at the edges. the overlap is unavoidable in the current small slissom network  but could be reduced in larger-scale simulations. such simulations with a large number and variety of objects constitute the most immediate direction of future research. segmentation in a more detailed selforganized model of the visual cortex  with orientation 
1 	neural networks 
columns and patterned lateral connections will also be studied  and it may be possible to account for phenomena such as gestalt effects based on the patterned lateral connections. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  the slissom model of dynamic spiking in a synergetically self-organizing map was presented. adapting lateral connections were shown to play an essential role in both self-organization and image segmentation  showing how the development and function of the visual cortex could be accounted for by a single unified architecture. 
a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s 
thanks to andrea haessly and joseph sirosh for initial simulations that led to the slissom architecture. this research was supported in part by the national science foundation under grant #iri-1 and by the texas higher education coordinating board under grant #arp-1. 
