 
we specify a model for the conceptual interpretation of positive gradable adjectives. building on a classification-based terminological reasoning approach we define comparison classes and class norms and specify how a degree is related to its corresponding class norm. 
1 	introduction 
there is a wide-spread consensus in the linguistic community that the semantics of positive adjectives like  rail  is captured by a binary predicate relating a degree to a comparison class 
 cf.  e.g.   klein  1; bierwisch  1  . hence   peter in  lb  should not be referred to as  tall  in a general sense  but as  tall in comparison to a class c   where c is constrained by the context in which  tall  occurs. this becomes evident considering the full version of example  1   where the utterance  la  crucially determines the valid comparison class for  tall pcter c '  c being the class of  1-year-old-boys . 
 1  a. peter is 1 years old. 	b. peter is tall. 
　from a computational point of view  two questions arise. first  how are degree expressions - positive gradable adjectives  in particular - represented  and  second  how are valid comparison classes for positive adjectives determined  the representation problem has already been tackled from a quantitative perspective employing interval representations  simmons  1  and fuzzy logic  zadeh  1   but also qualitative approaches have been considered  kamei and muraki  1; schwartz  1 . while both schools have notorious difficulties in incorporating the corresponding complementary methodology  in addition  they both fail to treat ordinal information appropriately such as for transitive reasoning on comparative constructions. as an alternative  we propose a qualitative representation and commonsense inferencing scheme that overcomes these deficits  cf. section 1 . 
   until now  only  bierwisch  1  has touched on the problems how to determine comparison classes  though in a rather sketchy way. hence  our algorithm in section 1 constitutes the first attempt at providing an explicit computation procedure for the conceptual interpretation of positive gradable adjectives in terms of finding its proper comparison class. 
1 	the degree calculus 
a general representation and inferencing scheme for natural language degree expressions must account for several requirements simultaneously. first  it must allow for different forms of degree expressions  esp. comparatives and positive adjectives. second  it must allow for a basically qualitative representation  since many expressions cannot be attributed any numbers at all  or only in an ad hoc way. third  it must allow for transitive inferences  since these are the most basic reasoning patterns for degrees. fourth  at least for technical domains  measure phrases must be incorporated  too. none of the approaches mentioned in section 1 are able to cope with these criteria  while the degree calculus we sketch below offers a synthesis of these four requirements. 


1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 


staab & hahn 

1 knowledge about interrelations 
in a discourse setting  a multitude of possibilities exist to fix the comparison class for a given adjective. 
 1  paul is 1 years old. he is tall. 
 1  paui celebrated his 1th birthday  yesterday. he is tall. 
 1  paui is tall for a 1 year old boy. 
　the examples  1    1  and  1  indicate that purely linguistic restrictions are not sufficient for restricting the comparison class of an adjective. similarly  knowledgebased computations that rely on static knowledge only  fail to determine the proper interpretations  e.g.  if comparison classes cannot be created dynamically but must be predefined . therefore  we use  meta knowledge of interrelations that describes how a class subhierarchy may influence the relations of class norm instances on a scale or how two degrees of a given concept are interrelated. as examples  consider the sentences  1  and  1 . in both of these the comparison classes are stated explicitly  and  thus  elucidate the distinction between a proper comparison class restriction and an improper one: 
 1  peter is tall for a gymnast. 
 1    peter is tall for a flute player. 
　the interrelation that exists between  hasheight  and  conductsexercises  describes gymnasts to be usually smaller than the average people. so  being tall for a gymnast does not necessarily imply being tall for the comparison class of all people. it is exactly the absence of corresponding interrelations between  hasheight  and  playsflute  that renders the restriction of the comparison class to flute players awkward. two things become evident here. first  knowledge about interrelations is everyday knowledge; it constitutes a common part of human knowledge. second  these interrelations need not be symmetrical.1 
　in order to exploit the kind of knowledge just described we use a description logics notation  as for the representation of the comparison classes mentioned before . this notation has the advantage that it combines formal explicitness with algorithmic convenience. the interrelations have in common that they describe local restriction classes that will later be combined to define the comparison class. we distinguish two basic types of interrelations which are illustrated by the examples  1  -  1   the relevant comparison classes are underlined . sentence  1  is a simple example where a degree-hierarchy interrelation is important  for a description of the relevant relations in the knowledge base  kb   cf. fig. 1 . in this example  the relevant comparison class  laser-printer  is the concept noise-level is directly 
     1 commonsense knowledge tells us that though gymnasts tend to be smaller than the average people  small people do not tend to do gymnastics very much. assume that a population consists of 1% small and 1% tall people  respectively  1% being gymnasts  and 1% of the gymnasts being small people. then the probability that a gymnast is small is 1%. however  the probability that a small person is a gymnast is only 1%. thus  restricting a comparison class from all people to gymnasts  in fact  decreases the class norm for height considerably  while the reverse is not true. 
 1  degree-hierarchy interrelation  with distance 1 : the noise level of the 1dpi laser printer xi1 is high for a laser printer. 
 1  degree-hierarchy interrelation  with distance 1 : the test picture of the xi1 has a good quality for the test picture of a 1dpi laser printer. 
 1  degree-degree interrelation  with distance 1 : 
the xi1 offers very good quality for a laser printer that costs $1. 

figure 1: hierarchy and definitory roles in the kb t-box 
associated with  assuming property inheritance . therefore  the path from the relevant degree noise-level to the relevant restriction class laser-printer has the unit length j  inheritance links are not counted .  1  refers to the same type of interrelation  but differs in the length of the distance  two relations have to be passed  between one of the relevant restrictions  1dpi-laser-printer  and the degree quality  of the test picture . 
　in order to represent the above-mentioned interrelations knowledge must be available about which relations  in the last example: quality-of and printed-by1  lie between the restricting hierarchy  here  the subhierarchy of printers  and the interrelated degree  here  quality . moreover  it must be known which subclasses of printer have a norm attached relating to noise level  which is either below or above the class norm associated with their direct superclass.1 in our 
example  laser-printer  inkjet-printer and 1dpilaser-printer belong to the set of classes that are associated with class norms above that of their superclass  while 
dot-matrix-printer and 1dpi-laser-printer relate to corresponding lower class norms. 
　for degree-hierarchy interrelations we define the operator sh as in table 1 to represent this knowledge. this operator sh takes a list of pairs of restriction classes  restrcj  and relations  rj . the relations  rj  are furthermore restricted to r'j in order to allow the definition of more constrained interrelations. this is especially necessary if the domain of a relation is not specific enough to ensure an adequate interrelation representation  e.g.  cf. fig. 1  where quality-of is restricted to rel-l-p  which can be described as  quality-of of a test picture  . furthermore  the 
1
　　for each relation  e.g.  has-quality  prints-testpicture  and relation instance we always assume the existence of its inverse which is then referred to by an intuitively plausible  name such as quallty-ofor printed-by. 
1 we here abstract from the consideration of multihierarchies. 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

1
degree-degree interrelations have the type d-lnterrel. 
	the goal 	instof  isa  range and hasrole denote the common termino-
logical relations. as mentioned before the relevant part of our kb 
i is a simple hierarchy  thus there is only a single path from a concept to the topmost concept and  min  and  max  applied to a  possibly empty  subset of concepts of such a path are  therefore  partial and 
superconcept 	single-valued. 
staab & hahn 


1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

1 	related work 
though comparison classes are referred to by many authors 
 e.g.  klein  1; 1; simmons  1    only  bierwisch  1  sketches a procedure for the determination of comparison classes for gradable adjectives. however  his model is too weak to infer complex comparison classes like  picture printed by laser printer .  kyburg and morreau  1  present an  extension stretching  approach that may treat referentially used adjectives  but fails to account for attributive ones which are in the focus of this paper and occur at a much higher frequency  cf.  klein  1  for the referential/attributive distinction . 
　inference models for degree representations usually distinguish between two major approaches. in qualitative models  such as those proposed by  schwartz  1  and  kamei and muraki  1   inferences are drawn on fixed sets of two to seven ordered qualitative labels that represent degree expressions. however  while their representation schemata successfully handle several particular problems  they do not allow for the representation of comparatives and inferences like  1  or even simpler transitive inferences. 
　quantitative models  on the other hand  face the principal problem that they must assign functions to lexical entries which map comparison classes to numbers. since this assignment is highly controversial  it is usually not even done for simple examples. as mentioned before  a quantitative interval approach as proposed by  simmons  1  for the linguistic description given by  bierwisch  1  is unable to draw transitive inferences. the often cited advantage of interval approaches  their ability to reason with factor phrases when the input is inexact  does neither seem to be cognitively very plausible nor very important for text understanding systems. fuzzy logic  zadeh  1  faces similar problems and has been rejected with convincing arguments concerning natural language processing by  pinkal  1 . however  the alternative pinkal proposes  a supervaluation approach  though it is extremely handsome for theoretical reasons  can hardly be applied to real-world text understanding systems due to complexity considerations. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  we have defined the degree calculus the basic constructs of which  class norms  modifier labels  inference rules  are general enough to account for natural language degree expressions of a wide variety  viz. positives  comparatives  equatives and superlatives  in their all-quantified readings as comparatives . furthermore  we have formulated an interpretation methodology for natural language degree expressions. our proposal covers declarative issues of representing comparison classes and their associated class norms  as well as procedural aspects of how to determine the appropriate one for a particular adjective. the homogeneous formal treatment we give within a terminological specification framework is unique as is the provision of a comprehensive algorithm for computing comparison classes at all. 
　the approach we propose is based on a deep knowledge model of natural language understanding. we consider this a feasibility study which explores the possible limits of the terminological knowledge representation approach for an extremely demanding natural language understanding task. the empirical results we have gathered convey some good news. when we supply sufficient knowledge the approach works astonishingly well  as it outperforms naive approaches in a significant way . when we do not supply sufficient knowledge it degrades  but still produces reasonable  though suboptimal  results. we stipulate that non-knowledge-based approaches are entirely inadequate to cope with this problem at all. 
　though our treatment of comparison classes is far from being complete  it is the first comprehensive treatment of comparison classes we know of. coupled with the degree calculus it offers far more benefits than competing approaches. 
acknowledgements. s. staab is a member of the graduate program  human and machine intelligence  at freiburg university  which is funded by dfg. we thank our colleagues  martin romacker and susanne schacht in particular  for their comments. 
