 
a framework is summarized which supports the planning of natural language argument structure. one key aspect of natural argument is the order in which components are presented. this is in part responsible for both the coherency and persuasive effect of an argument. one means of effecting such ordering is proposed  and an overview is provided of the various classes of ordering heuristics. these heuristics are based upon insights offered by rhetoric texts  psychological research  and a corpus study. finally  it is demonstrated that such an approach can also contribute to the generation of surface textual features including formatting  punctuation and clue words. 
1 introduction 
generating arguments in natural language is of key importance in producing cogent justification in expert systems  paris  1   critiquing user decisions  rankin  1   explaining reasoning in logic-based systems  fox and das  1  tailoring medical advice  marcu  1   etc. argument is often more structured than other forms of natural language  and this fact can be exploited in designing a system for the generation of persuasive discourse. this paper is based upon the work of reed et al   in which a hierarchical framework is proposed which reflects the natural structuring of argument. 
at the highest level of abstraction  the argument 
structure  as  level is responsible for the logical form of the argument  i.e. the deductive  inductive and fallacial relationships holding between premises and conclusions. the operators which are available at the as level are thus conceptually similar to a subset of those presented in  maybury  1 . below the as level  the eloquence generation  eg  level effects stylistic and rhetorical refinements  based upon contextual and hearer-dependent parameters. the eg level does not alter the plan produced by the as level; rather  it introduces structurally redundant rhetorical statements  marks stylistic preference  voice  mood  formality  etc.   inserts lexical information for subsequent realization  and so on. 
crucial to the interaction between the as and eg 
derek long 
department of computer science 
university of durham  south road 
durham dh1le england 
d.p.long dur.ac.uk 
levels is the notion of salience. the structure planned by the as level does not explicitly employ linguistic goals: rather  it uses goals expressing the salience of facts to the hearer. it is the task of the eg level to determine how information should be made salient to the hearer often  items need not be uttered for them to be salient  resulting in enthymematic argument. 
　below the as and eg levels  the inter-clause structure is resolved  employing relations similar to those of rhetorical structure theory  mann and thompson  1    and finally the grammatical  syntactic and morphological realization is performed through interface with the lolita system  smith et al.  1 . 
　the current work employs a concept of argument based upon the study of a corpus of natural arguments drawn from scientific papers  advertisements  editorial commentary and 'letters to the editor'. it is similar to that referred to as the  standard approach  in argumentation theory  freeman  1   in which an argument is seen as comprising one or more premises contributing to one or more conclusions. each premise can in turn be supported by a subargument  with the conclusion of the subargument acting as premise to the superargument. finally  groups of premises contribute to a conclusion either independently  disjunct support  or in combination  conjunct support . this distinction is of crucial importance when attempting to determine the validity of an argument   freeman  1   and it is therefore surprising to find the distinction eschewed in many generation systems  e.g.  mcconachy and zukerman  
1  . 
1 	planning 
the task of generating persuasive discourse is seen in this work  as in much -of nlg  as one of planning. noah  sacerdoti  1  is frequently employed in text generation  hovy  1   but is hampered by the fact that abstract operator bodies are primarily composed of operators. these operators are applied immediately the abstract operator is selected: the latter are thus acting as schema-like 1recipes'  and systems are liable to suffer from reduced flexibility as a consequence. in contrast  the current work makes use of abnlp  fox and long  1   a hierarchical planner based upon the concept of encapsulation  whereby the body of an abstract operator contains goals rather than operators  and further  that 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

the body of an operator is not opened up until an entire abstract plan has been completed  i.e. there are no goals left unfulfilled at that level of abstraction . on completion of an abstract plan  which can be seen  in discourse planning  as a skeletal outline of what is to be communicated   the refinement operation opens up all the abstract operator bodies  such that the structure and constraints determined at one level of abstraction are propagated to the next level down. as a consequence  many choices which might have been considered during planning of an argument at the detailed level can be pruned as they become inconsistent with the abstract plan. such an approach has the potential to considerably improve upon the performance of a classical planner   bacchus and yang  1 . the use of abnlp in a framework for argumentative discourse planning is discussed in more detail in  reed et al  1j. 
　the initial state in planning a persuasive text is described by two goals. firstly  bel  h  p   which represents the intention for the hearer  h  to believe some proposition  p. thus it carries intentional rather than informational content  young and moore  1  and is classified as a communicative goal  moore and paris  
1 . secondly  the initial state also includes the goal i s   s a l i e n t  h  p        also a communicative goal. 
this represents the fact that the hearer must not just believe p  but that p must be salient to him  in the general discourse context  ' '- the use of this context parameter is discussed in more detail in |reed et al.  1b  . in normal communication  i.e. communication which obeys grice's maxims of cooperation   grice  1   and is therefore truthful and honest   every bel goal will have a corresponding i s   s a l i e n t goal. it is the bel goals which are planned for at the as level: ultimately  the argumentation will have to reach beliefs which the speaker assumes the hearer either believes or will accept without further support. the i s   s a l i e n t goals  however  are usually satisfied by the m a k e   s a l i e n t operator which represents a primitive action at the as level  and expresses the goal of making a proposition salient to the hearer  how this is achieved is determined by the eg level: some pieces of information in an argument are obvious and can be left implicit; others must be realized explicitly  in varying degrees of detail . the bel goals are satisfied by the deductive  inductive and fallacial operators available to the as level. argument components are frequently linked by support relations which can be characterized by a modus ponens operator  in which the inference between antecedent and consequent is weaker than that of strict deduction. the mp operator is given below  in figure 1  note that similar operators are available for situations in which the hearer believes ~p  as opposed to those in which the hearer has no opinion on p . 
　in addition to the b e l and i s   s a l i e n t goals corresponding to two premises of modus ponens  the body of the operator also contains the topic manipulation goals  push topic and popjtopic. these are typically satisfied by primitive operators  of the same name  for convenience   which represent actions to be performed on a topic stack similar that proposed by  grosz and sidner  1 . the explicit operationalization of topic manipulation  rather than seeing focus as a constraint active over the planning process  offers a number of advantages in generating persuasive discourse. there is a close relationship between the position of topic manipulators and the occurrence of clue-words  which have been shown to be vital in ensuring the coherency of an argument  cohen  1 . similarly  at other levels of abstraction  topic manipulators co-occur with various punctuation and formatting  for example  three or four successive popjtopic actions may warrant a paragraph break . 

　seeing push topic and popjtopic as goals suggests that it may also be appropriate to subdivide the class of communicative goals proposed by  moore and paris  1  into those which are intentional and those which are attentional  such an approach would also seem to be consistent with moser and moore's  attempt to reconcile  grosz and sidner  1  with rst   mann and thompson  1  . 
　the planning conducted at the as level thus results in a highly parsimonious plan  in that it employs just three operators representing primitive actions at this level of abstraction: i s   s a l i e n t   pushjtopic and popjtopic. for example  the goals in figure 1 represents the abstract aim of persuading the hearer of a. 

　if a could be supported by a single modus ponens argument  the bel goal would be fulfilled by the mp operator  and the i s   s a l i e n t goal by make salient  producing the abstract plan in figure 1. 

　during refinement  the mp body is opened up  from where the bel goals are satisfied by matching those in the hearer model  the is salient goals by 
make salient operators and the topic manipulators by 
	reed & long 	1 

corresponding primitives. thus the final plan of the as level is as shown in figure 1. 

　however  although such a plan might convince a quite dispassionate audience  and may therefore suffice for inter-agent persuasion in a non-cooperative  multiagent domain   reed et al.  1a    it may very well fail to be persuasive - or even coherent - simply because the order in which the information is presented is inappropriate. 
1 	generating order 
　even within the coherency constraints imposed by the topic stack  ordering can still make the difference between coherent and incoherent-and at the very least  can improve the coherency of an argument  given that coherency seems to be a scalar attribute . through analysis of arguments in the corpus  it was possible to determine structure  and then to modify that structure through permissible re-orderings  and finally to retranslate the structure back into text  and compare with the original. the results of re-ordering were often incoherent  see  cohen  1  for examples of such incoherency  and almost always less persuasive than the original. 
　the fact that content ordering has an impact on the persuasive effect of an argument has also been demonstrated in psychology. mcguire   for example  discusses how subarguments should be presented in climax order  i.e. with better supports coming later. marcu  provides a survey of how ordering and other techniques such as lexical choice affect the persuasive effect of arguments in the medical domain. 
　however  the most significant evidence of the importance of ordering comes from rhetoric  where heuristics are suggested for improving arguments so as to maximize their persuasive impact. typical of such texts is  blair  1   wherein are presented rules governing all aspects of public speaking  and in particular  a list of heuristics for determining an optimal ordering of subarguments. for these various heuristics to be implemented  it is first necessary to identify how the substrate of ordering is determined  i.e. given the structure of plans produced by the framework proposed in ′1  over which components should any given ordering have scope. 
　ordering occurs in two distinct phases in the planning process  corresponding to the two subtly different types of ordering necessary. 
　the first occurs with the fulfillment of bel goals. the communicative goal bel represents a problem for the classical planning framework  since it is inappropriate to consider it simply as an achievement goal  one which can be satisfied by a single operator . for a bel is often best satisfied by several operators  i.e. by multiple subarguments  which have been shown to occur with great frequency in natural language   freeman  1  . however  it is also inappropriate to consider bel a maintenance goal  such as the stylistic goals in hovy's  system  pauline. for it is not the case that bel goals remain unsatisfied; rather  they are satisfied a number of times and are then considered fulfilled in the classical sense. this iteration problem in planning has generally been approached through the use of some 'forall' operation. maybury   for example  makes explicit use of v in his operator descriptions  and moore and paris  introduce a forall clause. in both papers  however  it is noted that the approach requires explicit  unprincipled modification of the plan language. in the absence of a principled solution  the current work employs a similarly pragmatic notion of universal quantification  to produce a maximal set of support by which to fulfill a bel goal. this set of subarguments  in addition to the i s   s a l i e n t goal associated with the bel  such as that in figure 1   forms the substrate for a possible re-ordering. for example  pre-order 
 conclusion preceding premises  is generated by shifting the is jsalient ahead of all the subarguments. similarly  post-order  all premises preceding the conclusion  and hybrid order are also effected at this phase. 
　however  despite the fact that most re-ordering can be accomplished during goal fulfillment  a separate phase is required to resolve ordering between operator body components. for example  the modus ponens operator presented in figure 1 has two contributory parts in its body: x and x -  p. the order between these  i.e. between the two pairs t l - t 1 and t1-t1  can only occur with refinement  and not with goal fulfillment. 
　these two forms of ordering are demonstrated in the example below  in which an argument has the structure shown in figure 1  with a conclusion a supported by three premises  b  c and d   two of which are supported by further premises  e and f   this example has been taken  with minor modification  from the corpus . 

　from the initial goals in figure 1  the bel  h  a  is fulfilled by three modus ponens arguments  as shown in figure 1a. this structure then undergoes ordering  to produce figure 1b  as discussed below  the ordering is 

1 	natural-language processing and graphical presentation 

the result of a persuasion-oriented heuristic due to the weakness of the conclusion  a . 

figure 1. result of planning  a  before and  b  after ordering 
　the three modus ponens subarguments are then opened up during refinement. the position of the primitives in the abstract plan  in this case  only one the make salient  remains the same at the next level of abstraction  and similarly  the arrangement of the subargument units is also preserved. this produces the situation in figure 1a. however  the coherency of the plan in figure 1a is compromised  due to the  relatively  large subargument which intervenes between the expression of the conclusion  a  and the support leant to it by the third subargument  d. one means of repairing the coherency is to reverse the order of the components in the final subargument such that  d --  a  is expressed before d itself  thus indicating to the hearer the relevance of d to the conclusion. this reordering is effected in figure 1b. 

figure 1. result of refinement  a  before  and  b  after ordering 
　the argument is then completed with another round of planning  to plan the supports e and /   followed by refinement  to open up the bodies of the e and / subarguments   and finally  planning again  to resolve the remaining i s   s a l i e n t and topic manipulation goals . 
clearly  however  the ordering depicted in figure 1 is achieved through knowledge of the fact that the subargument for c: is relatively large  inasmuch as it has a supporting subsubargument  e. this knowledge is not directly available at this level  since subargument c has not yet been planned. in order to account for this phenomenon  and others based upon information regarding planning at lower levels of abstraction  abnlp offers the concept of resource estimation. this process heuristically allocates resources to particular parts of an abstract plan  based upon contextual and hearer-model knowledge. 
　estimates of subargument size are not the only determinants of ordering. most other features are directly available at the current level of abstraction: structural features  such as inductive operators having precedence over fallacial operators ; the surrounding structure  such as that causing the reordering in figure 1 ; the source of the support  speaker beliefs  beliefs the speaker knows the hearer to hold  or beliefs grounded in an authority grounding is discussed in  reed et al  1a  . perhaps the single most important feature to determine ordering is argument strength. following  freeman  1   strength is subdivided into inferential force and persuasive force: the former is purely a matter of determining the validity of the inference  whilst the latter is determined by assessing how the inference would be accepted by the hearer based on the speaker's models of his beliefs  competence  bias  scepticism  etc. 
　persuasion-oriented ordering heuristics  in particular  make frequent use of this hearer-dependent facet of argument strength. blair's  dicta suggest that arguments should increase in strength  which accords with the psychological results of  mcguire  1   mentioned above   unless the hearer is particularly sceptical  in which case  a strong argument should come first  so that the hearer should attend to what follows   or if there is one weak argument amongst many strong  in which case it may be appropriate to hide it in the midst of the others . furthermore  that if one argument is particularly strong it should be dwelt upon-and conversely  that many weak arguments should be grouped together  this is resolved as an issue of resource allocation . 
　often at odds with those of persuasion  the coherencyoriented heuristics aim to keep the argument as simple as possible  minimizing the amount and length of information employed. when persuasion heuristics introduce or order information which could produce poorly coherent results  re-orderings are available to repair the structure  such as the reversal of antecedent and inference in an operator body  as in figure 1 . persuasion ordering heuristics are not limited to planning phase ordering  nor are coherency ordering heuristics limited to refinement phase ordering. for example  the con-
junction operator conj  has two conjuncts in its body  and these are subject to the same persuasion heuristics  such as climax ordering  as disjunct multiple subarguments. equally  if the persuasion heuristics had not suggested the hybrid order in figure 1  coherency heuristics would have restricted the ordering such that the conclu-
	reed & long 	1 

sion was immediately adjacent to the final subargument. 
　the as and eg levels can thus be seen as mediating between heuristics of persuasion and coherency. however  both coherency and persuasive effect can be improved at subsequent levels in the framework  employing the results of the ordering process. in particular  the positioning of the topic manipulators  push topic and pop topic  can be used in the generation of a number of surface features  including punctuation  clue words and formatting. 
1 	effects of ordering 
　as suggested in  cohen  1   clue words can be used to repair text which is weakly coherent  or even in some cases  completely incoherent. the eg level can in this way effect repair on a plan produced by the as level which is less than optimally coherent  due  for example  to persuasion-oriented ordering heuristics . the original plan is not altered during this process; rather  clues are introduced into the plan to explicate its structure  and thus improve its overall coherence. 
　cohen  distinguished two groups of clues: redirective and connective. clues of re-direction refer back to earlier pieces of information. for example  in a complex argument where a deeply nested subargument marks the end of several of its 'parent' superarguments  a clue phrase is often required to indicate which superargument is being returned to  e.g. to return to the question of . when the result of such an ordering is encountered by the eg level  the multiple consecutive pop topic operations which characterize the scenario cause the insertion of a re-direction clue. in natural language  however  clues of re-direction are often avoided  since they seem to indicate a lack of clear underlying structure. correspondingly  many orderings are prohibited by the as level - cohen's parallel evidence ordering1  for example  simply cannot be generated  due to incontrovertible coherency constraints . as a result  redirective clues are required infrequently. 
　connective clues  in contrast  are used frequently in natural language to make explicit the relationship holding between adjacent components of an argument. cohen identifies six categories of connective clues-a full exposition of how each category can be accounted for within the proposed framework is beyond the scope of this paper  but by way of example  the generation of inference  detail and parallel clues is considered below. 
　inference clues occur between a premise and the conclusion to which it lends support-these are frequently employed in analyses in argumentation theory  e.g. the 
1  parallel evidence ordering  cohen claims  would  in the example in figure 1  permit expressing items in the order c  d  e f such ordering requires significant clue word repair  and in the current work is simply considered incoherent. this can be justified on the grounds that the apparent occurrence of parallel evidence in natural language may in fact be the result of a summary preceding an argument proper-in cohen's  example  the conclusions are then left implicit in the argument for reasons of proximity to the summary. conclusion locators of  wilson  1  . inference clues 
 so  therefore  etc.  can be generated on locating a pop topic action immediately preceding the conclusion in an argument exhibiting pre-order. 
　similarly  detail clues  since  which follows from  etc.  occur between a conclusion and its first supporting premise. these are the result of a push topic action which immediately follows a conclusion in hybrid or post-order. 
　the relationship between subarguments at the same level of abstraction contributing to a single conclusion is termed parallel by cohen. this is characterized in the plan produced by the as level by repeated occurrences of pop topic  x  followed immediately by 
push  topic  x   see figure 1 . in the simplest case  the co-occurrence can lead to the insertion of the lexeme and. however  the eg level has available information regarding scope  due to the push topic and pop topic 'end-stops'  from which the hierarchical structure can be determined. this enables more complex lexical realization such as numbering of subarguments. 
　indeed  parallel clues are not just expressed lexically. depending upon the level of abstraction  parallel structure can also be indicated through the use of formatting conventions  such as paragraph breaks and section numbering   and through the use of punctuation  particularly semi-colons between weak and briefly expressed subarguments . 
　the generation of clues is thus dependent upon the ordering determined at the as level  and is also a means of repairing coherency which has been sacrificed in favour of persuasive effect. 
1 	conclusion 
　the problem of generating a persuasive argument in natural language depends upon determining a good balance between coherency on the one hand and purely persuasive aspects on the other. both these factors rely on a process of resolving appropriate ordering of content. heuristics from a number of sources can be brought to bear upon this process  including those prescribed in rhetoric texts  those derived from empirical c bservations in psychology  and those inferred through the study of a corpus. 
　a hierarchical planning framework employing a parsimonious set of abstract primitives has been shown to be capable of generating the coarse-grained structure of an argument in an intuitive way. furthermore  the approach affords the opportunity for clear  principled application of ordering rules. finally  it has been demonstrated that this representation facilitates the subsequent realization of structure into text  and in particular  the generation of clue words which are known to be crucially important in argument comprehension. 
