ion of some part of the real world. computer scientists have traditionally worked on how to make abstractions from the world  how to encode an abstraction into a computer system and how to manipulate the abstraction inside the system for desired purposes. as a result  special features and micro-structures of many parts of the world are 
well understood  and many formalisms such as programming languages and knowledge representation schemes have been invented  while many manipulation strategies such as those of calculation and inference have been developed. however  the general features and the macrostructures of the real world have been less investigated and rarely used for abstraction-that is  for the development of computing systems. this is the problem to be addressed in the thesis. 
　we begin from a generic framework  which we develop by reflecting on generic aspects of the world and some theoretical and technical results in computer science. the following contributions should be made by the thesis: 
1. it will address difficulties arising in developing such a representation scheme and problem solving system; 
1. the generic formalism will be widely applicable for abstraction and for computer-based intelligent system development; 
1. as normal  it will provide a mechanism whereby large scale computing systems can easily be developed from small ones; 
1. distributed and parallel computation can naturally be applied in such a computing system; 
1. we may gain better understanding of the structure of real world problems on which our abstraction is based. 
1 	doctoral consortium abstracts in our account  any part of the real world is treated as a constrained object hierarchy coh   which is made from three kinds of components: relatively static objects  functional actions and relations between object and object  action and action or object and action. three major issues arise. the particle problem is that of ontology: what ground objects  primitive actions and fundamental relations should be used  the construction problem is how to combine primitives to introduce new objects  actions and relations for abstracting a specific part of the world. finally  the manipulation problem is how to define the computations needed within a constrained object hierarchy and to determine how these should be carried out. 
　investigation of the first two problems has led to the integration of objects from oop and constraints from csp  with a mechanism for pushing constraints into object hierarchies. it becomes evident that many different computing systems can be easily formalised as constrained object hierarchies of this kind. 
　resolving the third issue has produced a classification of problem solving tasks  a classification of the elementary computations which can be carried out within a constrained object hierarchy. some strategies for controlling various computations and their interactions have also been proposed. 
　as part of the research  an implementation of coh theory has been made for a parallel computer. it is being used to evaluate the correctness of the theory and the efficiency of some proposed computation strategies  and to develop algorithms such as for constraint resolution within object hierarchies. 
　this research cuts across many boundaries within the field of ai  having connections with knowledge representation  constraint-based reasoning  reactive systems and distributed ai. we aim at an enhanced declarative formalism for knowpedge and problem representation  at a powerful engine for solving a wide range of problems and at a generic architecture for developing intelligent systems. 
