 
control structure is one of the most important issues which has to be addressed while designing and developing a software agent system. based on the research and development of several agent systems  this thesis describes new agent architectures and a number of general principles. 
1. the problems being addressed 
software agents have shown considerable promise in many fields. thus  control structures for such software agents raise important research issues. this thesis goals are  1  to design control structures for software agents   1  to solve real world problems with these models  and by doing this   1  to discover some principles of control mechanisms of software agents. 
¡¡therefore  the major question being addressed throughout the thesis research is: what are fundamental principles of control structures for software agent systems  
the following questions are emphasized: 
1 control structure 
what sort of control structure will allow software agents to pursue multiple goals with multiple perception-action channels and limited communication  a control structure for an agent  sumpy  has been built for this perspective. 
1 fuzzy control 
how is the fuzzy control theory applied to the software agent field so that agents are able to handle fuzzy information in the environment where they live and to achieve their goals in a real-world manner  
1 collaboration 
what kind of control structure will empower an agent to collaborate with humans in the process of autonomously carrying out an everyday clerical task  how can such an architecture handle the coordination of several different 
activities  including the understanding of incoming messages and the composition of simple documents  an intelligent agent  vmattie  is being built for this purpose. 
1. a table of the proposed work plan 
the following time table is the proposed work plan. 
time completion task june  1 the major research and prototype of sumpy dec.  1 vmattie architecture design and programming specification may  1 the coding and debugging of vmattie. june  1 submission and defense of the thesis 1. a description of the progress to date 
the first software agent  sumpy  has been designed and implemented  in perl . sumpy  lives  in and helps to maintain a unix file system for better disk space utilization by compressing and backing up the files. built using subsumption architecture  sumpy displays multiple parallel goals  multiple perception-action channels  fuzzy control  limited communication  and  plug and play  properties. an experiment in agent architecture and in the use of agents for such maintenance tasks  sumpy promises to prove useful and has added no significant problems to the test file systems. 
¡¡the second agent system  virtual mattie  has been designed and is under coding and testing  in java . the initial version is expected to be completed by may 1. its architecture enables virtual mattie to actively gather information from humans  compose announcements of next week's seminars  and mail them each week to a list that she keeps updated  all without the supervision of a human. vmattie's architecture combines maes' behavior net architecture and hofstadter and mitchell's copycat architecture and significantly extends them. 
acknowledgments 
the researcher gratefully acknowledges dr. stan franklin who has guided this research. 
	song 	1 
