 
pac is an interactive system for experimenting with scenarios of agents  where the agents are modelled as having both cognition and personality  as well as a physical realisation. the aim of the system is to provide an environment where scenarios can quickly and easily be built up  varying aspects of agent person-
ality  or emotions  and agent cognition  plans and beliefs . this will allow us to experiment with different combinations of agents in different worlds. we can then investigate the effect of various parameters on emergent behaviour of the agent system. 
some aspects of the system are described more fully in  pt1 . 
1 motivation 
the motivation for the system is to provide a testbed where we can easily build up scenarios of agents to investigate the effect of modeling emotion and personality as one of the important aspects of agents. some researchers are interested in modelling emotion and personality as a way of creating agents that are engaging for the human user of a system  e.g.  bat1a; hr1  . others  such as toda  tod1  also believe that emotions play a functional role in the behaviour of humans and animals  particularly behaviour as part of complex social systems. certainly the introduction of emotions  and their interaction with goals  at various levels  increases the complexity of the agents and social systems that can be modelled. our hypothesis is that  just as modelling of beliefs and goals has facilitated the building of complex agent systems  so will the modelling of emotion and personality enable a further step forward in the level of robustness and complexity able to be developed. however significant work is needed before we can expect to understand the functional role of emotion sufficiently to successfully model it in our software agents. the pac system will facilitate experimentation with groups of agents in varying worlds  and will allow us to observe the effect of representation of emotional characteristics and combinations of personality types under varying aspects of the simulated world. 
　our aim in this system is not to develop a full psychological model of emotions  personality or cognition  but rather to use a simplified model to study how this might facilitate building of more complex systems  or more engaging and credible agents. 
1 emotional model 
we have based our model of cause of emotion on a simple version of two models found in the literature. the first is that explored in  occ1   and used by both dyer  dye1  and bates  bat1b  in their systems. in this model emotional reactions are caused by goal success and failure events. for instance an agent which experiences a goal failure may feel unhappy  while one experiencing goal success may feel glad. dyer  dye1  develops a comprehensive lexicon of emotional states  based on goal success and failure. for example an agent which expects its goal to succeed will feel hopeful  an agent whose goal is achieved by the action of another agent will feel grateful  and an agent who expects its goal to be thwarted will feel apprehensive. figure 1 shows examples of some emotions  modified from  dye1    indexed by contributing cause. we have currently implemented a simplified version of this model. 
　the second model we have used is based on what we call motivational concerns. these are long term concerns which differ from the usual goals of rational agent systems in that they are not things which the agent acts to achieve  but rather something which the agent is continually monitoring in the background. if a threat or opportunity related to a motivational concern arises  then an emotional reaction is triggered  which leads to behaviour. 
　frijda and swagerman  fs1  postulate emotions as processes which safeguard the long-term persistent goals 
emotion  x  to goal-situation by mode happy achieved sad thwarted grateful y achieved y disappointed thwarted expect achieved guilty y thwarted x 
figure 1: pac allows setting of emotion threshold  base point and rate of decay        figure 1: some emotions and their causes or concerns of the agent  such as survival  a desire for stimulation  or a wish to avoid cold and damp. according to them emotion is the process which instantiates appropriate sub-goals to deal with threat or take advantage of opportunity  associated with these concerns. 
　the earlier work of toda  tod1  also postulates emotions as processes which affect the rational system of the agent  and which are based on basic urges. he groups 
1 	videos 
these urges into emergency urges  biological urges  cognitive urges and social urges. these are similar in principle to the long-term concerns of frijda and swagerrnan. 
　in our system it must be specified for a particular scenario what the motivational concerns of the various agents might be  e.g. survival  need for stimulation  concern for children  etc . the conditions which indicate threats to these concerns  or opportunities related to the concerns  must also be defined. motivational concerns can then be selected for particular agents  resulting in the appropriate triggering events being recognised by the emotion module  leading to instantiation or reprioritisation of goals. 
　each emotion in our system is represented as a linear gauge  with a threshold and a base point which can be varied for each agent  see figure 1 . as events happen which can cause a particular emotional reaction  the gauge moves up - at a rate which can be set for each agent. as time passes  if no further events trigger that emotion  the gauge moves back towards the base level  again at a rate which can be varied from agent to agent. 
　when a particular emotion crosses the threshold on the gauge for that emotion  the emotion is turned on/off. this causes a change to be noted by the cognitive system  where it may affect either the existence or prioritisation of goals. 
　

figure 1: pac allows editing of plans via access to the dmars plan editor 
　
1 personality of agents 
the emotional model used provides three different mechanisms which can be used for modelling agent personality. these are the motivational concerns  the emotion thresholds  and the rate of change for an emotion. 
　one aspect of personality is a notion of what things are important to that person - a person who is always concerned about money and financial matters could be represented as a person having a motivational concern for financial well-being. this person will respond emotionally to events affecting this aspect of life  and will thus appear to have a different personality than an agent who ignores events associated with threats and opportunities related to this concern. some motivational concerns will be more or less universal - such as that for stimulation or for survival. however others will be quite individual  and will be a significant aspect of the agent's personality. 
　the threshold at which an emotion is asserted is also an important aspect of personality. the individual who experiences many anger increasing events  before becoming  angry  has a different personality to the agent who becomes angry easily - perhaps after one or two such events. the change rate for each emotion is similarly important. two agents with the same threshold for anger  and the same motivational concerns  may still exhibit differing personalities  with respect to this emotion   based on their decay rate for anger. an agent whose anger wears off very slowly has a different personality to the agent whose anger dissipates almost directly. the former personality trait could be described as  the sort of person who bears a grudge . 
　with these aspects of the emotional model at our disposal  the personality of an agent can then be said to depend on the motivational concerns of that agent plus the thresholds and change rates for each emotion  for that agent. these relatively simple mechanisms  give us a way to begin to represent varying personalities of agents. 
1 agent architecture 
our underlying agent model is one of interacting aspects of emotion  cognition and physical behaviour. the pac system allows us to build various scenarios  to set agent characteristics  and to observe the effects of those charac-
　
teristics on agent  behaviour . each agent is modeled as having a cognitive component  an emotional  or personality component  and a behavioural component. each of these components can directly affect each of the other components by means of events or messages. 
　the cognitive component uses dmars1  an advanced agent-oriented programming system based on the beliefdesire-intention paradigm  rg1   the declarative part of the cognitive component is a set of plans  figure 1 shows editing of one of these plans in pac   representing the agent's knowledge of how to do things in the world  and a set of beliefs which represent the facts about the world  as the agent knows them. 
dmars manages activation of plans to achieve agent 
goals  with choice of plan being dependent on beliefs regarding world state  as well as on goals and immediate events. a goal and plan together make up an intention  the agent is intending to fulfill the goal using the particular set of procedures laid out in the plan   aai1 . intentions are prioritised to allow the most important one to be executed first. execution of the plan steps in an intention is interleaved with monitoring for significant events  to allow the system to remain reactive to the situation. intentions can be either suspended or aborted if required by a change in circumstances. dmars also has maintenance conditions on plans  allowing representation of conditions that must remain true during the execution of the plan. the maintenance condition becoming false causes the plan to abort. 
　the emotional component consists of the various emotions represented  and their current state for the agent  as well as the motivational concerns which are active for the agent. whenever a gauge for an emotion crosses a threshold an event is sent to the cognitive component to allow the fact that the agent now has  or no longer has   the emotion  to affect priorities or choice of plan. whenever a threat or opportunity for a motivational concern is recognised  events are sent to the cognitive component to ensure that goals are instantiated and/or re-prioritised as appropriate. 
　the emotional component also directly affects the behavioural component by modifying parameters on particular actions - e.g. a happy agent moves faster  and 
jumps higher than a sad or depressed agent. 
1 system description 
the pac system provides a menu-based environment which allows users to build up a scenario consisting of ob-
jects and agents  to modify various aspects of the agents via menu choices and tools  and then to run the resulting scenario. there are a number of choices of physical 
1
dmars - distributed multi-agent reasoning system  is 
available from the australian artificial intelligence institute. 
1 	videos 
agents available including a dog  cat  mouse and cartoon lamp. new physical agents can be added by developing the necessary models in openlnventor. the system also includes a support tool which allows the user to bring in images from outside  and scale them appropriately with respect to the other objects in the system  before adding them to the object menu. 
　as agents are added to the scene  the user is able to specify aspects of the behavioural  cognitive and emotional components for each agent. each graphical agent from the menu has fully specified defaults in each component  but these can also be modified by the user. 
　at the behavioural level the user can modify the sensing capabilities of the agent. the senses available currently are sight  smell and hearing. sight is modelled as a cone  radiating from the dog's head. by modifying the distance and angle parameters  the user can modify the visual field of the agent. smell is modelled as a circle  with modifiable radius  as is hearing. agents can thus be modelled as having individually different sensing capabilities. it is also possible to modify the agent's basic movement speed. 
　agent plans are specified using the high level graphical plan language which is a part of dmars. the menu option in our system  accesses the plan editor which is part of the dmars environment  see figure 1. the user can then edit or create the plans which will enable the agent to do things in the world. agent beliefs are similarly specified  using dmars belief editor. agents come with a default set of basic plans for doing things like wandering around  and moving from one point to another. it is likely that plans would need to be written for the particular scenario or set of scenarios. 
　the emotional and personality aspects of the agents can be modified using two mechanisms. the first is the choice of which motivational concerns the agent has. there are a limited number of these concerns. new motivational concerns can be added to the system in a modular way by writing the appropriate code to monitor for threats and oppportunities  and to set up appropriate goals or reprioritisation procedures when these arise. 
　the emotional representation for individual agents can be customised by modifying the various settings related to specific emotions such as anger  fear  aggression or pride. the user can set the base level of the emotion for the agent  indicating the stable point for the particular agent; the threshold at which the emotion is switched on/off; and the rate of decay towards the stable point  see figure 1 . 

figure 1: max and fido in dog world 

figure 1: a scenario with parent and child cartoon lamps 　we have built a number of sample scenarios using the system. one is a scenario involving two dogs  max and fido  who both want to eat from a bowl of food  tay1 . fido is customised to be have a more aggressive personality  while max is more fearful. this results in an interaction where fido barks at max  scaring him away from the food  figure 1 . later in the interaction as max's hunger level builds up  the hunger takes precedence over his fear  and he eats from the bowl despite fidov aggressive behaviour. 
　another scenario we have developed  for1  was inspired by the computer animation  luxo jr  las1  in which a parent and child cartoon lamp interact in a situation where the child plays with an inflatable ball while the parent watches  figure 1 . this scenario was driven entirely by the emotional states of the agents  where emotions were caused by a combination of the motivational concerns  and the goal successes and failures. the child lamp had a motivational concern based on stimulation  which was threatened when nothing happened  and recognised an opportunity when a plaything was available. it also had a motivational concern of security which was threatened by being too far from the parent. the parent lamp had a motivational concern based on the child's safety  and one based on the child's happiness. with this very simple representation the system successfully generated some interesting  novel and engaging animations.1 
　short excerpts of both these initial scenarios are shown on the video. 
acknowledgements 
we thank the australian artificial intelligence institute for provision and technical support of the dmars system. we thank greg palstra and ben fortuna for programming work and contributions to ideas. we thank terence wong  lawrence cavedon  murali ramakrishna and ghassan al-qaimari for discussions surrounding aspects of the project. 
