
reasoning about agent preferences on a set of alternatives  and the aggregation of such preferences into some social ranking is a fundamental issue in reasoning about multi-agent systems. when the set of agents and the set of alternatives coincide  we get the ranking systems setting. a famous type of ranking systems are page ranking systems in the context of search engines. in this paper we present an extensive axiomatic study of ranking systems. in particular  we consider two fundamental axioms: transitivity  and ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives. surprisingly  we find that there is no general social ranking rule that satisfies both requirements. furthermore  we show that our impossibility result holds under variousrestrictions on the class of ranking problems considered. each of these axioms can be individually satisfied. moreover  we show a complete axiomatization of approval voting using one of these axioms.
1 introduction
israel
for  agent b then this may influence the credibility of a report by b on the importance of agent c; these indirect effects should be considered when we wish to aggregate the information provided by the agents into a social ranking.
¡¡notice that a natural interpretation/application of this setting is the ranking of internet pages. in this case  the set of agents represents the set of internet pages  and the links from a page p to a set of pages q can be viewed as a two-level ranking where agents in q are preferred by agent page  p to the agents pages  which are not in q. the problem of finding an appropriate social ranking in this case is in fact the problem of  global  page ranking. particular approaches for obtaining a useful page ranking have been implemented by search engines such as google page et al.  1 .
¡¡the theory of social choice consists of two complementary axiomatic perspectives:
  the descriptive perspective: given a particular rule r for the aggregationof individual rankings into a social ranking  find a set of axioms that are sound and complete for r. that is  find a set of requirements that r satisfies; moreover  every social aggregation rule that satisfies these requirements should coincide with r. a result showing such an axiomatization is termed a representa-

the ranking of agents based on other agents' input is fundamental to multi-agent systems  see e.g.  resnick et al. 
1  . moreover  it has become a central ingredient of a va-
 
riety of internet sites  where perhaps the most famous examples are google's pagerank algorithm page et al.  1  and ebay's reputation system resnick and zeckhauser  1 .
this basic problem introduces a new social choice model.
tion theorem and it captures the exact essence of  and assumptions behind  the use of the particular rule.
in the classical theory of social choice  as manifested by many efforts have been invested in the descriptive approach arrow  a set of agents/voters is called to rank a set of in the framework of the classical theory of social choice. in alternatives. given the agents' input  i.e. the agents' indi- that setting  representation theorems have been presented to vidual rankings  a social ranking of the alternatives is gener- major voting rules such as the majority rule may  1 . reated. the theory studies desired properties of the aggregation cently  we have successfully applied the descriptive perspecof agents' rankings into a social ranking. in particular  ar- tive in the contextof rankingsystems by providinga represenrow's celebrated impossibility theorem arrow  1  shows tation theorem altman and tennenholtz  1  for the wellthat there is no aggregation rule that satisfies some minimal known pagerank algorithm  page et al.  1   which is the requirements  while by relaxing any of these requirementsap- basis of google's search technology.
propriate social aggregation rules can be defined. the novel an excellent example for the normative perspective is arfeature of the ranking systems setting is that the set of agents row's impossibility theorem mentioned above. in  tennenand the set of alternatives coincide. therefore  in such setting holtz  1   we presented some preliminary results for rankone may need to consider the transitive effects of voting. for ing systems where the set of voters and the set of alternatives example  if agent a reports on the importance of  i.e. votes coincide. however  the axioms presented in that work consistthe normative perspective: devise a set of requirements that a social aggregation rule should satisfy  and try to find whether there is a social aggregation rule that satisfies these requirements.
of several very strong requirements which naturally lead to an impossibility result.
¡¡in this paper we provide an extensive study of ranking systems. we introduce two fundamental axioms. one of these axioms captures the transitive effects of voting in rankingsystems  and the other adapts arrow's well-known independence of irrelevant alternatives iia  axiom to the context of ranking systems. surprisingly  we find that no general ranking system can simultaneously satisfy these two axioms! we further show that our impossibility result holds under various restrictions on the class of ranking problems considered. on the other hand  we show that each of these axioms can be individually satisfied. moreover  we use our iia axiom to present a positive result in the form of a representation theorem for the well-known approval voting ranking system  which ranks the agents based on the number of votes received. this axiomatization shows that when ignoring transitive effects  there is only one ranking system that satisfies our iia axiom.
¡¡this paper is structured as follows: section 1 formally defines our setting and the notion of ranking systems. sections 1 and 1 introduce our axioms of transitivity and ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives respectively. our main impossibility result is presented in section 1  and further strengthened in section 1. our positive result  in the form of an axiomatization for the approval voting ranking system in presented in section 1. finally  some concluding remarks are given in section 1.
1 ranking systems
before describing our results regarding ranking systems  we must first formally define what we mean by the words  ranking system  in terms of graphs and linear orderings:
definition 1. let a be some set. a relation r   a ¡Á a is called an ordering on a if it is reflexive  transitive  and complete. let l a  denote the set of orderings on a.
notation 1. let  be an ordering  then ' is the equality predicate of   and   is the strict order induced by . formally  a ' b if and only if a  b and b  a; and a   b if and only if a  b but not b  a.
given the above we can define what a ranking system is:
definition 1. let gv be the set of all graphs with vertex set v . a ranking system f is a functional that for every finite vertexset v maps graphsg ¡Ê gv to an orderingfg¡Ê l v  . if f is a partial function then it is called a partial ranking system  otherwise it is called a general ranking system.
¡¡one can view this setting as a variation/extension of the classical theory of social choice as modeled by  arrow  1 . the ranking systems setting differs in two main properties. first  in this setting we assume that the set of voters and the set of alternatives coincide  and second  we allow agents only two levels of preference over the alternatives  as opposed to arrow's setting where agents could rank alternatives arbitrarily.
1 transitivity
a basic property one would assume of ranking systems is that if an agent a's voters are ranked higher than those of agent b 

figure 1: example of transitivity
then agenta shouldbe rankedhigherthan agent b. this notion is formally captured below:
definition 1. let f be a ranking system. we say that f satisfies strong transitivity if for all graphs g =  v e  and for all vertices v1 v1 ¡Ê v : assume there is a 1 mapping f : p v1  1¡ú p v1  s.t. for all v ¡Ê p v1 : v  f v . further assume that either f is not onto or for some v ¡Ê p v1 : v   f v . then  v1   v1.
¡¡consider for example the graph g in figure 1 and any ranking system f that satisfies strong transitivity. f must rank vertex d below all other vertices  as it has no predecessors  unlike all other vertices. if we assume that a fg b  then by strong transitivity we must conclude that b fg c as well.
but then we must conclude that b  fg a  as b's predecessor a is ranked lower than a's predecessor c  and a has an additional predecessor d   which leads to a contradiction. given b  fg a  again by transitivity  we must conclude that c  fg b  so the only ranking for the graph g that satisfies strong transitivity is d  fg c  fg b  fg a.
¡¡in  tennenholtz  1   we have suggested an algorithm that defines a ranking system that satisfies strong transitivity by iteratively refining an ordering of the vertices.
¡¡note that the pagerank ranking system defined in  page et al.  1  does not satisfy strong transitivity. this is due to the fact that pagerank reduces the weight of links  or votes  from nodes which have a higher out-degree. thus  assuming yahoo! and microsoft are equally ranked  a link from yahoo! means less than a link from microsoft  because yahoo! links to more external pages than does microsoft. noting this fact  we can weaken the definition of transitivity to require that the predecessors of the compared agents have an equal outdegree:
definition 1. let f be a ranking system. we say that f satisfies weak transitivity if for all graphs g =  v e  and for all vertices v1 v1 ¡Ê v : assume there is a 1 mapping f : p v1  ¡ú1 p v1  s.t. for all v ¡Ê p v1 : v  f v  and |s v | = |s f v  |. further assume that either f is not onto or for some v ¡Ê p v1 : v   f v . then  v1   v1.
¡¡indeed  an idealized version of the pagerank ranking system defined on strongly connected graphs satisfies this weakened version of transitivity. furthermore  the result in the example above does not change when we consider weak transitivity in place of strong transitivity.
1 ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives
a standard assumption in social choice settings is that an agent's relative rank should only depend on  some property of  their immediate predecessors. such axioms are usually called independence of irrelevant alternatives iia  axioms.

figure 1: an example of riia.
¡¡in our setting  we require the relative ranking of two agents must only depend on the pairwise comparisons of the ranks of their predecessors  and not on their identity or cardinal value. our iia axiom  called ranked iia  differs from the one suggested by  arrow  1  in the fact that we do not consider the identity of the voters  but rather their relative rank.
¡¡for example  consider the graph in figure 1. furthermore  assume a ranking system f has ranked the vertices of this graph as following: a ' b   c ' d   e ' f. now look at the comparison between c and d. c's predecessors  a and b  are both ranked equally  and both ranked lower than d's predecessor f. this is also true when considering e and f - e's predecessors c and d are both ranked equally  and both ranked lower than f's predecessor e. therefore  if we agree with ranked iia  the relation between c and d  and the relation between e and f must be the same  which indeed it is - both c ' d and e ' f. however  this same situation also occurs when comparing c and f  c's predecessors a and b are equally ranked and ranked lower than f's predecessor e   but in this case c   f. so  we can conclude that the ranking system f which produced these rankings does not satisfy ranked iia.
¡¡to formally define this condition  one must consider all possibilities of comparing two nodes in a graph based only on ordinal comparisons of their predecessors. we call these possibilities comparison profiles:
definition 1. a comparison profile is a pair ha bi where a =  a1 ... an   b =  b1 ... bm   a1 ... an b1 ... bm ¡Ê n  a1 ¡Ü a1 ¡Ü ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ¡Ü an  and b1 ¡Ü b1 ¡Ü ¡¤¡¤¡¤ ¡Ü bm. let p be the set of all such profiles. a ranking system f  a graph g =  v e   and a pair of vertices v1 v1 ¡Ê v are said to satisfy such a comparison profile ha bi if there exist 1 mappings f1 : p v1  1¡ú {1...n} and f1 : p v1  ¡ú1 {1...m} such that given f :  {1} ¡Á p v1   ¡È  {1} ¡Á p v1   1¡ú n defined as:
f 1 v 	=	af1 v  f 1 u 	=	bf1 u  
f i x  ¡Ü f j y    x fg y for all  i x   j y  ¡Ê  {1} ¡Á p v1   ¡È  {1} ¡Á p v1  .
¡¡for example  in the example considered above  all of the pairs  c d    c f   and  e f  satisfy the comparison profile h 1   1 i.
¡¡we now require that for every such profile the ranking system ranks the nodes consistently:
definition 1. let f be a rankingsystem. we say that f satisfies ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives  riia  if there exists a mapping f : p 1¡ú {1} such that for every graph g =  v e  and for every pair of vertices v1 v1 ¡Ê v

figure 1: graphs for the proof of theorem 1
and for every comparison profile p ¡Ê p that v1 and v1 satisfy  v1 fg v1   f p  = 1.
¡¡as riia is an independence property  the ranking system f=  that ranks all agents equally  satisfies riia. a more interesting ranking system that satisfies riia is the approval voting ranking system  defined below.
definition 1. the approval voting ranking system av is the ranking system defined by:
	v1 avg	v1   |p v1 | ¡Ü |p v1 |
¡¡a full axiomatization of the approval voting ranking system is given in section 1.
1 impossibility
our main result illustrates the impossibility of satisfying  weak  transitivity and riia simultaneously.
theorem 1. there is no general ranking system that satisfies weak transitivity and riia.
proof. assume for contradiction that there exists a ranking system f that satisfies weak transitivity and riia. consider first the graph g1 in figure 1 a . first  note that a1 and a1 satisfy some comparison profile pa =   x y   x y   because they have identical predecessors. thus  by riia  a1 fg1 a1   a1 fg1 a1  and therefore a1 'fg1 a1. by weak transitivity  it is easy to see that c  and c  fg1 b. if we assume b fg1 a1  then by weak transitivity  a1  fg1 b which contradicts our assumption. so we conclude that c.
¡¡now consider the graph g1 in figure 1 b . again  by riia  a1 'fg1 a1. by weak transitivity  it is easy to see that a1  fg1 c and b  fg1 c. if we assume a1 fg1 b  then by weak transitivity  b which contradicts our assumption. so we conclude that b.
consider the comparisonprofile p =   1   1  . given
f  a1 and b satisfy p in g1  because c fg1
b  and in g1  because b  'fg1 a . thus  by riia  a1 fg1 b   a1 fg1 b  which is a contradiction to the fact that a1  fg1 b but b.	
¡¡this result is quite a surprise  as it means that every reasonable definition of a ranking system must either consider cardinal values for nodes and/or edges  like  page et al.  1    or operate ordinally on a global scale  like  altman and tennenholtz  1  .
1 relaxing generality
a hidden assumption in our impossibility result is the fact that we considered only general ranking systems. in this section we analyze several special classes of graphs that relate to common ranking scenarios.
1 small graphs
a natural limitation on a preference graph is a cap on the number of vertices  agents  that participate in the ranking. indeed  when there are three or less agents involved in the ranking  strong transitivity and riia can be simultaneously satisfied. an appropriate ranking algorithm for this case is the one we suggested in  tennenholtz  1 .
¡¡however when there are four or more agents  strong transitivity and riia cannot be simultaneously satisfied  the proof is similar to that of theorem 1  but with vertex d removed in both graphs . when five or more agents are involved  even weak transitivity and riia cannot be simultaneously satisfied  as implied by the proof of theorem 1.
1 single vote setting
another natural limitation on the domain of graphs that we might be interested in is the restriction of each agent vertex  to exactly one vote successor . for example  in the voting paradigm this could be viewed as a setting where every agent votes for exactly one agent. the following proposition shows that even in this simple setting weak transitivity and riia cannot be simultaneously satisfied.
proposition 1. let g1 be the set of all graphs g =  v e  such that |s v | = 1 for all v ¡Ê v . there is no partial ranking system over g1 that satisfies weak transitivity and riia.
proof. assume for contradictionthat there is a partial ranking system f over g1 that satisfies weak transitivity and riia. let f : p 1¡ú {1} be the mapping from the definition of riia for f.
¡¡let g1 ¡Ê g1 be the graph in figure 1a. by weak transitivity  x satisfies the comparison profile h 1 1   1 i  so we must have fh 1 1   1 i = 1. now let g1 ¡Ê g1 be the graph in figure 1b. by weak transitivity x1 'fg satisfies the comparison profile h 1   1 i  so we must have fh 1   1 i = 1.
¡¡let g1 ¡Ê g1 be the graph in figure 1c. by weak transitivity it is easy to see that x1 'fg 'fg1
y. furthermore  by weak transitivity we conclude that a  fg1 b and a1  fg1 b1 from c  fg1 d; and


figure 1: graphs from the proof of proposition 1
y1  fg1 b from x1  fg1 d. now consider the vertex pair
 c b1 . we have shown that x1 'fg1 xfg1 b. so 
 c b1  satisfies the comparison profile h 1 1   1 i  thus by riia b1  fg1 c. now consider the vertex pair  b a . we have already shown that a d. so   a b  satisfies the comparison profile h 1   1 i  thus by riia b  fg1 a. however  we have already shown that a  fg1 b - a contradiction. thus  the ranking system f cannot exist. 
1 bipartite setting
in the world of reputation systems resnick et al.  1   we frequently observe a distinction between two types of agents such that each type of agent only ranks agents of the other type. for example buyers only interact with sellers and vice versa. this type of limitation is captured by requiring the preference graphs to be bipartite  as defined below.
definition 1. a graph g =  v e  is called bipartite if there exist v1 v1 such that v = v1 ¡È v1  v1 ¡É v1 =    and e    v1 ¡Áv1 ¡È v1 ¡Áv1 . let gb be the set of all bipartite graphs.
¡¡our impossibility result extends to the limited domain of bipartite graphs.
proposition 1. there is no partial ranking system over gb ¡É g1 that satisfies weak transitivity and riia.
1 strongly connected graphs
the well-known pagerank ranking system is  ideally  defined on the set of strongly connected graphs. that is  the set of graphs where there exists a directed path between any two vertices.
¡¡let us denote the set of all strongly connected graphs gsc. the following proposition extends our impossibility result to strongly connected graphs.
proposition 1. there is no partial ranking system over gsc.
1 axiomatization of approval voting
in the previous sections we have seen mostly negative results which arise when trying to accommodate  weak  transitivity and riia. we have shown that although each of the axioms can be satisfied seperately  there exists no general ranking system that satisfies both axioms.
¡¡we have previously shown tennenholtz  1  a nontrivial ranking system that satisfies  weak  transitivity  but have not yet shown such a ranking system for riia. in this section we provide a representation theorem for a ranking system that satisfies riia but not weak transitivity - the approval voting ranking system. this system ranks the agents based on the number of votes each agent received  with no regard to the rank of the voters. the axiomatization we provide in this section shows the power of riia  as it shows that there exists only one  interesting  ranking system that satisfies it without introducing transitive effects.
¡¡in order to specify our axiomatization  recall the following classical definitions from the theory of social choice:
¡¡the positive response axiom essentially means that if an agent receives additional votes  its rank must improve:
definition 1. let f be a ranking system. f satisfies positive response if for all graphs g =  v e  and for all  v1 v1  ¡Ê  v ¡Á v     e  and for all v1 ¡Ê v : let g1 =  v e ¡È  v1 v1  . if v1 fg v1  then v.
¡¡the anonymity and neutrality axioms mean that the names of the voters and alternatives respectively do not matter for the ranking:
definition 1. a ranking system f satisfies anonymity if for all g =  v e   for all permutations ¦Ð : v 1¡ú v   and for all v1 v1 ¡Ê v : let e1 = { ¦Ð v1  v1 | v1 v1  ¡Ê e}. then  v1 f v e  v1   v.
definition 1. a ranking system f satisfies neutrality if for all g =  v e   for all permutations ¦Ð : v 1¡ú v   and for all v1 v1 ¡Ê v : let e1 = { v1 ¦Ð v1  | v1 v1  ¡Ê e}. then  v1 f v e  v1   v.
¡¡arrow's classical independence of irrelevant alternatives axiom requires that the relative rank of two agents be dependant only on the set of agents that preferredone over the other.
definition 1. a ranking system f satisfies arrow's independence of irrelevant alternatives  aiia  if for all g =  v e   for all g1 =  v e1   and for all v1 v1 ¡Ê v :
let pg v1    pg v1  = pg1 v1    pg1 v1  and pg v1    pg v1  = pg1 v1  pg1 v1 . then  v   v.
¡¡our representation theorem states that together with positive response and riia  any one of the three independence conditions above  anonymity  neutrality  and aiia  are essential and sufficient for a ranking system being av 1. in addition  we show that as in the classical social choice setting when only consideringtwo-level preferences  positive response  anonymity  neutrality  and aiia are an essential and sufficient representation of approval voting. this result extends the well known axiomatization of the majority rule due to  may  1 :
proposition 1.  may's theorem  a social welfare functional over two alternatives is a majority social welfare functional if and only if it satisfies anonymity  neutrality  and positive response.
we can now formally state our theorem:
theorem 1. let f be a general ranking system. then  the following statements are equivalent:
1. f is the approval voting ranking system f = av  
1. f satisfies positive response  anonymity  neutrality  and aiia
1. f satisfies positive response  riia  and either one of anonymity  neutrality  and aiia
proof.  sketch  it is easy to see that av satisfies positive response  riia  anonymity  neutrality  and aiia. it remains to show that  1  and  1  entail  1  above.
¡¡to prove  1  entails  1   assume that f satisfies positive response  anonymity  neutrality  and aiia. let g =  v e  be some graph and let v1 v1 ¡Ê v be some agents. by aiia  the relative ranking of v1 and v1 depends only on the sets pg v1    pg v1  and pg v1    pg v1 . we have now narrowed our consideration to a set of agents with preferences overtwo alternatives  so we can apply proposition1 to complete our proof.
¡¡to prove  1  entails  1   assume that f satisfies positive response  riia and either anonymity or neutrality or aiia. as f satisfies riia we can limit our discussion to comparison profiles. let f : p 1¡ú {1} be the function from the definition of riia. we will use the notation a  b to mean fha bi = 1  a   b to mean fhb ai = 1  and a ' b to mean a  b and b  a.
¡¡by the definition of riia  it is easy to see that a ' a for all a. by positive response it is also easy to see that  1 ... 1    1 ... 1  iff n ¡Ü m. let p = |	|
h a1 ... a 1 ... bm  be a comparison profile. let g =  v e  be the following graph :
v	=	{x1 ... xmax{an bm}} ¡È
¡È{v1 ... vn v1 ... v ¡È{u1 ... um u
e	=	{ xi vj |i ¡Ü aj} ¡È { xi uj |i ¡Ü bj} ¡È ¡È{ vi v |i = 1 ... n} ¡È { ui u |i = 1 ... m}.
it is easy to see that in the graph g  v and u satisfy the profile p. let ¦Ð be the following permutation:
 
¦Ð x  =    u1i
     uxi       i x = ui x = u1i
otherwise. vi1 x = vi   vi x = v1
the remainder of the proof depends on which additional axiom f satisfies:
  if f satisfies anonymity  let e1 = { ¦Ð x  y | x y  ¡Ê e}. note that in the graph  v e1  v and u satisfy the profile h 1 ... 1   1 ... 1 i  and thus v f v e1  | {nz } | {mz }
u   n ¡Ü m. by anonymity  u f v e  v   u f v e1  v  thus provingthat f p  = 1   n ¡Ü m for an arbitrary comparison profile p  and thus f = av .
  if f satisfies neutrality  let e1 = { x ¦Ð y  | x y  ¡Ê e}. note that in the graph  v e1  v and u satisfy the profile h 1 ... 1   1 ... 1 i  and thus v f v e1  | {nz } | {mz }
u   n ¡Ü m. by neutrality  u f v e  v   u f v e1  v  again showing that f p  = 1   n ¡Ü m for an arbitrary comparison profile p  and thus f = av .
  if f satisfies aiia  let e1 = { x ¦Ð y  | x y  ¡Ê e} as before. so  also v    n ¡Ü m. note that
pg v  = p v e1  v  and pg u  = p v e1  u   so by
aiia  u f v e  v   u f v e1  v  and thus as before 
	f = av .	
1 concluding remarks
reasoning about preferences and preference aggregation is a fundamental task in reasoning about multi-agent systems  see e.g.  boutilier et al.  1; conitzer and sandholm  1; lamura and shoham  1  . a typical instance of preference aggregation is the setting of ranking systems. ranking systems are fundamental ingredients of some of the most famous tools/techniques in the internet  e.g. google's page rank and ebay's reputation systems  among many others .
¡¡our aim in this paper was to treat ranking systems from an axiomatic perspective. the classical theory of social choice lay the foundations to a large part of the rigorous work on multi-agent systems. indeed  the most classical results in the theory of mechanism design  such as the gibbardsatterthwaite theorem  see  mas-colell et al.  1   are applications of the theory of social choice. moreover  previous work in ai has employed the theory of social choice for obtaining foundations for reasoning tasks  doyle and wellman  1  and multi-agent coordination  kfir-dahav and tennenholtz  1 . it is howeverinterestingto note that rankingsystems suggest a novel and new type of theory of social choice. we see this point as especially attractive  and as a main reason for concentratingon the study of the axiomatic foundationsof ranking systems.
¡¡in this paper we identified two fundamental axioms for ranking systems  and conducted a basic axiomatic study of such systems. in particular  we presented surprising impossibility results  and a representation theorem for the wellknown approval voting scheme.
references
 altman and tennenholtz  1  alon altman and moshe tennenholtz. ranking systems: the pagerank axioms. in proceedings of the 1th acm conference on electronic commerce  ec-1   1.
 arrow  1  k.j. arrow. social choice and individualvalues  1nd ed. . yale university press  1.
 boutilier et al.  1  craig boutilier  ronen i. brafman  carmel domshlak  holger h. hoos  and david poole. cpnets: a tool for representing and reasoning with conditional ceteris paribus preference statements. j. artif. intell. res.  jair   1-1  1.
 conitzer and sandholm  1  v. conitzer and t. sandholm. complexity of mechanism design. in proceedings of the 1th conference on uncertainity in artificial intelligence  uai-1   pages 1  1.
 doyle and wellman  1  j. doyle and m.p. wellman. impediments to universal preference-based default theories. in proceedings of the 1st conference on principles of knowledge representation and reasoning  1.
 kfir-dahav and tennenholtz  1  noa e. kfir-dahav and moshe tennenholtz. multi-agent belief revision. in proceedings of the 1th conference on theoretical aspects of rationality and knowledge  tark   1.
 lamura and shoham  1  p. lamura and y. shoham. conditional  hierarchical multi-agent p