
this paper extends language understanding and plan inference to information graphics. we identify the kinds of communicative signals that appear in information graphics  describe how we utilize them in a bayesian network that hypothesizes the graphic's intended message  and discuss the performance of our implemented system. this work is part of a larger project aimed at making information graphics accessible to individuals with sight impairments.
1 introduction
for individuals who have serious sight impairments  documents that contain information graphics  bar charts  line graphs  etc.  pose challenging problems. although devices have been developed for conveying information graphics in alternative mediums such as musical tones or tactile images  these approaches have serious limitations. for example  they often require expensive equipment  as well as requiring the user to construct a  mental map  of the graphic  which is difficult for congenitally blind users who do not have the personal knowledge to assist them in the interpretation of the image  kennel  1 . the underlying hypothesis of our work is that alternative access to what the graphic looks like is not enough - the user should be provided with the message and knowledge that one would gain from viewing the graphic in order to enable effective and efficient use of this information resource.
　we are developing an interactive natural language system which infers the intended message of an information graphic  provides a summary that includes the intended message along with notable features of the graphic  and then responds to follow-up questions from the user. figure 1 shows the architecture of our system. the visual extraction module  vem  analyzes the graphic and provides an xml representation of the graphic to the caption tagging module  ctm  which extracts information from the caption and passes the augmented xml representation to the intention recognition mod-

 
　　authors can be reached via email as follows: elzer cs.millersville.edu  {carberry  chester  demir} cis.udel.edu  ingrid.zukerman infotech.monash.edu.au  nlgreen uncg.edu.ule  irm . the irm is responsible for recognizing the intended message of the information graphic and sending it to the content planning module  cpm   which will augment the intended message with related interesting features of the graphic. the message organization module  mom  will then organize the most salient propositions into a coherent summary  which will be rendered in natural language and conveyed to the user via speech synthesis. the followup question module  fqm  will allow the user to interactively seek additional information about the graphic.

　this paper identifies the communicative signals that appear in information graphics and discusses how we exploit them in a bayesian network that hypothesizes a graphic's intended message. it concludes with several illustrative examples and an evaluation of our system's performance  which provides strong evidence of the effectiveness of our methodology. to our knowledge  our work is the first to extend plan recognition to the domain of information graphics.
1 approach
language research has posited that a speaker or writer executes a speech act whose intended meaning he expects the listener to be able to deduce  and that the listener identifies the intended meaning by reasoning about the observed signals and the mutual beliefs of author and interpreter  grice  1 .
however  as  clark  1  noted  language is more than just words. it is any  signal   or lack of signal when one is expected   where a signal is a deliberate action that is intended
local bankruptcy

figure 1: graphic from a 1 local newspaper

to convey a message. although some information graphics are only intended to display data values 1 the overwhelming majority of information graphics from popular media sources appear to have some underlying goal or intended message  such as the graphic in figure 1 whose communicative goal is ostensibly to convey the sharp increase in local bankruptcies in 1 compared with the previously decreasing trend. applying clark's view of language to information graphics  it is reasonable to presume that the author of an information graphic expects the viewer to deduce the message that he intended to convey by reasoning about the graphic itself  the salience of entities in the graphic  and mutual beliefs.
　beginning with the seminal work of  perrault and allen  1   researchers have applied plan inference techniques to a variety of problems associated with understanding utterances  particularly within dialogue. given domain knowledge in the form of operators that decompose goals into a sequence of subgoals  along with evidence in the form of an observed action  such as an utterance   a plan inference system can chain backwards on the plan operators to deduce one or more high-level goals that might have led the agent to perform the observed action as part of an overall plan for achieving his goal s . the high-level communicative goals in the plan capture the utterance's intended meaning.
　in their work on intelligent multimedia generation  the autobrief group proposed that speech act theory can be extended to the generation of graphical presentations  kerpedjiev and roth  1 . when designing an information graphic  the designer has one or more high-level communicative goals. he constructs a graphic that he believes will enable the viewer to perform certain perceptual and cognitive tasks which  along with other knowledge  will enable the viewer to recognize the graphic's intended message  kerpedjiev and roth  1 . by perceptual tasks we mean tasks that can be performed by simply viewing the graphic  such as finding the top of a bar in a bar chart; by cognitive tasks we mean tasks that are done via mental computations  such as computing the difference between two numbers.
　in our research  we extend plan inference techniques to inferring intention from information graphics. our plan operators capture knowledge about how the graphic designer's goal of conveying a message can be achieved via the viewer performing certain perceptual and cognitive tasks  as well as knowledge about how perceptual and cognitive tasks decompose into sets of simpler tasks. figure 1 displays a plan operator consisting of:
  goal: the goal that the operator achieves
  data requirements: requirements which the data must satisfy in order for the operator to be applicable in a graphic planning paradigm
  display constraints: features that constrain how the information graphic is eventually constructed if this operator is part of the final plan
  body: lower-level subgoals that must be accomplished in order to achieve the overall goal of the operator
　for plan recognition  the plan operators facilitate chaining backwards from perceptual tasks that can be performed on a
　given graphic  to hypothesize candidate goals and plans. the display constraints are used in reverse  that is  to eliminate operators from consideration  i.e.  if the graphic does not satisfy the constraints on the display  then the operator could not have been part of a plan that produced the graphic . the data requirements are used to instantiate parameters in the operator  i.e.  the data must have had certain characteristics for the operator to have been included in the designer's plan  and these limit how the operator's arguments can be instantiated . following the work of  charniak and goldman  1  and others  we capture plan inference in a probabilistic framework. we use our plan operators  along with the evidence that we glean from the information graphic itself  to construct a bayesian network which allows us to reason about the likelihood of various candidate plans.
1 network structure
although we believe that our findings are extendible to other kinds of information graphics  our current work focuses on bar charts. our analysis of simple bar charts1 has shown that the intended message can be classified into one of 1 highlevel categories; examples of such categories are:   getrank: viewer to believe that  entity-1  is ranked  rank  among the entities in the graphic
  change-trend: viewer to believe that there is a  slope-1  trend from  param1  to  param1  and a
significantly different  slope-1  trend from  param1  to  param1 
  relative-difference: viewer to believe that the value of element  param1  is  comparison  the value of element  param1   where  comparison  is greaterthan  less-than  or equal-to.
　the top-level node in our network captures the likelihood of all of the possible categories of high-level intentions underlying a graphic. the entry with the highest probability in this node represents the category most likely to represent the graphic designer's primary intention or communicative goal for the graph. each individual category of high-level goal is represented as a child of this top-level node. we refer to the process of replacing one or more of the parameters of a goal or perceptual task with specific elements or entities of the graphic as instantiating that goal or task. the network nodes
goal:	rankfrombar  viewer    ds    g    bi    vi    rank  
gloss:	viewer to believe from graphic  g  that the element of dataset  ds  depicted as bar  bi  with the value  vi  for primary key
        att1  has a value for  att1  that is  rank  among the values of  att1  associated with elements displayed on graphic  g  data requirements:
　1.  att1  is the primary key attribute for dataset  ds 
　1.  att1  is a dependent attribute for dataset  ds 
　1. the values of  att1  have a natural ordering along a quantitative scale
　1. the value of  att1  for  vi  has rank  rank  among the elements of  ds  display constraints:
　1. graph  g  is a bar chart
　1. for each value of  att1  in dataset  ds   the value of  att1  and associated value of  att1  is displayed via a bar on graph  g  body:
1. perceiverank: viewer can perform the perceptual task of finding the  rank  relative to  att1  of bar  bi  in graph  g 
1. getlabel: viewer can perform the perceptual task of finding the value  vi  for  att1  where  vi  corresponds with the bar  bi  on graph  g 
figure 1: top levels of belief network

in the top two levels are not instantiated. specific instantiations appear in the network as children of the nodes representing the high-level intentions. for example  the getrank node is shown with several children in figure 1  illustrating several of its possible instantiations - namely  finding the rank of the first  second  or third bar in the graphic.  for readability  only the instantiation of the bar parameter  bi   in each getrank node is shown in figure 1.  these are alternative instantiations and so inhibitory links  huber et al.  1  are used to capture their mutual exclusivity. the child node of getrank with the highest probability represents the instantiation of that goal most likely to be part of the graphic designer's intended plan. therefore  if the entry for getrank has the highest probability in the intendedmessage root node  our system selects the instantiated child node of getrank with the highest probability  and produces the instantiated version of getrank as its hypothesis about the intended message of the graphic.
　if there are multiple ways for a goal to be achieved  these are captured as children of the instantiated goal node. for example  a viewer might come to believe that the united states ranks third in gdp per capita in one of two ways: 1  he might seek out the bar for the u.s. and perceive that it is the third highest bar in the graph  or 1  he might notice the bar representing the u.s. in the graphic  perhaps it is a different color   and perceive that that bar is the third highest in the graph and that it represents the gdp per capita for the u.s. these possibilities are captured respectively as rankfromlabel and rankfrombar in figure 1.
　the nodes in the top levels of the network  representing the high-level intentions and the alternative ways of achieving them  figure 1   exist in every network and are added at the beginning of the network construction process. nodes representing perceptual tasks  the lowest-level nodes in the network  are then added  and upward chaining via the plan operators adds higher level goals until a link is established to one of the top-level goal nodes shown in figure 1. however  automatically adding to the network all of the possible instantiations of all possible perceptual tasks rapidly becomes infeasible due to the overwhelming size of the resultant network and practical constraints on memory. thus  instead of constructing the network a priori to include every possible instantiation of each task  the network is built dynamically  using the api for netica  norsys  1   when the system is presented with a new information graphic  and nodes are added to the network only as suggested by communicative signals in the graphic  as discussed in the next two sections.
1 communicative signals
in plan recognition systems involving dialogue  the communicative signals are naturally centered around the utterances  and the inference process uses signals such as the surface form of the utterance  the focus of attention in the dialogue  etc. following autobrief  kerpedjiev and roth  1   green et al.  1   we contend that when constructing a graphic  the designer made certain design decisions in order to make  important  tasks  the ones that the viewer is intended to perform in getting the graphic's message  as easy or as salient as possible. the realization of these design decisions in the information graphic serve as communicative signals. the rest of this section identifies the kinds of communicative signals that appear in information graphics  and section 1 discusses how these signals are used in our plan inference framework.
1 effort as a communicative signal
the design choices made by the graphic designer facilitate some perceptual tasks more than others. for example  if the viewer is intended to compare the height of two bars  placing the two bars beside each other in the graphic will facilitate the comparison task. thus the relative effort required for a perceptual task serves as a communicative signal about what tasks the designer expects the viewer to perform.
1 salience as a communicative signal
our working hypothesis is that if the graphic designer goes to the effort of employing attention-getting devices to make certain elements of the graphic particularly salient  then the salient elements serve as communicative signals - i.e.  the designer probably intends for them to be part of the intended message of the graphic.

　highlighting  via a difference in color or shading  is one way of signalling salience. suppose that the bar for the u.s. was the only red bar in the graph shown in figure 1. this would suggest that this bar is particularly relevant to the intended message of the graphic. annotating individual elements with their exact values also signals salience. this is not the case when all of the elements are displayed with their exact values  since this is a general design feature of the graphic and does not draw attention to a specific subset of elements. other salient entities include any element that is significantly taller than all of the other elements in the graphic and the most recent date on a time-line  since the viewer will certainly notice the height of a bar that is taller than all of the others  and will naturally be interested in what has occurred most recently. although no specific action is required on the part of the graphic designer to make these elements salient  we posit that it is mutually believed by both designer and viewer that such elements will be salient to the viewer.
　captions by themselves are often too general  corio and lapalme  1  or ill-formed to rely solely on them to identify what the graphic is intended to convey. however  we have found that captions often contain useful communicative signals  elzer et al.  1 . first  nouns in captions can function the same as highlighting; if the noun matches a label in

1
　　this is based on a u.s. news & world report graphic in our corpus.
the graphic  then it signals the salience of the graphic element associated with that label. certain verbs and adjectives in captions also serve as communicative signals. in this case  the verbs and adjectives signal the salience of certain highlevel tasks. for example  the adjective highest in the caption  highest in gdp  suggests that the viewer should find the maximum in the graphic  whereas the verb beats in the caption  u.s. beats japan  indicates that the viewer should note the relative difference in value between the u.s. and japan.  elzer et al.  1  presents our work on exploiting captions in understanding information graphics.
1 exploiting the communicative signals
the communicative signals gleaned from an information graphic can be exploited for two purposes: 1  to select perceptual task nodes for insertion in the network  and 1  as evidence that will influence the hypothesis about the graphic designer's intentions.
　as discussed in section 1  the bayesian network must be restricted to those perceptual tasks suggested by the graphic. we use two kinds of communicative signals for this purpose: perceptual effort and salient elements. we developed a set of rules  based on research by cognitive scientists such as  lohse  1   for estimating the required perceptual effort for a given perceptual task in a given graphic  eyetracking experiments validating these rules are detailed in  elzer et al.  1  . this set of rules is used to identify the set of instantiated perceptual tasks in a graphic that are easiest relative to others  and nodes representing these tasks are added to the network. in some graphics  these are the only communicative signals available. however  if there are salient elements in the graphic  such as a highlighted bar or a bar whose label appears as a noun in the caption   this salience signals that the element may play a role in the plan for achieving the intended message of the graphic. therefore  we instantiate each possible perceptual task with the salient elements  add them to the network  and chain upward as described in section 1 until a link is established to the top-level goal node. as nodes are added via upward chaining  their subgoals  as captured in the plan operators  are also added  so that perceptual tasks required to achieve these subgoals are included in the network even if they were not among the easiest or salient tasks.
　a bayesian network also needs to explicitly record evidence that should influence the credibility of different hypotheses. perceptual task effort and salient elements provide evidence about the intended message. for each perceptual task node in the network  evidence nodes are added as children of the perceptual task node  as shown in figure 1 - in our diagrams  nodes representing evidence extracted from the graphic are shown with dashed outlines. for example  the effort evidence node in figure 1 captures the relative effort required for the perceptual task that is its parent  the highlighting node captures whether a parameter in the perceptual task is instantiated with a highlighted element in the graphic  and the nounincaption node captures whether a parameter in the perceptual task is instantiated with a bar whose label matches a noun in the caption.
certain verbs and adjectives in the caption are also com-

figure 1: perceptual task node with evidence nodes
municative signals that provide evidence about the intended message of an information graphic. using wordnet  we developed classes of verbs and adjectives where members of each class perform in a similar way within the domain of information graphic captions.  in the case of adjectives derived from verbs  such as the adjective growing in the caption a growing biotech market  the adjective is treated as a verb using its root form.  for example  the class for the verb rise includes verbs such as increase  grow  expand  climb  and soar. verb class and adjective class evidence nodes record which verb and/or adjective class  if any  appears in the caption; they are inserted as children of the top-level node as shown in figure 1  since this type of evidence suggests a particular category of high-level intention.

figure 1: top-level node with verb and adjective evidence

1 gathering the probabilities
in a bayesian network  conditional probability tables capture the probability of each of the values of a child node given the value of its parent s . in contrast to many other probabilistic plan recognition models where it is difficult to empirically determine the probabilities  the probabilities for our belief network have been obtained through a corpus analysis.
　we automated the construction of a spreadsheet containing information from each graphic needed to compute the necessary probabilities. each graphic's xml representation was analyzed to determine for each possible instantiation of each perceptual task:
  the relative effort  categorized as easy  medium  hard  or impossible  as estimated by our effort estimation rules discussed in section 1
  which parameters refer to elements that were salient in the graphic and the kind of salience  highlighted bars  annotated bars  bars with labels that appear as nouns in the caption  etc. 
in addition  the occurrence in the caption of a verb or adjective class that suggested a particular intention was entered into the spreadsheet.
　two coders had previously identified the intention of each graphic in the corpus. we applied our plan operators to construct a plan  constrained by what appeared in the graphic 
perceiverank  bar  inplannotinplanonly  bar  annotated11 bar  and others annotated11only others annotated11no bars annotated11figure 1: a sample conditional probability table
for achieving the posited intention of each graphic; the goalsubgoal relationships  including the low-level perceptual and cognitive tasks  were entered into the spreadsheet.
　spreadsheet formulas were then constructed to compute all of the required conditional probability tables. examples of the needed probability tables include: 1  the conditional probability of a particular perceptual task being easy  medium  hard or impossible given that the perceptual task is  or is not  part of the plan  1  the conditional probability  for each class of verb  that the verb class appears in the caption given that the communicative goal of the graphic does  or does not  fall into a particular category of intention  and 1  the conditional probability of a bar being annotated given that recognizing the intended message entails  or does not entail  performing a particular perceptual task involving that bar. figure 1 shows this latter conditional probability table.
1 system performance
1 illustrative examples
the following examples illustrate how different kinds of evidence impact our system's hypothesis. the examples are based on the bar chart in figure 1. the xml representation of each example was produced by the visual extraction module  vem   augmented by the caption tagging module  ctm   and then processed by the intention recognition module  irm   see figure 1 . given the graphic as it appears in figure 1  our system hypothesizes that the graphic is intended to convey the relative rank in gdp of different countries and assigns this intention a likelihood of 1%. other possibilities also have some probability assigned to them. for example  the intention of conveying that luxembourg has the highest gdp is assigned a probability of 1% because the bars are in sorted order according to height  thus making it relatively easy for the viewer to recognize the maximum  and because finding the entity in the graphic with the maximum value is a fairly common intention  occurring approximately 1% of the time in our corpus . however  there is no other evidence suggesting that the bar representing the maximum value is salient  such as that bar being highlighted  or  luxembourg  being mentioned in the caption   so the system hypothesizes that the viewer is intended to notice the relative rank of all of the countries listed.
　suppose  however  that the bar representing the u.s. was darker than the other bars. now  the hypothesis that the intended message of the graphic is to convey that the rank of the u.s. is third is assigned a probability of 1%. the fact that the bar is highlighted provides strong evidence that it plays a role in the intended message of the graphic. elements of the graphic could also be made salient in other ways  such as through annotations. suppose that the bar representing the u.s. was still darker than the other bars  but that the bars representing the u.s. and japan  and only those bars  were annotated with their exact values. here the evidence still suggests the salience of the u.s.  but also suggests that japan is salient. the fact that both bars are now salient will provide evidence against intentions involving only the u.s. and will favor hypotheses involving both bars. thus it is not surprising that the system hypothesizes the intention of the graphic to be finding the relative difference  and the degree of that difference  between the gdp of the u.s. and japan and assigns it a likelihood of 1%. now consider a significant variation of the graphic design. suppose  again  that the bar representing the u.s. was darker than the other bars. but now suppose that the bars were sorted by the alphabetical order of their labels  rather than by descending order of their height. the perceptual task of determining the rank of the u.s. is now so difficult to perform that the system assigns only a negligible probability to the task of getting the rank of the u.s.
1 overall evaluation and future work
to evaluate our system  we used leave-one-out cross validation. we performed a series of experiments in which each graphic in a corpus of 1 graphics is selected once as the test graphic. the data pertaining to the test graphic was removed from calculation of the probabilities used in the conditional probability tables. the test graphic was then presented to our intention recognition module  and the bayesian network was constructed with probability tables acquired from the remaining graphics. the system was judged to fail if either its toprated hypothesis did not match the intended message that was assigned to the graphic by the coders or the probability rating of the system's top-rated hypothesis did not exceed 1%. overall success was then computed by averaging together the results of the whole series of experiments. our overall accuracy was 1%. as a baseline  our most commonly occurring intention  at 1%  was a rising trend. our success rate provides strong evidence of the success of our methodology.
　most of the errors in our current evaluation are caused by sparseness of the data; for example  if we only have a single graphic using a verb like  stabilize  to indicate a stable trend  the leave-one-out validation will not have any evidence linking the verb class to the intention  and we may get an incorrect result when evaluating the graphic. we strongly believe that as we expand our corpus  our success rate will improve. we currently limit ourselves to recognizing what appears to be the primary communicative intention of an information graphic; in the future we will also consider secondary intentions. we will also extend our work to other kinds of information graphics such as line graphs and pie charts  and to complex graphics  such as composite bar charts.
1 conclusion
this paper has presented a probabilistic framework that is the first to extend plan inference to the problem of recognizing the communicative message of an information graphic. we have identified the communicative signals that appear in information graphics and exploited them as evidence in a bayesian belief network. the evaluation of our implemented system's performance demonstrates the effectiveness of our methodology  which offers promise as a means of providing access via natural language to information graphics for individuals with sight impairments.
