
abduction is a fundamental form of nonmonotonic reasoning that aims at finding explanations for observed manifestations. applications of this process range from car configuration to medical diagnosis. we study here its computational complexity in the case where the application domain is described by a propositional theory built upon a fixed constraint language and the hypotheses and manifestations are described by sets of literals. we show that dependingon the language the problem is either polynomial-time solvable  np-complete  or
-complete. in particular  we show that under the assumption p1=np  only languages that are affine of width 1 have a polynomial algorithm  and we exhibit very weak conditions for np-hardness.
1 introduction
in this paper we investigate the computational complexity of abduction  a method of reasoning extensively studied by peirce . abductive reasoning is used to search for explanations of observed manifestations. the importance of this problem to artificial intelligence was first emphasized by morgan  and pople .
¡¡the abductive process has demonstrated its practical importance in many domains. in particular  it has been used to formalize processes in medical diagnosis  bylander et al.  1   text interpretation  hobbs et al.  1   system diagnosis  stumptner and wotawa  1  and configuration problems  amilhastre et al.  1 .
¡¡in this paper we are interested in propositional logic-based abduction  i.e.  the backgroundknowledge is represented by a propositional theory. even in this framework several formalizations of the problem have been studied in the literature  depending on the syntactic restrictions imposed to the manifestations and on the hypotheses over which explanations must be formed. we use the following formalization: given a propositional theory t formalizing a particular application domain  a set m of literals describing a set of manifestations  and a set h of literals containing possible hypotheses  find an explanation for m  that is  a set e   h such that t ¡È e is consistent and logically entails m. this framework is more general than most frameworks studied in the literature; an exception is the definition by marquis  marquis  1   which allows the manifestation to be encoded by any propositional formula.
example 1 consider the following example from the domain of motor vehicles  inspired by  console et al.  1 .
t	=	  richmixture¡Å lean mixture ¡Ä
 richmixture¡ú  lowfuel consumption ¡Ä  lean mixture¡úoverheating ¡Ä
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ lowwater¡úoverheating   h	=	{rich mixture  lean mixture  lowwater}  m	=	{ lowfuel consumption  overheating}.
then e = {rich mixture  lowwater} is an explanation of m  while  e.g.  {lean mixture low water} is not because it does not explain low fuel consumption  and {rich mixture  lean mixture} is not because it is inconsistent with t.
¡¡formalizations of abduction also differ in the literature in the notions of preferred explanations: in this setting  the aim is to compute an explanation that is minimal among all explanations according to some criteria  e.g.  inclusion or cardinality . a good overview is given by eiter and gottlob . however we are not concerned here with these different notions; we indeed focus on the decision problem asking whether there exists an explanation at all for a given instance. this problem is from now on denoted abduction.
¡¡this problem is well studied from the computational complexity perspective  eshghi  1; selman and levesque  1; eiter and gottlob  1; del val  1b; 1a; zanuttini  1   although with different formalizations of the problem  as mentioned above. it has been proved that it is ¦²p1 -complete in the general case  eiter and gottlob  1   while propositional deduction is known to be  only  conpcomplete  cook  1 . this negative result raises the problem of identifying restricted cases in which abduction has computational complexity lower than the general case.
¡¡the most natural way to study such restrictions is to study restrictions on the theories representing knowledge bases. this is also the approach followed in most of the previous research in the area. for example  it is known that when the
knowledge base t is a conjunction of horn clauses  then abduction is np-complete  selman and levesque  1 .
¡¡the ultimate goal of this line of research is to determine the complexity of every restricted special case of the problem. the first result of this type was proved by schaefer   who proved that the satisfiability problem of conjunctions of boolean constraints over a fixed languageis either in p or npcomplete  depending on the language. recall the result due to ladner  stating that if p 1= np  then there exist decision problems in np that are neither in p nor np-complete. hence
the existence of dichotomy theorems like schaefer's cannot be taken for granted. creignou et al.'s book  surveys such results.
¡¡in this paper we completely classify the complexity of abduction in schaefer's framework and exhibit a trichotomy. more precisely  we prove that abduction is:
  in p if the language is affine of width 1 
  otherwise  np-complete if the language is horn  dual horn  bijunctive or affine 
  otherwise  ¦²p1 -complete.
as far as we know  the  only  polynomial case and the minimal np-hard languages that we exhibit are all new results. note that the only property that guarantees a polynomial algorithm is that of being affine of width 1  i.e.  the case where the theory representing the domain is only a conjunction of constants and  in equalities between two variables. thus the problem is very hard as soon as sets of literals are allowed as hypotheses and manifestations  instead of atoms or sets of atoms as in  e.g.   zanuttini  1  .
¡¡we do not consider directly the complexity of the search problem consisting of computing an explanation or asserting there is none. it is however easily seen that this problem is hard as soon as abduction is; as for languages that are affine of width 1  our proof that abduction is in p exhibits an efficient algorithm.
1 preliminaries
the set of all n-tuples of elements from {1} is denoted by {1}n. any subset of {1}n is called an n-ary relation on {1}. the set of all finitary relations over {1} is denoted by br. a constraint language over {1} is an arbitrary finite set ¦£   br. constraint languages are the way in which we impose restrictions on the knowledge bases for the ab-
duction problem.
¡¡a constraint over the constraint language ¦£ is an application of a relation r in ¦£ to a tuple of variables  written r x1 ... xn   possibly with repeated variables . an assignment m to the variables satisfies the constraint r x1 ... xn  if  m x1  ... m xn   is a tuple in r. such a satisfying assignment m is called a model of r x1 ... xn . a theory t over ¦£ is a conjunction of constraints over ¦£; a model m of t is an assignment that satisfies all its constraints simultaneously  denoted m |= t. if there is such a model  t is said to be satisfiable. finally  a theory t entails a theory t¡ä  written t |= t¡ä  if every model of t is a model of t¡ä.
¡¡the unary relations f = { 1 } and t = { 1 }  which force the value of a variable to 1 and 1 respectively  have a special role for the abduction problem. we will often use the shorthand notation  x and x to denote the constraints f x  and t x  respectively. constraint languages containing f and t will be of particular importance to us. given a constraint language ¦£  the idempotent constraint language corresponding to ¦£ is ¦£ ¡È {f t} which is denoted by ¦£id.
¡¡given a theory t  v ars t  denotes the set of all variables that occurs in t. given a set of variables v   lits v   denotes the set of constraints sx¡Êv {f x  ¡È t x } or  equivalently  the set of all literals formed upon the variables in v . the

opposite of a literal   is written  . given a set of literals l  their conjunction is denoted by vl.
¡¡the abduction problem restricted to the finite constraint language ¦£ is denoted by abduction ¦£  and is defined as follows; the problem is said to be parameterized by ¦£.
problem 1  abduction ¦£   an	instance p of
abduction ¦£  consists of a tuple  v h m t   where:
  v is a set of variables 
  h   lits v   is the set of hypotheses 
  m   lits v   is the set of manifestations  and
  t is a theory over ¦£ with v ars t  = v .
the question is whether there exists an explanation for p  i.e.  a set e   h such that t ¡Ä ve is satisfiable and t ¡Ä
ve |= vm.
¡¡the size of p =  v h m t  is the total number of occurrences of variables in it.
¡¡recall the following standard restrictions on the constraint languages  see  e.g.  creignou et al.  1  .
definition 1  restrictions on ¦£ 
  ¦£ is horn if every relation r in ¦£ is the set of models of a cnf formula having at most one unnegated variable in each clause 
  ¦£ is dual horn if every relation r in ¦£ is the set of models of a cnf formula having at most one negated variable in each clause 
  ¦£ is bijunctiveif every relation r in ¦£ is the set of models of a cnf formula having at most two literals in each
clause 
  ¦£ is affine if every relation r in ¦£ is the set of models of a system of linear equations over gf 1   the field with two elements 
  ¦£ is affine of width 1 if every relation r in ¦£ is the set of models of a system of linear equations over gf 1  in which each equation has at most 1 variables.
¡¡we emphasize that ¦£ is assumed to be finite in the definition of abduction ¦£ . moreover  it parameterizes the problem  and is not part of its input. thus we can assume any convenient presentation of the relations in ¦£ is stored in a catalog; thus we will assume  e.g.  that if ¦£ is horn then a theory t over ¦£ is given as a cnf formula with at most one unnegated variable per clause.
¡¡we now recall schaefer's result  which will be of great importance throughout the paper. call sat ¦£  the problem of deciding whether a given theory over ¦£ is satisfiable. schaefer completely classified the complexity of sat ¦£ ; we only report the result for idempotent constraint languages.
theorem 1   schaefer  1   sat ¦£id  is in p if ¦£ is horn  dual horn  bijunctive or affine. otherwise it is np-complete.
¡¡finally  we assume that the reader is familiar with the basic notions of complexity theory  but we briefly recall the following. p is the class of decision problems solvable in deterministic polynomial time. np is the class of decision problems solvable in nondeterministic polynomial time. ¦²p1 = npnp is the class solvable in nondeterministic polynomialtime with access to an np-oracle. a problem is np-complete  complete  if every problem in np  ¦²p1   is polynomial-time reducible to it. throughout the paper we assume p.
1 polynomial case
the following proposition gives the only  maximal  polynomial case of abduction ¦£ . note that  as mentioned in the introduction  its proof gives a polynomial algorithm that computes an explanation if there exists one.
¡¡throughoutthe proof we write    = a   a ¡Ê {1}  for the linear equation  x = a  if   = x  and for the linear equation x = a ¨’ 1 if   =  x. the shorthand    =  ¡ä  is used in the same manner and is equivalent to    ¨’  ¡ä = 1 .
proposition 1 if ¦£ is affine of width 1  then abduction ¦£  is polynomial.
proof	let p =  v h m t  be an instance of
abduction ¦£   where ¦£ is affine of width 1. if m¡ä is the set of all manifestations m such that t 1|= m  then obviously the explanations of p are exactly those of  v h m¡ä t . since t |= m can be decided efficiently with gaussian elimination on t ¡Ä  m = 1   we assume m¡ä = m.
¡¡for every manifestation m ¡Ê m write em for the set of literals {h ¡Ê h | t |=  h = m }; once again every em can be computed efficiently with gaussian elimination on t ¡Ä
 h ¨’ m = 1  for every h ¡Ê h. we show that p has an explanation if and only if t ¡Ävm¡Êm vem is satisfiable and no em is empty. since the satisfiability of t ¡Ävm¡Êm vem can be decided efficiently with again gaussian elimination  on t ¡Ävm¡Êm vh¡Êem h =1    this will conclude the proof. assume first p has an explanation e. then t ¡Ä vm is consistent; since for every m ¡Ê m and h ¡Ê em we have t |=  h = m   we also have t ¡Ävm |= t ¡Ävm¡Êm vem  and thus t ¡Ä vm¡Êm vem is satisfiable. now we also have  m ¡Ê m t |=  ve ¡ú m . since t is affine of width 1 it is bijunctive  thus every clause entailed by t can be minimized into a bijunctive one; since t ¡Äve is satisfiable and t 1|= m  the only possibility is a minimal clause of the form h ¡ú m with h ¡Ê e. but since t is affine this implies that m ¡ú h also is an implicate of it  and finally we have t |=  h ¨’ m = 1   which shows that em is nonempty. for more details we refer the reader to  zanuttini and he¡äbrard  1 . conversely  assume t ¡Ä vm¡Êm vem is satisfiable and no em is empty. then since  h ¨’ m = 1  |=  h ¡ú m  it is easily seen that
vm¡Êm vem is an explanation for p.	1
1 np-complete cases
we now exhibit the np-complete cases of abduction ¦£ .

since t ¡Ä ve |= vm holds if and only if t ¡Ä ve ¡Ä   is unsatisfiable for every   ¡Ê m  the following result is obvious.
lemma 1 if sat ¦£id  is in p  then abduction ¦£  is in np.
¡¡we first establish np-completeness for particular languages. in section 1 we will establish more general results.
¡¡let r x¡Åy = { 1   1   1 }  i.e.  the set of models of  x ¡Å y. observe that r x¡Åy is both horn and dual horn.
proposition 1 abduction {r x¡Åy}  is np-complete.
proof membership in np follows from theorem 1 and lemma 1. as regards hardness  we give a reduction from the
np-complete problem monotone-sat  garey and johnson  1   i.e.  the satisfiability problem for cnf formulas where each clause contains either only positive literals or only negative literals. let be such a formula  where each ni is a negative clause  written
  and every pi is a positive clause written
. we build the instance p =  v h m t  of abduction r x¡Åy  where:
  v =	i | i = 1 ... k	¦Äi | i = 1 ...  
clause ni and ¦Äi  that of clause pi
; this
encodes the implications  xji ¡ú  ¦Ãi and yij ¡ú ¦Äi  i.e.  the fact that ni  pi  is satisfied if at least one of the  xji
 yij   j ¡Ê {1 ... ¦Íi}  j ¡Ê {1 ... ¦Ði}  is
  h = lits v ars    
  m =vki=1  ¦Ãi ¡Ä v i=1 ¦Äi.
obviously enough  the theory t is over the language
{r x¡Åy}. now it is easily seen that if ¦× has at least one model  say m  then e = {  | m |=  } is an explanation for p  and that if p has an explanation e  then any assignment m to v ars ¦×  with    ¡Ê e m |=   is a model of ¦×. 1
¡¡similarly  we now prove that abduction ¦£  is npcomplete if ¦£ is the singleton language containing only rx¡Åy = { 1   1   1 }.
proposition 1 abduction {rx¡Åy}  is np-complete.
proof since rx¡Åy is dual horn  membership in np follows from theorem 1 and lemma 1. as for hardness  we give a reduction from monotone-sat  see the proof of proposition 1   where positive clauses in an instance of this problem are restricted to contain at most two literals. thus an instance of this problem is a formula of the form ¦× =
  where the yij's are variables and every ni is a negative clause written . the
np-completeness of this restricted problem follows directly from schaefer's result .
¡¡given an instance ¦× of monotone-sat as above we build the instance p =  v h m t  of
abduction {rx¡Åy}  where:
  v = {¦Ãi | i = 1 ... k} ¡È v ars ¦× ; ¦Ãi will intuitively
represent satisfaction of clause ni
; clauses
 xji ¡Å ¦Ãi  encode the implications  xji ¡ú ¦Ãi
  h = lits v ars    
  m =vki=1 ¦Ãi.
we show that ¦× has a model if and only if p has an explanation. assume first that ¦× has a model m; then it is easily seen that e = {  | m |=  } is an explanation for
p. now assume p has an explanation e. then from  i = 1 ... k t ¡Ä ve |= ¦Ãi it follows that for every i = 1 ... k e contains at least one  xji  and thus any assignment satisfying e satisfies every negative clause of ¦×; on the other hand  since t ¡Ä ve is satisfiable there is a model m of t ¡Ä ve that satisfies every positive clause of ¦×  and this m thus satisfies ¦×.	1
¡¡the following proposition can be shown with the same proof as proposition 1 with all variables renamed.
proposition 1 let r x¡Å y = { 1   1   1 }. abduction {r x¡Å y}  is np-complete.
¡¡we finally prove that abduction ¦£  is np-complete for a particular affine language. this will be achieved by reducing to it another important problem in nonmonotonic reasoning  namely the inference problem for propositional circumscription. a model m =  m1 ... mn  of a formula   is said to be a minimal model of   if there is no model m¡ä =  m¡ä1 ... mn¡ä   of   such that m 1= m¡ä and  i = 1 ... n mi¡ä ¡Ü mi.
¡¡durand and hermann proved that the inference problem for propositional circumscription of affine formulas is conpcomplete. in the process  they proved the following theorem.
theorem 1   durand and hermann  1   the problem of deciding whether there is a minimal model of a given affine formula   that does not satisfy a given negative clause   q1¡Å ... ¡Å  qn    i = 1 ... n qi ¡Ê v ars     is np-complete.
¡¡a careful reading of their proof shows that the theorem remains true even if the linear equations in the input affine formulas are all restricted to contain at most 1 variables. we thus define the language ¦£1aff to be the set of all k-ary affine relations with k ¡Ü 1. obviously  ¦£1aff is finite  which is necessary for problem abduction ¦£1aff  to be well-defined. proposition 1 abduction ¦£1aff  is np-complete.
proof membership in np follows from theorem 1 and lemma 1. as for hardness  let   be a formula and q1 ... qn ¡Ê v ars   . we show that the clause   q1 ¡Å...¡Å  qn  is false in some minimal model of   if and only if the abduction problem with t =    m = {q1 ... qn}  and h = { x | x ¡Ê v ars    {q1 ... qn}} has an explanation  which will conclude by theorem 1 and the above remark.
¡¡assume first that   q1 ¡Å ... ¡Å  qn  is false in a minimal model m of  . define e to be { xi | m |=  xi}. since m |=   by assumption and m |= ve by construction    ¡Ä ve is satisfiable. now assume for sake of contradiction that there is m¡ä satisfying   ¡Ä ve ¡Ä   q1 ¡Å ... ¡Å  qn . then since m¡ä |= ve and e is negativewe get  x ¡Ê e m¡ä x  ¡Ü m x ; now for x ¡Ê v ars      v ars e  we have by assumption m x  = 1 and thus m¡ä x  ¡Ü m x  again. finally  we have  qi m¡ä qi  = 1   1 = m qi   which contradicts the minimality of m. thus   ¡Ä ve |=  q1 ¡Ä ... ¡Ä qn  and e is an explanation.
¡¡conversely  assume that e is an explanation. then   ¡Ä ve is satisfiable; write m for one of its minimal models. by assumption the formula   ¡Ä ve ¡Ä   q1 ¡Å ... ¡Å  qn  is unsatisfiable  thus m 1|=   q1¡Å...¡Å qk . we also have m |=   by assumption. finally  assume for sake of contradiction that m is not a minimal model of    and let m¡ä be such that m¡ä |=    m¡ä ¡Ü m and m¡ä 1= m. then since e is negative  because h is  and m |= ve we have m¡ä |= ve  thus m¡ä |=  ¡Äve  which contradicts the minimality of m among the models of   ¡Ä ve.	1
1 classification
we finally put together the results in the previous sections for obtaining our complete classification. the concept of a relational clone is central to our approach.
definition 1  relational clone  let ¦£   br. the relational clone of ¦£ is written h¦£i and is the set of all relations that can be expressed using relations from ¦£ ¡È {=}  = is the equality relation on {1}   conjunction  and existential quantification.
¡¡intuitively  the constraints over h¦£i are those which can be simulated by constraints over ¦£.
¡¡the following result states that when studying the complexity of abduction ¦£  it is enough to consider constraint languages that are relational clones.
lemma 1 let ¦£ be a finite constraint language and ¦£¡ä   h¦£i finite. then abduction ¦£¡ä  is polynomial-time reducible to abduction ¦£ .
proof	let  v ¡ä h¡ä m¡ä t¡ä  be	an	instance	of
abduction ¦£¡ä . by the definition of a relational clone there is a set of variables w disjoint from v ¡ä and a theory t= over ¦£ ¡È {=} with v ars t=  = v= = v ¡ä ¡È w and such that t¡ä is logically equivalent to the formula  w t=. since w is disjoint from v ¡ä there is no variable occurring in h¡ä or m¡ä and in w at the same time  and it is then easily seen that the abduction problem  v= h¡ä m¡ä t=  has an explanation if and only if  v ¡ä h¡ä m¡ä t¡ä  has one. now for every constraint  xi = xj   i   j  it is enough to replace xj with xi everywhere in v= t= m¡ä and h¡ä and to remove the constraint from t= for obtaining a still equivalent instance  v h m t  of abduction ¦£   which concludes. 1
¡¡we can reduce even further the set of constraints languages to be considered  namely to idempotent ones.
lemma 1 let ¦£ be a finite constraint language. abduction ¦£id  is polynomial time reducible to abduction ¦£ .
proof	let p =  v h m t  be an instance of
abduction ¦£id .	we	build	an	instance p¡ä	=
 v h¡ä m¡ä t¡ä  of abduction ¦£  by removing every constraint f x  or t x  from t and adding it to h and m. it is then easy to see that  v h¡ä m¡ä t¡ä  has an explanation if and only if  v h m t  has one. 1

figure 1: lattice of all idempotent boolean relational clones.
¡¡given these two lemmas  our classification of the complexity of abduction ¦£  heavily relies on post's remarkable classification of all boolean relational clones  post  1 . post proved in particular that the relational clones form a lattice under set inclusion. an excellent introduction to post's lattice can be found in the recent survey articles  bo¡§hler et al.  1; 1 .
¡¡lemmas 1 and 1 say that for any finite ¦£¡ä   h¦£idi  abduction ¦£¡ä  is polynomial-time reducible to abduction ¦£ . in other words  when studying the complexity of abduction ¦£  it is enough to consider constraint languages that are idempotent relational clones. the lattice of all idempotent boolean relational clones is given on figure 1. those that are most relevant to our classification are the following:
  br  the set of all boolean relations 
  ie1  the set of all horn relations 
  iv1  the set of all dual horn relations 
  id1  the set of all bijunctive relations 
  il1  the set of all affine relations 
  id1  the set of all affine relations of width 1 
  im1  the set of all relations that are horn and dual horn.
thus  according to post's lattice there is only one idempotent relational clone that is not horn  not dual horn  not affine  and not bijunctive  namely the relational clone consisting of all boolean relations br. hence the following result follows intuitively from the result due to eiter and gottlob  stating that abduction is ¦²p1 -complete for the general case of theories given by cnf formulas.
proposition 1 if ¦£ is not horn  not dual horn  not affine and not bijunctive then abduction-complete.
proof it is well-known that for any cnf formula ¦× there is a set of variables w disjoint from v ars ¦×  and a cnf formula ¦×¡ä overv ars ¦× ¡Èw with at most 1 variables per clause such that the formulas ¦× and  w¦×¡ä are logically equivalent. that fact together with a proof similar to that of lemma 1 show that the abduction problem for general cnf theories reduces to abduction ¦£1   where ¦£1 is the  finite  set of all ternary relations. since ¦£1 is not horn  not dual horn  not affine and not bijunctive  we have   and lemma 1 and
lemma 1 concludes.	1
¡¡we are finally able to completely classify the complexity of abduction ¦£ .
theorem 1  classification  let ¦£ be a constraint language. abduction ¦£  is:
  in p if ¦£ is affine of width 1 
  otherwise  np-complete if ¦£ is horn  dual horn  bijunctive or affine 
  otherwise  ¦²p1 -complete.
 proof proposition 1 shows the result for languages that are affine of width 1. now it can be seen that the relations r x¡Åy  rx¡Åy and r x¡Å y of propositions 1  1 and 1 are in the relational clones  and  respectively; this can be verified by checking that they are invariant under the operations defining the corresponding clones  for more details see  bo¡§hler et al.  1; 1  . moreover  the language ¦£1aff of proposition 1 is affine  thus it is in il1. consequently  figure 1 shows that the minimal idempotent relational clones that are not affine of width 1  namely im1   and il1 are np-complete. on the other hand  we know from theorem 1 and lemma 1 that the relational clones il1  affine   id1  bijunctive   ie1  horn  and iv1  dual horn  are in np. thus abduction ¦£  is np-complete when h¦£idi contains and is contained in il1  id1  ie1  or iv1. this covers exactly the languages that are horn  dual horn  bijunctive  or affine and that are not affine of width 1.
	finally  proposition 1 concludes the proof.	1
1 discussion and future work
we have completely classified the complexity of propositional abduction in schaefer's framework when manifestations and hypotheses are described by sets of literals. this result can prove useful in helping the designers of knowledge based systems to deal with the expressivity/tractability tradeoff when choosing a language for their system. our result indeed completes the picture of the complexity of reasoning for propositional constraint languages. in particular  we have shown that this problem is very hard  in the sense that only languages that are affine of width 1 allow for polynomial abduction. also note that in many cases np-hardness remains even when restricting further the problem; e.g.  to h = lits v  v ars m    see the proofs of propositions 1-
1 .
¡¡it is important to note that the complexity of abduction for a constraint language given in extension  i.e.  by the set of all tuples in every relation  can be determined efficiently; the case of theorem 1 in which a language falls can indeed be determined efficiently by using the closure properties of the concerned co-clones  see  e.g.   bo¡§hler et al.  1  .
¡¡it would be interesting to try to extend this work into at least three directions. first of all  besides the problem of deciding the existence of an explanation for a given instance  of great importance are the problems of relevance and necessity  which ask whether a given hypothesis is part of at least one  resp. of all  preferred explanation s . these problems involve a preference criterion which can have a great impact on their complexity; for more details we refer the reader to  eiter and gottlob  1 . hence  it would be interesting to investigate the complexity of these problems. in the same vein  eiter and makino recently studied the problem of enumerating all the explanations of a horn abduction problem  eiter and makino  1 ; it would be interesting to try to extend their work to other classes of formulas.
¡¡secondly  although schaefer's framework is quite general  there are restrictions on propositional formulas that it cannot express. for instance  eshghi  and del val  1a  study such restrictions that yield polynomial cases of the abduction problem. it would thus be of great interest to try to identify still more such tractable classes.
¡¡finally  it would be interesting to study the case where the domains of variables are more general  e.g.  for conjunctions of constraints over finite domains.
