
in this paper we introduce a generic form of structural decomposition for the constraint satisfaction problem  which we call a guarded decomposition. we show that many existing decomposition methods can be characterized in terms of finding guarded decompositions satisfying certain specified additional conditions.
using the guarded decomposition framework we are also able to define a new form of decomposition  which we call a spread cut. we show that discovery of width k spread-cut decompositions is tractable for each k  and that the spread cut decomposition stronglygeneralizeall existing decompositions except hypertrees. finally we exhibit a family of hypergraphs hn  for n = 1 1...  where the width of the best hypertree decomposition of each hn is at least 1n  but the width of the best spreadcut decomposition is at most 1n.
1 introduction
a constraint satisfaction problem consists of a set of variables that must be assigned values subject to certain constraints. these constraints restrict the simultaneous assignments to certain specified subsets of the variables. many real-world problems can be represented very naturally in this framework  dechter  1; marriott and stuckey  1 
모similar problems arise in the field of relational databases  where they are referred to as conjunctive query evaluation problems  kolaitis and vardi  1 . many of the techniques developed in this paper can also be applied directly to the conjunctive query evaluation problem  but we shall not pursue this application here.
모the decision problemforthe generalconstraint satisfaction problem is np-hard  mackworth  1 . this motivates the search for more restricted subproblems which are tractable  that is  solvable in polynomial-time.
모this paper considers subproblems of the constraint satisfaction problem which can be shown to be tractable using socalled structural methods or decomposition methods. these methods rely exclusively on using the structural properties of instances  in other words the way in which the constraints overlap each other.
모a variety of such decomposition methods have been developed and applied in both the constraint satisfaction community  and the database community. examples include methods based on the use of treewidth  freuder  1   cycle cutsets  dechter and pearl  1   tree-clustering  dechter and pearl  1   hinges  gyssens et al.  1   cycle hypercutsets and hypertrees  gottlob et al.  1 . all of these methods rely on reducing a given problem instance to an equivalent instance with a simpler structure  which can then be solved efficiently.
모in this paper we present a generic  abstract form of decomposition  which we call a guarded decomposition. we show that all of the earlier decomposition methods can be viewed as special cases of guarded decomposition  each characterized by some simple additional conditions.
모one existing decomposition method  based on the use of hypertrees  gottlob et al.  1; 1   is of particular importance as it is has been shown to be strictly more general than many other decomposition methods and that  for each k  it is tractable to to discover hypertree decompositions of width at most k. the general framework presented here allows us to identify a new decomposition method  based on the use of a structure that we call a spread cut. we show that spread-cut decompositions generalize all of the methods previously shown to be generalized by hypertree decompositions  and still it is tractable  for each k to discover spread cut decompositions of width k. furthermore  we exhibit a family of examples for which the spread-cut decomposition method obtains better decompositions than the hypertree decomposition method.
1 constraint satisfaction  hypergraphs  and tractability
definition 1 a csp instance is a triple p = hv d ci where:
  v is a finite set of variables;
  d is a set called the domain of p;
  c is a set of constraints. each constraint c 뫍 c is a pair c = h뷌 뷈i where 뷌   v is a set of variables  called the scope of c  and 뷈   d뷌 is a set of functions from the scope to the domain  called the relation of c.
a solution to the csp instance p = hv d ci is a function from v to d whose restriction1 to the scope of any constraint c 뫍 c is one of the functions in the relation of c.
example 1 consider the csp instance pag = hv d ci where v = {1 ... 1}  d = {1}  and c =
{c1 c1 ... c1}.
모this instance has ten variables which must each be assigned the value 1 or 1  subject to 1 constraints. the constraints in c are defined as follows:
 
note that each constraint except c1 allows every assignment to the variables of its scope. the constraint c1 does not allow the three variables of its scope all to take the value 1 simultaneously  but does allow all other assignments.
모a straightforward calculation shows that this instance has exactly 1   1 = 1 solutions. 
in order to study the structural properties of csp instances  that is  the way in which the constraint scopes overlap each other  we need the standard notion of a hypergraph.
definition 1 a hypergraph is a pair h = hv ei  where v is an arbitrary set  called the vertices of h  and e is a set of subsets of v   called the hyperedges of h.
definition 1 for any csp instance p = hv d ci  the structure of p  denoted  p   is the hypergraph hv {뷌 | h뷌 뷈i 뫍 c}i.
모for any hypergraph h  the class of all csp instances with structure h is denoted 붱 h .
example 1 recall the csp instance pag defined in example 1. the structure of pag is the hypergraph hag illustrated in figure 1.
모the set of vertices of hag is the set {1 ... 1}  and the eight hyperedges of hag are the following subsets of these vertices: e1 = {1}  e1 = {1 1}  e1 = {1 1}  e1 = {1}  e1 = {1 1}  e1 = {1 1}  e1 = {1 1}  e1 = {1 1}.	
as indicated in the introduction  the decision problem for the general constraint satisfaction problem is np-hard  mackworth  1   so there has been considerable interest in finding more restricted problem classes whose instances can be recognized and solved in polynomial time.
definition 1 a class i of csp instances is called tractable if there is a polynomial time algorithm to decide membership of i  and a polynomial time algorithm which solves all instances in i.
s
a class i of csp instances is called structural if i = h뫍h 붱 h  for some class of hypergraphs h.

figure 1: the hypergraph hag  which is the structure of the csp instance pag  defined in example 1.
1 guarded decompositions
two csp instances with the same set of variables are called solution equivalent if they have the same set of solutions. all known tractable structural classes of csp instances are characterized by showing that the instances they contain can be transformed into solution equivalent instances with simpler structure. the constraints of these transformed instances are obtained by calculating the relational joins of certain constraint relations in the original instances  and then projecting these onto new scopes. to describe this general transformation scheme we introduce the following terminology.
definition 1 a guarded block of a hypergraph h is a pair h뷂 뷌i where the guard  뷂  is a set of hyperedges of h  and the block  뷌  is a subset of the vertices of the guard.
definition 1 for any csp instance p  and any guarded block h뷂 뷌i of  p   the constraint generated by p on h뷂 뷌i is the constraint h뷌 뷈i  where 뷈 is the projection onto 뷌 of the relational join of all the constraints of p whose scopes are elements of 뷂.
given a csp instance p  with structure h  and a collection of guarded blocks of h  we can generate constraints on each of these guarded blocks to obtain a new collection of constraints  and hence a new csp instance. in some cases  if the guarded blocks are carefully chosen  this new instance will be solution equivalent to p  and so can be used to solve p. if this property holds for any csp instance with structure h  then the collection of guarded blocks will be called a guarded decomposition of h  which is formally defined as follows:
definition 1 a set of guarded blocks 붩 of a hypergraph h is called a guarded decomposition of h if for every csp instance p = hv d ci 뫍 붱 h   the instance p 1 = hv d c1i  where c1 is the set of constraints generated by p on the members of 붩  is solution equivalent to p.
how can we determine whether a given collection of guarded blocks is in fact a guarded decomposition  theorem 1 below gives a simple and efficient way to answer this question  based on the following properties.
definition 1 a guarded block h뷂 뷌i of a hypergraph h covers a hyperedge e of h if e is contained in 뷌.
모a set of guarded blocks 붩 of a hypergraph h is called a guarded cover for h if each hyperedge of h is covered by some guarded block of 붩.
모a set of guarded blocks 붩 of a hypergraph h is called a complete guarded cover for h if each hyperedge e of h occurs in the guard of some guarded block of 붩 which covers
e.
theorem 1 a set of guarded blocks 붩 of a hypergraph h is a guarded decomposition of h if and only if it is a complete guarded cover for h.
proof:	let 붩 be a set of guarded blocks of a hypergraph h = hv ei.
모suppose that 붩 is not a complete guarded cover for h. choose e 뫍 e such that there is no guarded block h뷂 뷌i 뫍 붩 for which e 뫍 뷂 and e   뷌. we will construct an instance pe with structure h which will witness the fact that 붩 is not a guarded decomposition of h.
모let the domain of pe be d = {1}. for each edge f 뫍 e f 1= e  let the constraint of pe with scope f allow all mappings from f to d. finally let the constraint of pe with scope e  ce  allow all mappings from e to d except for the mapping that assigns the value 1 to all the vertices of e simultaneously.
모now let h뷂 뷌i be any guarded block in the set 붩. if e 뫍1 뷂 then the constraint generated by pe on h뷂 뷌i allows every assignment. on the other hand  if e 뫍 뷂  then  by the choice of e  we know that e 1  뷌. in this case we observe that any projection of ce onto any proper subset of e allows all assignments. so again the constraint generated by pe on h뷂 뷌i allows every assignment.
모since all constraints generated by pe on all elements of 붩 allow every assignment  the resulting csp instance is not solution equivalent to pe  and hence 붩 is not a guarded decomposition of h.
모for the converse  suppose that 붩 is a complete guarded cover for h. let p be an arbitrary csp instance with structure h. we have to show that the csp instance p붩 obtained by taking the constraints generated by p on each element of 붩 is solution equivalent to p.
모clearly  any solution to p is a solution to p붩. on the other hand  by the completeness of 붩  and the construction of p붩  the projection of any solution to p붩 onto any edge e 뫍 e must be allowed by the constraint of p with scope e. hence any solution to p붩 is also a solution to p. 
1 tractability
we have shown that guarded decompositions can be used to transform a given csp instance to a solution equivalent instance which may have a different structure.
모in order to be able to use guarded decompositions to identify tractable structural classes we need to impose some additional conditions to ensure we have the following properties.
tractable construction it must be possible to generate each of the new constraints in polynomial time.
tractable solution it must be possible to solve the resulting instances in polynomial time.
tractable discovery it must be possible to obtain a guarded decompositionof the type we are consideringfor a given hypergraph or else discover that no such decomposition exists  in polynomial time.
we will now consider extra conditions that can be imposed on a guarded decomposition to ensure that it has each of these properties.
1 tractable construction
the time complexity of a relational join operation is o rk   where k is the number of relations being joined  and r is the maximum number of tuples in any of these relations. hence to ensure that we have the tractable construction property  it is sufficient to bound the number of constraint relations that need to be combined using the relational join operation. this can be done by bounding the number of hyperedges in the guard of any guarded block used in the decomposition.
definition 1 the width of a set of guarded blocks is the maximum number of hyperedges in any of its guards.
for any fixed value of k  the class of guarded decompositions of width at most k has the tractable construction property.
1 tractable solution
one way to ensure that the new instances obtained by using a guarded decomposition have the tractable solution property  is to ensure that the structure of these new instances is acyclic  beeri et al.  1 . the property of being acyclic can be defined as follows:
definition 1 a join tree of a hypergraph h is a connected tree  t  whose nodes are the hyperedges of h  such that  whenever the vertex x of h occurs in two hyperedges e1 and e1 of h then x occurs in each node of the unique path connecting e1 and e1 in t. in other words  the set of nodes of t in which x occurs induces a  connected  subtree of t. a hypergraph is called acyclic if it has a join tree.
theorem 1   gyssens et al.  1   any csp instance whose structure is acyclic can be solved in polynomial time.
definition 1 a join tree of a set of guarded blocks 붩 of h is a connected tree  t  whose nodes are the elements of 붩  such that  whenever the vertex x of h occurs in two blocks of 붩 then x occurs in each block of the unique path connecting them in t. in other words  the set of nodes of t for which x occurs in the block induces a  connected  subtree of t.
a set of guarded blocks is acyclic if it has a join tree.
by theorem1  any class of acyclic guardeddecompositions has the tractable solution property. using theorem 1 and definition 1 we now show that an acyclic guarded decomposition can be obtained from an arbitrary acyclic guarded cover without increasing the width  or significantly increasing the number of guarded blocks  by adding appropriate additional guarded blocks to make a complete guarded cover.
theorem 1 if the set of guarded blocks 붩 is an acyclic guarded cover for h then the set 붩 뫋 {h{e} ei | e 뫍 e} is an acyclic guarded decomposition of h.
in view of this result  we shall focus on acyclic guarded covers and use them to define classes of decompositions.
1 tractable discovery
the class of hypergraphs having a guarded cover in some fixed class    with width at most k  will be denoted c   k .
definition 1 a class of guarded covers   will be called parameterized tractable 1 if for each value of k there exists a polynomial-timealgorithm which  given any hypergraphh 뫍 c   k   returns a guarded cover of h with width at most k  and given any hypergraph h 1뫍 c   k   reports failure.
it follows from the results above that if   is a class of acyclic guarded covers  which is parameterized tractable  then c   k  will be a tractable structural class of csp instances  for each value of k.
1 known tractable structural classes
we will now show that many existing decompositionmethods for the csp can be defined in terms of finding acyclic guarded covers with particular special properties.
모we first note that for historical reasons some existing decomposition methods for the csp make use of extended guards that contain both vertices and hyperedges. to be able to present all of these methods in a uniform way we introduce the idea of transforming a csp instance by adding a unary constraint cv  for each variable v  where.
this corresponds to extending the structure of the instance to ensure that it includes a hyperedge for each variable.
definition 1 let h = hv ei be any hypergraph. a guarded cover for the hypergraph hv e 뫋 {{v} | v 뫍 v }i is called an extended cover for h.
the following result shows that the existence of an extended cover of width k is equivalent to the existence of a standard guarded cover of width k. this means that extended covers are simply a notational convenience and do not allow better decompositions.
theorem 1 if a hypergraph h has an acyclic extended cover of width k  then h also has an acyclic guarded cover of width at most k with at most the same number of guarded blocks.
we also note that many existing decomposition methods are based on guarded covers in which every block is exactly the union of the edges of its guard.
definition 1 a guardedcover 붩 is edge-definedif the block of each guarded block in 붩 is exactly the set of vertices contained in the hyperedges of its guard.
모we can now characterize many known structural decomposition methods  see  gottlob et al.  1  for traditional definitions  in terms of a corresponding class of acyclic guarded covers with certain additional conditions.
모in each of the cases listed below  except for query decompositions   it has been shown that the additional conditions are sufficient to ensure that the corresponding class of acyclic guarded covers     is parameterized tractable. hence  in all cases  except query decompositions   the class of csp instances in c   k  is a tractable structural class.
  a biconnected-component decomposition of a hypergraph is an edge-defined acyclic complete guarded cover  붩  satisfying an articulation condition:
	 h뷂1 뷌1i h뷂1 뷌1i 뫍 붩 	|뷌1 뫌 뷌1| 뫞 1
  a cycle-hypercutset decomposition of a hypergraph h = hv ei is an edge-defined acyclic complete guarded cover  붩  satisfying a simplicity condition:
	 c   e  h뷂 뷌i 뫍 붩 	|뷂   c| 뫞 1
  a hinge-tree decomposition of a hypergraph h is an edge-defined acyclic complete guarded cover  붩  satisfying a separation condition:
 h뷂1 뷌1i h뷂1 뷌1i 뫍 붩  e 뫍 뷂1 뫌 뷂1 뷌1 뫌 뷌1   e.
  a cycle-cutset decomposition of a hypergraph h is an edge-defined acyclic extended cover  붩  such that every hyperedge of every guarded block of 붩 consists of a single vertex  and 붩 satisfies a simplicity condition:
 c   v  h뷂 뷌i 뫍 붩  e 뫍 e  뷌   c    e
  a query decomposition of a hypergraphh = hv ei is a pair h붩 ti where 붩 is a complete edge-definedacyclic extended cover of h and t is a join tree of 붩 that satisfies a connectedness condition:
	 e 뫍 e 	{h뷂 뷌i 뫍 붩 | e 뫍 뷂} is connected in t.
  a hypertree decomposition of a hypergraphh is a pair h붩 ti  where 붩 is an acyclic guarded cover and t is a rooted join tree of 붩  which satisfies the following descendant condition:

where dh뷂 뷌i is the set of all descendants of h뷂 뷌i in t. the minimum width of any hypertree decomposition of a hypergraph h is called the hypertree width of h.
1 comparing decompositions
the relative strengths of different decomposition techniques derived from acyclic guarded covers can be compared using the measures developed by gottlob et al .
definition 1 let  1 and  1 be any two classes of guarded covers. we say that  1 generalizes  1 if there exists a value 붼   1 such that  for every k  c  1 k    c  1 k + 붼 .
모we say that  1 strongly generalizes  1 if  1 generalizes  1  and there exists k for which there does not exist 붼   1 with c  1 k    c  1 k + 붼 .
hypertrees have been shown to strongly generalize all the other parameterized tractable classes of decompositions defined in the previous section  gottlob et al.  1 . furthermore it has recently been shown that the hypertree width of any hypergraph is at most three times the minimal possible width of any acyclic guarded cover  adler  1 . it follows that hypertrees cannot themselves be strongly generalized by any other class of acyclic guarded covers.
모however  we will show in the next section that it is possible to define a parameterized tractable class   of acyclic guarded covers  such that for some families of hypergraphs  the minimal width of a guarded cover in   is smaller than the hypertree width by some constant factor. such an improvement allows the correspondinginstances to be solved exponentially faster than by using hypertree decompositions.
definition 1 let  1 and  1 be any two classes of guarded covers. we say that  1 can be superior to  1 if there is some r   1  such that for every k  c  1 rk   1 c  1 k .
1 spread cuts
in this section we will define a new class of acyclic guarded covers  called spread cuts. we show that classes of instances with bounded spread cut width are tractable and that spread cuts can be superior to hypertrees.1vertices of a set of hyperedges 뷂; that is  ss뷂 = se뫍뷂 e.
	throughout this section  we will write	뷂 to refer to the
definition 1 let h = hv ei be a hypergraph and 뷌   v be a set of vertices. we say that two hyperedges e f 뫍 e are 뷌-adjacent if e 뫌 f 1  뷌.
모a 뷌-path connecting e to f is a sequence e = e1 e1 ... er 1 er = f such that ei is 뷌-adjacent to ei+1  for i = 1 ... r   1.
모a set of hyperedges c   e is 뷌-connected if  for every pair of hyperedges in c  there is a 뷌-path connecting them.
모a set of hyperedges is a hyperedge 뷌-component of h if it is a maximal non-empty 뷌-connected subset of e.
a non-empty set of vertices c is a vertex 뷌-component of
h if there is some hyperedge 뷌-component c뷌 for which c = c뷌   뷌.
in this paper  unless otherwise stated  a component will mean a vertex component.
example 1 consider again the hypergraphhag defined in example 1 and illustrated in figure 1.
모now consider the guarded block h뷂 뷌i with 뷂 = {e1 e1} and 뷌 = {1 1 1}.
	there	are	three	hyperedge	뷌-components:	{e1} 
{e1 e1 e1 e1} and {e1 e1 e1}. hence  there are two vertex 뷌-components: {1} and {1 1}.
{e1 e1 e1} and {e1 e1 e1}.shence  there are two vertex there are four hyperedge 뷂-components: {e1}  {e1} 
s
뷂-components: {1} and {1}.
notice that each vertex 뷌-component meets  has nonempty intersection with  exactly one vertex s뷂-component.
모this special property of this guarded block relies on 뷌 being  large enough . if 뷌 were empty  then there would be just one vertex 뷌-component and this component would meet both vertex s뷂-components. 
if we restrict the possible blocks for a given guard appropriately then we can polynomially bound the number of guarded blocks  whilst still getting effectivedecompositions. this motivates the following definition.
definition 1 a guarded block h뷂 뷌i of a hypergraph h has unbroken components if each 뷌-component of h meets 뷂}   뷌. s
at most one	뷂-component of h and {e1 뫌 e1 | e1 e1 뫍
모a spread cut of h is an acyclic guarded cover for h in which all of the guarded blocks have unbroken components.
example 1 consider again the hypergraphhag defined in example 1 and illustrated in figure 1. the minimal width of any hypertree decomposition of
hag is three1.
모the following set of guarded blocks is a spread cut of hag of width two: h{e1 e1} {1 1 1}i  h{e1 e1} {1 1 1}i  h{e1 e1} {1 1 1}i  h{e1 e1} {1 1 1}i.	
1 spread cuts are parameterized tractable
we will now define a canonical form for guarded blocks with unbroken components  and show that if a hypergraph h has a spread cut of width k  then it also has a spread cut of width at most k  in which each guarded block is canonical.
definition 1 let 뷂 be any set of hyperedgesof h. we define the label  l뷂 v   of any vertex of h to be the set of hyperedge 뷂-components which include a hyperedge containing v.
we say that a guarded block h뷂 뷌i is canonical if for each hyperedge e 뫍 뷂 the vertices of e outside of 뷌 are exactly those with a particular label. that is 
	 v 뫍 e   뷌  w 뫍 e 	w 1뫍 뷌   l뷂 w  = l뷂 v .
theorem 1 if h has a spread cut of width k then h has a spread cut of width at most k  in which each guarded block is canonical.
proof: due to space limitations  we can only give an outline of the proof.
모the idea is to show that  for any guarded block h뷂 뷌i with unbroken components  and for any hyperedge e 뫍 뷂  spreads cut and  for each hyperedge of each guard  remove | v뫍e 뷌 l뷂 v | 뫞 1. given this fact  we can start with any
from the block any vertex with the same label as any vertices already outside of the block. it is straightforward to show that the result is still an acyclic guarded cover  and hence still a spread cut with the same width  where each guarded block is now canonical.	
모using this canonical form  we can establish the following result.
theorem 1 spread cuts are parameterized tractable.
proof: due to space limitations  we can only give an outline of the proof.
모the proof idea is that we only have to establish in polynomial time whether there exists a spread cut of width at most k in which each guarded block is canonical. we do this by first defining an object called a k-spread  which is a triple  h뷂 뷌 ci  where h뷂 뷌i is any canonical guarded block with unbroken components  |뷂| 뫞 k  and c is a 뷌-component.
모we then define the predicate k-split    recursively  on kspreads. we say that k-split h뷂 뷌 ci  holds if c is empty  or if there exists some canonical guarded block  h뷂s 뷌si  where 뷌s   c 뫋 뷌 and  for every k-spread h뷂s 뷌s csi:
cs 뫌 c 1=      e 뫍 e  e 뫌 cs =1     e 뫌 뷌   뷌s  and
cs   c   k-split h뷂s 뷌s csi .
모it is easy to show that the number of k-spreads of a hypergraph h = hv ei is at most  |e| + 1 k+1. it follows  as in the corresponding proof for hypertrees  lemma 1  page 1  of gottlob et al   that k-split h    v i  can be evaluated in at most |e|1k+1 steps.
모finally  we show that h has a spread cut with canonical guarded blocks of width at most k if and only if k-split h    v i . the only hard part of this proof is to show that the set of guarded blocks used in the proof of k-split h    v i  is a guarded cover. this proof is exactly analogous to the corresponding proof for the algorithm that finds normal form hypertree decompositions  see the proof of property 1 in lemma 1  page 1  of gottlob et al  .

모the proof of theorem 1 also shows that classes of instances with bounded spread cut width are tractable.
1 spread cuts and hypertrees
to establish that spread cuts strongly generalize all of the parameterized tractable decomposition methods listed in section 1 excluding hypertrees we simply refer to the proofs of strong generalization given by gottlob et al  and observe that every hypertree  of small width  used to establish strong generalization in that paper is also a spread cut.
모to show that spread cuts can be superior to hypertrees we establish the following result.
proposition 1 there exists a family of hypergraphs hn n = 1 1 ...  such that hn has a spread cut with width 1n  but the hypertree width of hn is at least 1n.
proof: due to space restrictions we can only give an outline of the proof.
모the idea is to use n copies of the hypergraph hag defined in example 1 to construct hn. we add edges linking vertices in different copies if they correspond to vertices of hyperedges that meet in hag. using the  robbers and marshals  characterization of hypertree width  gottlob et al.  1   we then show that the hypertree width of hn is at least 1n.  if there are fewer than 1n marshals  the robber can always choose to play in the copy of hag with at most two marshals on its hyperedges. 
모finally  the width 1n spread cut is just the spread cut of hag with width 1 described in example 1  multiplied  over the n copies of hag.	
1 conclusion
we haveintroducedthe generalnotion of a guardeddecomposition and shown how it can be used to describe many known tractable structural subproblems of the csp. we have then defined a new form of decomposition  the spread cut  which sits in the same place in the generalization hierarchy as hypertrees. we have shown that spread cuts are parameterized tractable and that they allow us to obtain decompositionswith a smaller width than any hypertree decomposition for some classes of hypergraphs.
모it is an open question whether the general class of all acyclic guarded covers is itself parameterized tractable.
