
this paper presents a logical extension of nash's cooperative bargaining theory. we introduce a concept of entrenchment measurement  which maps propositions to real numbers  as a vehicle to represent agent's belief states and attitudes towards bargaining situations. we show that nash's bargaining solution can be restated in terms of bargainers belief states. negotiable items  bargaining outcomes and conflicting arguments can then be explicitly expressed in propositional logic meanwhile nash's numerical solution to bargaining problem is still applicable.
1 introduction
negotiation or bargaining is a process to settle disputes and reach mutually beneficial agreements. typical situations of negotiation are characterized by two or more agents who have common interests in cooperating but have conflicting interests in the way of doing so. the outcomes of negotiation depend on agents' attitudes towards their bargaining items and their expectations from the negotiation. the representation of bargainer's attitudes in game theory is implicit via a pair of von neumann-morgenstern utility functions  nash 1 . the conflicting of interests between bargainers is then implied by certain mathematical conditions of the utility functions. however  agents' attitudes can be more explicitly described in terms of logic. negotiable items  conflicting claims  arguments of disputation and negotiation protocols are all expressible by logical statements  sycara 1  sierra et al. 1  kraus et al. 1  wooldridge and parsons 1  meyer et al. 1a  zhang et al. 1 . one difficulty of logical frameworks of negotiation is that quantitative criteria are harder to be applied to bargaining processes  which seem necessary in the analysis of negotiation situations. this paper attempts to bridge the gap between the quantitative analysis of game-theory and qualitative description and reasoning of logic.
﹛one of our basic assumption to negotiation is that outcomes of negotiation are determined by bargainers' belief states. representation of agent's belief states is normally by a set of beliefs and a revision operator over the belief set in terms of the theory of belief revision  gardenfors 1“  . alternatively  belief states can also be specified by an ordering over propositions  referred to as epistemic entrenchment  gardenfors 1“  . it is well-known that such two modelings of belief states is equivalent. the main finding of the paper is that the ordering of epistemic entrenchment can be extended into a numerical measurement over propositions so that a von neumann-morgenstern utility function is induced. with this quantitative representation of bargainers' belief states  nash's numerical requirements on bargaining solutions can be restated in terms of logical properties. bargaining items  negotiation outcomes and conflicting arguments can be also explicitly expressed via the extended concept of belief states.
﹛the structure of the paper is the following. after a short motivation in this section  we extend the agm's epistemic entrenchment to a map from propositions to real numbers. bargaining problem is then defined as a pair of bargainers' belief states and outcomes of bargaining is specified by a pair of concessions made by two bargainers. in order to induce a von neumann-morgenstern utility function over negotiation outcomes  the standard game-theoretical process of randomization over possible outcomes is applied. when all these done  nash's bargaining solution is ready to be restated in terms of bargainers belief states. finally we argue that our solution to bargaining problem can not be replaced by the belief revision based solution even though they share many common logical properties.
﹛we will work on a propositional languages l with finite many propositional variables. a set k of sentences in l is said to be logically closed or to be a belief set if k = cn k   where cn k  = {  ﹋ l : k `  }. if f1  f1 are two sets of sentences  f1 + f1 denotes cn f1 ﹍ f1 . we shall use   and ﹠ to denote the propositional constants true and false  respectively.
1 entrenchment measurement
in the theory of belief revision  the belief state of an agent consists of a belief set - the beliefs held by the agent - and a revision operator - which takes a piece of new information as input and outputs a new belief set. we know that the belief state is uniquely determined by the agent's epistemic entrenchment - an ordering on beliefs  gardenfors 1“  . however  we shall argue that such an ordering is not enough to specify agent's belief states in bargaining. we will extend the concept of epistemic entrenchment into a more general concept so that a quantitative measurement can be used to capture bargainers' attitudes towards their bargaining items.
definition 1 an entrenchment measure is a pair of  老 e  where e is a real number and 老 is a function from l to the real number set   which satisfies the following condition:  lc  if  1 ﹞﹞﹞  n ` 肉  min{老  1  ﹞﹞﹞ 老  n } ≒ 老 肉 .
let k = {  ﹋ l : 老    ≡ e}  called the derived belief set of the entrenchment measure. it is easy to see that k is logically closed  i.e.  k = cn k   so it is a belief set. obviously  k is consistent iff 老 ﹠    e. we shall call 老 the belief state of an agent and e is the bottom line of the belief state.
﹛the following proposition shows that an entrenchment measure uniquely determines an epistemic entrenchment  thus also determines a unique belief revision function over the derived belief set.
proposition 1 let  老 e  be an entrenchment measure and k be its derived belief set. define an ordering ≒ over l as follows: for any   肉 ﹋ l 
1. if `      ≒ 肉 iff ` 肉;1
1. if 1`   and   ﹋ k    ≒ 肉 iff 老    ≒ 老 肉 ;
1. if   1﹋ k    ≒ 肉 for any 肉.
then ≒ satisfies all postulates  ee1 - ee1  for epistemic entrenchment  see  gardenfors 1“	  .
based on the result  we can define a belief revision operator
  that satisfies all agm postulates: 肉 ﹋ k     if and only if 肉 ﹋ k+{ } and either 老       老   ˍ肉  or `   ˍ肉.
we shall call   the revision function derived from  老 e .
﹛since our language is finite  it is easy to define a multiple revision operator   by the singleton revision function:
﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛k   f = k    ＿f  where  ＿f  is the conjunction of all the sentences in f. this will facilitate the comparison of our results with  meyer et al. 1b  and  zhang et al. 1 .
﹛we remark that any epistemic entrenchment ordering can be extended to an entrenchment measure while keeping the ordering on sentences. clearly such an entrenchment measure is not unique. an entrenchment measure contains richer structure than an epistemic entrenchment ordering. interestingly  the extra structure of entrenchment measures cannot be captured by belief revision operations.
theorem 1  independence of monotone transformations  let 而 be a strictly increasing monotonic transformation over    i.e.  for any x y ﹋    x   y if and only if 而 x    而 y .
let   and  1 be the derived revision functions from  老 e  and  而  老 而 e    respectively1. then for any    k    = k  1    where k is the belief set of  老 e .
1 bargaining problem
we shall restrict us to the bargaining situations where only two parties are involved. a bargaining situation is a situation in which both bargainers bring their negotiable items to the negotiation table expecting to reach a common agreement. whenever a conflict presents  concessions form one or both agents are required in order to reach a compromise. formally  a bargaining situation or a bargaining game is a pair    老1 e1   老1 e1    of entrenchment measures over l such that each belief set derived by the entrenchment measures is logically consistent  i.e. ki = {  ﹋ l : 老i    ≡ ei} 1` ﹠.
example 1 consider the following negotiation scenario: a buyer  agent 1  negotiates with a seller  agent 1  about the price of a product. the buyer's reserve price is less than $1 and the seller's reserve price is no less than $1. let's discretize the problem as follows: p1 ={ the price is less than $1 }. p1 ={ the price is less than $1 }. p1 ={ the price is less than $1 }. p1 ={ the price is less than $1 }.
﹛assume that the entrenchment measure of each agent is respectively the following1:
﹛老1    = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1 p1  = 1  老1 p1  = 1  老1 p1  = 1  老1 p1  = 1  老1  pj  = 1 for j = 1 ﹞﹞﹞ 1.
﹛老1    = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1 p1 ↙ p1  = 老1  p1  = 1  老1  p1  = 1  老1  p1  = 1  老1  p1  = 1  老1 pj  = 1 for j = 1 ﹞﹞﹞ 1.
suppose that both sides set their bottom lines to be
1. then k1	=	cn {p1 p1 p1 p1}  and k1	= cn { p1  p1  p1  p1} .	 
﹛note that the values of entrenchment measures reflect the degree of entrenchment on negotiable items of each agent rather than the agent's preference. for instance  the buyer in above example entrenches p1 more firmly than p1 even though p1 is more profitable because p1 is much easier to keep than p1.
definition 1 a bargaining game b =   老1 e1   老1 e1   is said to be a subgame of another bargaining game b1 =
  denoted by b v b1  if  for each i = 1  1. 老i    = 老i1    for any   ﹋ ki;
1. ei ≡ ei1.
note that b v b1 implies ki  . therefore b can be viewed as a kind of conservative concession to each other in the sense that each player gives up part of their initial demands by raising their negotiable bottom lines while keeping their entrenchment measurements on negotiable items unchanged.
1 possible outcomes of bargaining
we now consider the possible outcomes of a bargaining game. apparently the outcome of a bargaining process is the agreements that are reached in the negotiation. in most situations when the demands of two agents conflict  concessions from players are required. the finial negotiated outcome then consists of the combination of those demands that each agent chooses to retain. in this section we shall first consider all possible compromises a bargaining process could reach and then combine these outcomes in a probabilistic fashion.
1 pure deals of bargaining
following  meyer et al. 1a  and  zhang et al. 1   we shall define an outcome of bargaining as a pair of subsets of two agents' bargaining item sets  interpreted as the concessions made by both agents. considering the real-life bargaining  bargainers normally intend to keep their highly entrenched negotiable items and to give up those less entrenched items if necessary. this idea leads to the following definition of possible bargaining outcomes.
definition 1 let b =   老1 e1   老1 e1   be a bargaining game. ki  i = 1  is the belief set derived by  老i ei . a pure deal of b is a pair  d1 d1  satisfying:
1.ki
1.
  then   ﹋ di
where i = 1. the set of all pure deals of b is denoted by   b .
﹛there is little need to comment on the first three conditions. they are just the statements on the type of compromises desired. the last one expresses the idea that the procedure of concession by both agents is in the order from lower entrenched items to higher entrenched items: higher entrenched items should be retained before any lower entrenched items are considered to be given up. combining this condition with the second implies the individual rationality - if an agent entrench an item as firmly as a tautology  this item will never be given up in any bargaining situation. such an item is called reserved item.
﹛we are now ready to define the utility of pure deals for each player. we will evaluate an agent's gain from a deal by measuring the length of the remained negotiable items of the agent.
definition 1 for any d ﹋   b   define the utility of the deal  denoted by u d  =  u1 d  u1 d    as follows: ui d  = 老i      min{老i    :   ﹋ di}
example 1 consider example 1 again. all possible pure deals of the bargaining game are:
d1 =  cn {p1 p1 p1}  cn { p1}  
d1 =  cn {p1 p1}  cn { p1  p1}   d1 =  cn {p1}  cn { p1  p1  p1}   the utility values of the deals are:
u d1  =  1   u d1  =  1   u d1  =  1 .
﹛note that  cn {p1 p1 p1 p1}  cn     and  cn    cn { p1  p1  p1  p1}   are not pure deals because p1 and  p1 are reserved items of agent 1 and 1  respectively.	 
﹛given a bargaining game b  if   b  is nonempty  it must contain two extreme cases of pure deals  called all-or-nothing
deals:
	↘ 	 ↙
﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛d =  k1 r1  and d =  r1 k1  where ri = {  ﹋ ki : 老i    = 老i   }  i.e.  the reserved items of agent i.
the utilities of the all-or-nothing deals give the up-bound
and low-bound of utility values for each agent:
	↘ 	 ↙
u d  =  老1      e1  and u d  =  1 老1      e1 .
we say that a pure deal d dominates another pure deal
d1  denoted by d  d1  if either d or d. d weekly dominates d1  denoted by
d   if d.
﹛a pure deal d of a bargaining game b is said to be pareto optimal over   b  if there does not exist another pure deal in   b  which dominates d.
﹛the following theorem shows that if a negotiation function takes a pareto optimal pure deal as its outcome  then it satisfies all logical requirements put on negotiation functions by  meyer et al. 1a  and all the postulates except iteration proposed in  zhang et al. 1 .
theorem 1 for any  d1 d1  ﹋   b   if it is pareto optimal  then it satisfies all the postulates introduced by  meyer et al. 1a  for so-called concession-permissible deals1:
 c1  di = cn di  for i = 1.
 c1  di   ki for i = 1.
 c1  if k1 ﹍ k1 is consistent  di = ki for i = 1.
 c1  d1 ﹍ d1 is consistent.
 c1  if either k1 ﹍ d1 or k1 ﹍ d1 is consistent  then k1 ﹎
k1   cn d1 ﹍ d1 .
moreover  if  1 and  1 are the belief revision operators derived by the two entrenchment measures of b  respectively  then d satisfies the following conditions introduced by  zhang et al. 1 :
1. cn d1 ﹍ d1  =  k1  1 d1  ﹎  k1  1 d1 .
1. k1﹎ k1d1    k1d1 and k1﹎ k1d1    k1  1 d1.
﹛the following lemma shows that the utility value of a pure deal uniquely determines the deal. the fact will be used in the next section.
lemma 1 for d d1 ﹋   b   u d  = u d1  iff d = d1.
1 mixed deals
in many cases  a bargaining game could end in a tie that no single agreement reaches. a standard method to deal with the problem in game theory is to play a lottery to determine the outcome of a bargaining game. following nash's utility theory  we call rd1 +  1   r d1 a mixed deal if d1 and d1 are two pure deals or mixed deals  meaning the lottery which has the two possible outcomes  d1 and d1  with probabilities r and 1 r  respectively. the set of all mixed deals is denoted by   b 1.
﹛for any mixed deal d = rd1 +  1   r d1  the utility of the deal can be defined as u d  = ru d1  +  1   r u d1 .
﹛the concept of domination then can be extended to mixed deals: for any mixed deals d d 
d     d1 iff u d     ≡  u d1 .1

﹛﹛﹛1in  meyer et al. 1a   six postulates were introduced to specify the rationality of concessionary. however the sixth   c1   holds trivially provided k1 and k1 are logically closed. 1	
﹛﹛more precisely    b  is a conservative extension of   b  by allowing lottery deals in the form rd1 +  1   r d1.
	1
﹛﹛for any x y ﹋     x   y denotes x1   y1 ＿ x1 ≡ y1 or x1 ≡ y1＿ x1   y1. x ≡ y denotes that xi ≡ yi.
﹛since the language we consider is finite  the set of pure deals of a bargaining game is also finite. the following lemma is easy to prove according to the construction of mixed deals.
lemma 1 let d1 ﹞﹞﹞ dm ﹋   b  be all pure deals of a bargaining game b. any mixed deal d can be expressed as a linear combination of d1 ﹞﹞﹞ dm  i.e.  there exist real numbers  汐1 ﹞﹞﹞ 汐m  satisfying
1. 汐j ≡ 1  j = 1 ﹞﹞﹞ m;
1. p汐j = 1;
1. d = p汐jdj.
moreover  u d  = p汐ju dj .
in other words   is a convex hull of   b  if we identify a deal with its utility pair. obviously  the utility function over mixed deals defined above is a pair of von neumannmorgenstern utility functions.
﹛we have seen from lemma 1 that a pure deal can be uniquely determined by its utility values. however  a deal can be duplicately represented in the form of mixed deals. for instance  any pure deal d can be represented as rd+ 1 r d. to solve the problem we can either use lemma 1 to obtain a unique representation of a deal by orthogonalizing representation of pure deals  or utility pairs  or apply equivalence classification by defining an equivalent relation: d ‵ d1 iff u d  = u d1 . to avoid too much complexity  we omit the details of the mathematical treatment but simply assume that for any d d iff u d  = u d1 .
1 bargaining solution
the target of bargaining theory is to find theoretical predictions of what agreement  if any  will be reached by the bargainers. john nash in his path-breaking papers introduced an axiomatic method which permitted a unique feasible outcome to be selected as the solution of a given bargaining problem nash 1  nash 1 . he formulated a list of properties  or axioms  that he thought solution should satisfy  and established the existence of a unique solution satisfying all the axioms. in this section we shall give a brief summary of nash's theory and then extend nash's result in terms of bargainer's belief states.
1 the nash bargaining solution
a bargaining game in nash's terminology is a pair    d   where      1 is a set of possible utility pairs and d ﹋  1 the disagreement point. it was assumed that   is convex and compact. all bargaining games satisfying the conditions are collected in the set b. a bargaining solution is then a function f : b ↙  1 such that f   d  ﹋  . nash proposed that a bargaining solution should possess the following four properties  nash 1:
po  pareto-optimality  there does not exist  u1 u1  ﹋   such that  u1 u1    f   d .
sym  symmetry  if    d  is symmetric  then f1   d  = f1   d .
ieur  independence of equivalent utility representation   let   1 d1  be obtained from    d  by a strictly increasing affine transformation 而 x  =  而1 x1  而1 x1  1. then f  1 d1  = 而 f   d  
iia  independence of irrelevant alternatives  if  1     and f   d  ﹋  1  then f  1 d  = f   d .
theorem 1  nash's theorem  a bargaining solution f satisfies all the four properties if and only if f = f  where f is defined by f   d  = u  where u  solves the maximization problem max{u1 : u =  u1 u1  ﹋   u ≡ d}.
1 bargaining solution with belief states we might have noticed that a solution to bargaining problem is to provide a general model of the bargaining process rather than a selection function that picks up a point as outcome from all feasible solutions for a particular bargaining situation. a surprise with nash's theorem is that the axioms shown above seem so natural that any negotiation process should follow whereas the solution is so specific that it uniquely determines an outcome in any bargaining situation. the question now is that whether we can restate these plausible requirements in terms of bargainers' belief states instead of utility functions.
﹛given a finite propositional language  let b denote all bargaining games in the same propositional language with nonempty set of deals. a bargaining solution is defined as a function f which maps a bargaining game b ﹋ b to a mixed deal in   b . following nash's approach  we propose the following axioms:
po  pareto optimality  there does not exist a deal d ﹋

  b  such that d  f b .
md  midpoint domination  f b   1↘ d + 1 ↙d.
ieem  independence of equivalent entrenchment measurement  given a bargaining game b =   老1 e1   老1 e1   
for any strictly increasing affine transformations 而 
f 而 b   √ f b 
where 而 b  =   而1   老1 而1 e1    而1   老1 而1 e1   .
iia  independence of irrelevant alternatives  if b1 v b and   then f b1  √ f b .
we can easily see the similarities between the above axioms and nash's. the differences are also observable. firstly  the above axioms are presented in terms of bargainers' belief states  i.e.  the entrenchment measurement of two agents. this is significant not only because bargainers' belief states contains the logical implication of negotiation demands but also because the entrenchment measurements are more obtainable than the utility functions over all possible outcomes combinatorial explosion can happen with possible outcomes . secondly  our axioms are more intuitive and easier to verify. for instance  the md  which is a replacement of nash's sym  expresses the idea that a minimal amount of cooperation among the players should allow them to do at least as well as the average of their preferred outcomes. when no easy agreement on a deterministic outcome is obtained  the tossing of a coin is always an option to determine a winner of the negotiation  see a counterpart of md in game theory in  thomson 1  . additionally  our iia is much weaker than nash's iia because not every convex subset of  1 can be a set of utility pairs of mixed deals.
﹛exactly like the nash's theorem  there exists a unique bargaining solution possessing the above properties.
theorem 1 there is a unique solution f which satisfies po  ieem  md and iia. moreover  the solution is the function f b  √ d  such that d and u1 d  u1 d   = max  u1 d u1 d  .
d﹋  b 
proof: the whole proof of the theorem is quite lengthy. to save space  we shall only present a sketch of the second half of the proof. we shall prove that if f is a bargaining solution possessing po ieem  md and iia  then f = f.
﹛given a bargaining game b =   老1 e1   老1 e1    let ki be the derived belief sets of b. in the case that k1﹍ k1 is consistent  it is easy to show that f b  √ f b  √  k1 k1 . so we assume that k1﹍ k1 is inconsistent.
﹛let d  √ f b . suppose that b1 is the bargaining game derived from b by changing its entrenchment measurement with a strictly increasing affine transformation 而 so that u. by ieem  f b  √ d  iff f b1  √ d . since f satisfies ieem  d  also maximizes u over . therefore we are left to prove f b1  √ d .
﹛let b. following nash's argument  it is not hard to verify that for any d 
{ x y  : x ≡ 1 y ≡ 1 and x + y ≒ 1} because  is convex. particularly  .
﹛since k1﹍k1 is inconsistent and   b  is nonempty  we can pick up two pareto optimal pure deals from   b1  in the form  k1 u1  and  u1 k1 . construct a game b1 =   老1 e1   老1 e1   as following: for each i = 1 
1. for any   ﹋ ki  ;
1. for any   ﹋ cn ki ﹍{  ＿ui }  ki  老1i    = 老1i      1;
1. .
	it is easy to prove that b1	is a subgame of b1	and
k ki ﹍ {  ＿ui }  i = 1 . according to md  u. on the other hand  for any mixed deal d   by lemma 1  d √ p 汐jdj  where dj ﹋   b1 . for each j  if both dij   ki  i = 1   then
﹛1 j 1 j j ↘ 1 j ↙ 1 u  d   = u  d  ; otherwise either d = d or d = d   which implies u. thus u.
this implies u. therefore u. it follows that f b1  is expressible in b1  or
f. according to iia  f b1  √ f b1 . we conclude that f b  √ f b1  √ d  √ f b .	 
﹛with the theorem we can easily see that the solution to the bargaining situation described in example 1 is the equivalent class of the pure deal d1 =  cn {p1 p1}  cn { p1  p1}    under which both agents agree that the price of the product is less than $1 but no less than $1. note that a more refined discretization of the problem might give a mixed deal as the solution of the bargaining game.
﹛the uniqueness of bargaining solution depends on the assumption that both bargainers agree to randomize between outcomes  i.e.  whenever the solution of a bargaining game gives a mixed deal  a lottery will be played to decide which pure deal will be the agreement. however  the assumption is not generally applicable to most of real-life bargaining. in this case  we could use a pure deal that maximizes the product of utility pairs as an approximate prediction of bargaining outcomes even though it is not necessarily unique  note that such a solution must be pareto optimal .
1 discussion
we have observed that a bargaining game consists of two independent entrenchment measurements on negotiable items of two individuals. the actual values of entrenchment measures can be  freely  scaled without changing the solution of the bargaining game. how could these  random  assignments of an entrenchment measure determine a unique solution  before we answer the question  let's explore another example.
example 1  owen 1  two men are offered $1 if they can decide how to divide the money. the first man is assumed to be very rich  while the second man has $1 capital in all. as the first player is very rich  it is assumed that the utility of
$x for the first player  with 1 ≒ x ≒ 1  is proportional to x  i.e. u1 x  = x. to the second player  it is assumed that the utility of a sum of money is proportional to its  natural  logarithm  i.e.  u1 x  = ln 1   x    ln1.
﹛the game-theoretical solution to the problem is simply maximizing the product of two agents' utilities : u1 x u1 x  = xln 1 x   which gives approximately x = 1  meaning that the first player receives $1 and the other takes $1.
﹛the logical solution to the problem needs a process of discretization. let p x  denote the proposition that the first player receives no less than $x  where x is a natural number  1 ≒ x ≒ 1  1.
the negotiable item set of each agent is then:
k1 = cn {p x  : 1 ≒ x ≒ 1}  and k1 =
cn { p x  : 1 ≒ x ≒ 1} .
﹛let c = {p x  ↙ p x   1  : 1   x ≒ 1}  which is the common knowledge of both players. the associated entrenchment measure of the first player can be defined as: 老1    = 1 for each   ﹋ { } ﹍ c; 老1 p x   = 1   x for any 1 ≒ x ≒ 1; 老1    =  1 for any   1﹋ k1.
the entrenchment measure of the second player is: 老1    = 1 for each   ﹋ { } ﹍ c;
 for any 1 ≒ x ≒ 1;
﹛it is easy to verify that the bargaining solution of the game is  cn {p 1 }﹍c  cn { p 1 }﹍c    which gives the similar result as the game-theoretical solution.
﹛the result seems strange: the poor man receives less money than the rich man. this is because the poor man is so eager to get money that he highly entrench each single dollars  1 ≒ 老1  p x   ≒ 1 for any 1 ≒ x ≒ 1  1. if the second agent linearly entrenched its gain as the first agent  the negotiation would end with 1 to 1. this means that the nonlinearity of the second agent's entrenchment measurement results the non-balanced allocation. in other words  the distribution of entrenchment measurement reflects the bargaining power of players. note that the logarithm function is strictly monotone. therefore the non-linearity of entrenchment measurement cannot be captured by any belief change operations  see theorem 1 . the agm's entrenchment ordering is not enough to measure players' bargaining power. in fact  the entrenchment measurement plays two rules in bargaining: its ordering determines a unique belief revision operation for minimizing the loss of bargainer's negotiable items and the distribution of entrenchment values decides the negotiating power of bargainers.
1 conclusion and related work
we have presented a logical framework for nash's bargaining solution. to do so  we introduced a concept of entrenchment measure  which maps a proposition to a real number  and used it as a vehicle to convey agents' belief states in different bargaining situations. we have shown that nash bargaining solution can be restated in terms of the extended concept of belief states. negotiable items  bargaining outcomes and conflicting arguments can then be expressed in propositional logic meanwhile nash's numerical solution to bargaining problem is still applicable. this offers a combinative approach of qualitative and quantitative analysis to bargaining situations. as a direct application of the result  a logic-based solution to automated negotiation can be proposed. given a two-agent bargaining situation  we invite both agents to describe their negotiable items in terms of propositional logic and to provide their own measurements of entrenchment on their negotiable items. all the information comes to an arbitrator  or a server  who will announce the outcome of the negotiation after conducting a process of belief revision and a calculation of nash's solution. this procedure should be considered to be fair because the result of negotiation is in effect determined by the participants' belief states rather by the arbitrator.
﹛this paper is closely related to the work on the belief revision model of negotiation  booth 1  meyer et al. 1a  meyer et al. 1b  zhang et al. 1 . we have proved that if the bargaining solution takes a pure deal as the outcome  it will satisfy almost all assumptions that are put on the negotiation function constructed by belief revision operators see theorem 1 . however  as we have discussed in the last section  belief revision operation cannot measure bargainers' negotiation power. therefore a negotiation function defined purely by belief revision operation is unable to determine negotiation outcomes.
﹛the model we presented in the paper is a logical extension of nash's cooperative model of bargaining  which deals with the bargaining situations described by a set of abstract rules. non-cooperative models of bargaining  in contrast  analyze interaction which is based on explicit rules of bargaining  binmore et al. 1 . a series of work have been done that attempts to represent negotiation procedures in terms of

ferent negotiators  owen 1  houba and bolt 1  fatima et al. 1 .
logic  kraus et al. 1  sycara 1  sierra et al. 1 . it is interesting to see whether the classical results about the relationship between cooperative solutions and noncooperative solutions of bargaining problem can be extended to the logical models of bargaining.
﹛nash's axiomatic approach to bargaining has reached a high sophistication through the development of last five decades  roth 1  thomson 1  napel 1 . a variety of alternative assumptions have been proposed to derive a given solution concept. it could be a promising research topic to investigate logical properties of these alternative solutions. on the other hand  the logical implication of the distribution of entrenchment measurements is also worthwhile to be further explored. references
 binmore et al. 1  k. binmore  m. osborne and a. rubinstein  noncooperative models of bargaining  handbook of game theory  vol 1  1.
 booth 1  r. booth  a negotiation-style framework for non-prioritized revision  tark'1  1.
 fatima et al. 1  s. fatima  m. wooldridge and n. r. jennings  n. r.  bargaining with incomplete information  to appear in annals of mathematics and artificial intelligence.
 gardenfors 1“   p. gardenfors “ knowlege in flex: modeling the dynamics of epistemic states  the mit press  1.
 houba and bolt 1  h. houba and w. bolt  credible
threats in negotiations  springer.
 kraus et al. 1  s.kraus  k.sycara  a.evenchik  reaching agreements through argumentation: a logical model and implementation  artificial intelligence  1  1.
 meyer et al. 1a  t. meyer  n. foo  r. kwok and d. zhang  logical foundations of negotiation: outcome  concession and adaptation  aaai-1  1.
 meyer et al. 1b  t. meyer  n. foo  r. kwok and d. zhang  logical foundations of negotiation: strategies and p