
in this paper  two families of merging operators are considered: quota operators and gmin operators. quota operators rely on a simple idea: any possible world is viewed as a model of the result of the merging when it satisfies  sufficiently many  bases from the given profile  a multi-set of bases . different interpretations of the  sufficiently many  give rise to specific operators. each gmin operator is parameterized by a pseudo-distance and each of them is intended to refine the quota operators  i.e.  to preserve more information . quota and gmin operators are evaluated and compared along four dimensions: rationality  computational complexity  strategy-proofness  and discriminating power. those two families are shown as interesting alternatives to the formula-based merging operators  which selects some formulas in the union of the bases .
1	introduction
merging operators aim at defining the beliefs  resp. goals  of a group of agents from their individual beliefs  resp. goals . the merging problem in the propositional setting has been addressed in many works  both from the artificial intelligence community and the database community  cholvy  1; revesz  1; liberatoreand schaerf  1; lin and mendelzon  1; baral et al.  1; 1; konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a . it is also close to important issues considered in social choice theory  arrow  1; moulin  1; arrow et al.  1 .
모each operator is more or less suited to the many merging scenarios which can be considered. subsequently  when facing an application for which merging is required  a first difficulty is the choice of a specific merging operator. among the criteria which can be used to make a clever choice  are the following ones:
rationality: a main requirement for adhering to a merging method is that it offers the expected properties of what intuitively  merging  means. this calls for sets of rationality postulates and this has been addressed in several papers revesz  1; liberatoreand schaerf  1; konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a . in the following  we focus on the rationality postulates given in  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a   because they extend other proposals. the more  w.r.t. set inclusion  postulates satisfied the more rational the operator.
computational complexity: when one looks for a merging operator for an autonomous multi-agent system  a natural requirement is computational efficiency. in the worst case  merging is not a computationally easy task  and query answering typically lies at the first or even the second level of the polynomial hierarchy. computationally easier operators can be obviously preferred to more complex ones.
strategy-proofness: it is usually expected for merging that agents report truthfully their beliefs/goals. for many applications  this assumption can easily be made  in particular when the agents have limited reasoning abilities. however  when rational agents with full inference power are considered  such an assumption must be questioned: agents can be tempted to misreport their beliefs/goals in order to achieve a better merging result from their point of view. strategy-proof operators must be preferred in such a case.
discriminating power: because information is typically hard to be acquired  another important criterion to compare merging operators is cautiousness: merging operators which preserve only few information from the individual bases cannot be considered as valuable ones. thus  it is natural to prefer operators leading to consistent merged bases that are as strong as possible from an inferential point of view.
모as to rationality  one can look at  revesz  1; liberatore and schaerf  1; lin and mendelzon  1; konieczny  1; konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a; konieczny et al.  1 . as to computationalcomplexity see  koniecznyet al.  1   and for a study of strategy-proofness of many merging operators  a recent reference is  everaere et al.  1   see also  meyer et al.  1  for a related study concerning ocf merging operators . in light of those results  it appears that no mergingoperatoris a better performerthan any other operator with respect to the four criteria. to be more precise modelbased operators1 are often computationally easier  inference is typically-complete or-complete  than formulabased ones  inference can be -complete   konieczny et al.  1 . model-based operators also typically satisfy more rationality postulates  see  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a; konieczny  1  . the third criterion is much more difficult to satisfy for both families of operators  even in very restricted cases. actually  most of the merging operators identified so far in the literature are not strategy-proof. since the four evaluation criteria appear hard to be satisfied altogether  one cannot do better than searching for good trade-offs.
모we consider in this paper two families of propositional merging operators. the first one consists of quota merging operators. they rely on a simple idea: any possible world is viewed as a model of the result of the merging when it satisfies  sufficiently many  bases from the given profile.  sufficiently many  can mean either  at least k   any integer  absolute quota   or  at least k%   a relative quota   or finally  as many as possible   and each interpretation gives rise to a specific merging operator. we show that those operators exhibit good logical properties  have low computational complexity and are strategy-proof. since this is achieved at the price of a potential lack of discriminating power  we introduce a second family of mergingoperators: gminoperators. eachgminoperator is parameterizedby a pseudo-distanceand each of them is intended to refine the quota operators i.e.  to preserve more information . such operators are both more rational and more discriminating than quota merging operators. unfortunately  this improvement has to be paid by a higher computational complexity  and more strategic vulnerabilities  but we think they offer an interesting compromise nevertheless.
모note that aggregation functions close to the ones on which quota and gmin operators are based are used to deal with relational structures that are more complex than bipartitions of worlds  which are the structures under consideration in standard propositional logic . for instance  they have been considered in the possibilistic logic setting and for constraint satisfaction problems  see e.g.  dubois et al.  1; 1; fargier  1  . however  as far as we know  no systematic study of quota and gminoperators has been conducted so far in the standard propositional setting. especially  they have never been evaluated with respect to the four criteria we consider. this is where the main contribution of the paper lies.
모the rest of the paper is as follows. the next section gives some notations and definitions. in section 1  quota operators are defined and their properties are studied. in section 1  we define 1kmax  which is the operator obtained when optimizing the value of the quota under the constraint that it does not lead to an inconsistent merged base. in section 1  1gmin operators are defined and their properties are studied. finally  we conclude this paper in section 1.
1	formal preliminaries
we consider a propositional language l defined from a finite set of propositional variables p and the usual connectives.
모an interpretation  or world  is a total function from p to {1}  denoted by a bit vector whenever a strict total order on p is specified. the set of all interpretations is noted w. an

based ones  which pick some formulas in the union of the bases is often made  konieczny et al.  1 .
interpretation 뷎 is a model of a formula 뷋 뫍 l if and only if it makes it true in the usual truth functional way.  뷋  denotes the set of models of formula 뷋  i.e.   뷋  = {뷎 뫍 w | 뷎 |= 뷋}.
모abasek denotes the set of beliefs/goals of an agent  it is a finite and consistent set of propositional formulas  interpreted conjunctively. unless stated otherwise  we identify k with the conjunction of its elements.
모a profile e denotes the group of agents that is involved in the merging process. it is a multi-set  bag  of belief/goal bases e = {k1 ... kn}  hence two agents are allowed to exhibit identical bases . we denote by e the conjunctionof bases of e  i.e.  ve = k1뫇w...뫇kn  and1vv we is the disjunction of the bases of e  i.e.  e = k 뫈 ... 뫈 kn. a profile e is said to be consistent if and only if e is consistent. the multi-set union is noted t  multi-set containment relation is noted v. the cardinal of a finite set  or a finite multi-set  a is noted # a . we say that two profiles are equivalent  noted e1 뫖 e1  if there exists a bijection f from e1 to e1 such that for every 뷋 뫍 e1  뷋 and f 뷋  are logically equivalent.
모the result of the merging of the bases of a profile e  under the integrity constraints 뷃  is the mergedbase denoted
1뷃 e . the integrityconstraintsconsist of a consistent formula the merged base has to satisfy  it may represent some physical laws  some norms  etc. .
1	quota operators
let us first define the quota operators.
definition 1 let k be an integer  e = {k1 ... kn} be a profile  and 뷃 be a formula. the k-quota merging operator  denoted 1k  is defined in a model-theoretic way as:
 
{뷎 뫍  뷃  |  ki 뫍 e 뷎 |= ki} if non empty 
 1k뷃 e   ={뷎 뫍  뷃  | # {ki 뫍 e | 뷎 |= ki}  뫟 k}
otherwise.
모essentially  this definition states that the models of the result of the k-quota merging of profile e under constraints 뷃 are the models of 뷃 which satisfy at least k bases of e. when there is no conflict for the merging  i.e.  e 뫇 뷃 is consistent  the result of the merging is simply the conjunction of thev bases.
example 1 let us consider the following example  with a profile e = {k1 k1 k1 k1}  such that  k1  = {1 1}   k1  = {1}   k1  = {1} 
 k1 	=	{1}  and the integrity constraints  뷃 	=
w	we get as a re-
	 	뷃    	=	1 1 1	 	뷃 e  	=
{1 1} and  1뷃1 e   =  .
모here is an equivalent syntactical characterization of  1k뷃 e   that is obtained from preferred consistent subsets of e.1 let us first define the following notation:
pnkq = {c   {1 ... n} | # c  = k}.
모then the following proposition gives a characterization of quota operators :
proposition 1 let k be an integer  e = {k1 ... kn} be a profile  and 뷃 be a formula.
e 뫇 뷃	if consistent  	otherwise.
모interestingly  the size of the formula equivalent to  1k뷃 e   given by proposition 1 is polynomial in |e| + |뷃|. hence  merged bases can be easily compiled as propositional formulas.
1	logical properties
since we aim at investigating the logical properties of our family of merging operators  a set of properties must first be considered as a base line. the following set of postulates was pointed out in  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1; 1a :
definition 1  ic merging operators  1 is an ic merging operator if and only if it satisfies the following postulates:
 ic1  1뷃 e  |= 뷃
 ic1  if 뷃 is consistent  then 1뷃 e  is consistent
 ic1  if v1e is consistent1 with1뷃  then 1뷃1뷃 e1  뫖 ve뷃1뫇 뷃1
 ic1  if e 뫖 e and 뷃 뫖 뷃   then 1	 e   뫖 1	 e  
 ic1  if k1 |= 뷃 and k1 |= 뷃  then 1뷃 {k1 k1}  뫇 k1 is consistent if and only if 1뷃 {k1 k1}  뫇 k1 is consistent
 ic1  1뷃 e1  뫇 1뷃 e1  |= 1뷃 e1 t e1 
 ic1  if 1뷃 e1  뫇 1뷃 e1  is consistent  then 1뷃 e1 t e1  |= 1뷃 e1  뫇 1뷃 e1 
 ic1  1뷃1 e  뫇 뷃1 |= 1뷃1뫇뷃1 e 
 ic1  if 1뷃1 e  뫇 뷃1 is consistent  then 1뷃1뫇뷃1 e  |= 1뷃1 e  an ic merging operator is said to be an ic majority operator if it satisfies  maj 

quota merging operators exhibit good logical properties.
proposition 1k operators satisfy properties  ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1  and  ic1 . they do not satisfy  ic1    ic1  and  maj  in general.
모only two properties of ic merging operators are not satisfied:  ic1 since the result of the quota merging can be inconsistent  see example 1   and  ic1 .
모beside those general properties  some specific additional properties  are satisfied by quota operators.
 disj  if  we  뫇 뷃 is consistent  then 1뷃 e  |=  we  뫇 뷃
모interestingly  the disjunction property  disj  is not shared by every ic majority merging operator  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1a   since most of them allow for  generating  some new beliefs/goals from the ones in the bases of the profile  some interpretations that do not satisfy any of the bases can be chosen as models of the merged base . when this behaviour is unexpected  formula-based merging operators - which satisfy  disj  - can be used  but such operators do not satisfy many rationality postulates  konieczny  1   especially  ic1  is not satisfied  and are often hard from a computational point of view. quota operators  as well as the other operators studied in this paper  which also ensure  disj  offer interesting alternatives to formula-based operators in this respect.
모two other interesting postulates can be defined for characterizing more precisely quota operators; the first one is a weakening of  maj   which is not satisfied by every ic merging operator:
 wmaj  if 1뷃 e1  is consistent 
then  is consistent
모the second one shows the prominence of the largest maximal consistent subsets of the profile; let us define
maxcons뷃 e  as {m | m v e  m 뫇 뷃 is consistent  and  m1m   m1 v e vm1 뷃뫇 뷃 isvnot consistent1 }:1
 card  if e1 e1 뫍 maxcons  e   # e   뫞 # e    and
모모1뷃 e  뫇 e1 is consistent  then 1뷃 e  뫇 e1 is consistent proposition 1k operators satisfy properties  disj    card  and  wmaj .
모note that it is not the case that every ic majority merging operator satisfies  card   see section 1 .
1 computational complexity let 1 be a merging operator. we consider the following decision problem merge 1 :
  input : a triple he 뷃 붸i where e = {k1 ... kn} is a profile  뷃 뫍 l is a formula  and 붸 뫍 l is a formula.
  question : does 1뷃 e  |= 붸 hold 
for quota merging operators  we can prove that:
proposition 1 merge 1k  is bh 1 -complete.
모this bh 1 -completeness result is obtained even in the restricted case the query is a propositional symbol and there is no integrity constraints  뷃 =   . note that this complexity class is located at a low level of the boolean hierarchy. and that  obviously  the complexity of merge 1k  decreases to conp whenever k is not lower than the number of bases of e  or under the restriction ve 뫇 뷃 is inconsistent . 1 strategy-proofness
let us now investigate how robust quota operators are with respect to manipulation. intuitively  a merging operator is strategy-proof if and only if  given the beliefs/goals of the other agents  reporting untruthful beliefs/goals does not enable an agent to improve her satisfaction. a formal counterpart of it is given in  everaere et al.  1 :
definition 1 let i be a satisfaction index  i.e.  a total function from l뫄l to ir. a merging operator   is strategy-proof for i if and only if there is no integrity constraint 뷃  no profile such that
  .
모clearly  there are numerous different ways to define the satisfaction of an agent given a merged base. while many ad hoc definitions can be considered  the following three indexes from  everaere et al.  1  are meaningful when no additional information are available:
definition 1
is consistent 
	dw 	   =
1
	1	if k  |= k 
	  ids k k   =1	otherwise.
if #  k    1= 1 
	p 	   =
	1	otherwise.
모for the weak drastic index  idw   the agent is considered satisfied as soon as its beliefs/goals are consistent with the merged base. for the strong drastic index  ids   in order to be satisfied  the agent must impose her beliefs/goals to the whole group. the last index   probabilistic index  ip  is not a boolean one  leading to a more gradual notion of satisfaction. the more compatible the merged base with the agent's base the more satisfied the agent. the compatibility degree of k with k  is the  normalized  number of models of k that are models of k  as well.
proposition 1 quota merging operators are strategy-proof for ip  idw and ids.
모this is quite noticeable since strategy-proof merging operators are not numerous  everaere et al.  1 . strategyproofness is hard to achieve  as illustrated in social choice theory  for aggregation of preference relations  by the gibbard-satterthwaite impossibility theorem  gibbard  1; satterthwaite  1; moulin  1 .
1	absolute and relative quotas
in the definition of quota merging operators  an absolute threshold  i.e.  a fixed integer not depending on the number of bases in the profile  has been used. on the other hand  it can prove also sensible to express quota in a relative manner  and to define the models of the merged base as the interpretations satisfying at least half  or the two third  or the wanted ratio  of the initial bases. this technique is close to a wellknown voting method used in social choice theory  namely voting in committees  barbera` et al.  1 . let us call such operators k-ratio merging operators  with 1 뫞 k 뫞 1   and let us note them 1k.
example 1  continued 	 
.
모one can quickly figure out the close connections between the two families of quota merging operators  the one based on absolute quota and the other one on relative quota  or ratio . each ratio merging operator corresponds to a family of quota merging operators  one for each possible cardinal of the profile . and given a fixed cardinal  each  absolute  quota merging operator corresponds to a family of ratio merging operators.
모although the intuitive motivations of the two definitions of those families look different  it turns out that ratio merging operators have exactly the same properties w.r.t. computational complexity and strategy-proofness as  absolute  quota merging operators  though the proofs of some results are different . only some logical properties are different.

proposition 1k operators satisfy properties  ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    ic1    maj    disj  and  card . they do not satisfy  ic1  and  ic1  in general.
1kmax operator
now  whatever the chosen quota is absolute or not  an important point is the choice of its value. let us first observe that quota merging operators lead to a sequence of merged bases that is monotonic w.r.t. logical entailment: proposition 1 let e be a profile  뷃 be a formula. we have 1k뷃+1 e  |= 1k뷃 e  for all integers k.
모among the elements of this sequence  some of them are of special interest. thus  1 gives the conjunction of the bases  with the constraints  when consistent and 뷃 otherwise. it is called full meet merging operator in  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1 . 1 gives the conjunction of the bases  with the constraints  when consistent and the disjunction of the bases  with the constraints  otherwise; it is closed to the basicmergingoperator konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1   and is also definable as a model-based merging operator obtained using the drastic distance and max as aggregation function  konieczny et al.  1 . the only difference is that 1 gives an inconsistent result when the disjunction of the bases is not consistent with the constraints  whilst the basic merging operator gives 뷃 in this case.
모each time k is increased  the result of the merging is either the same as for the previous value of k or is logically stronger. in our finite propositional framework  the sequence  1k뷃 e   k   1  is obviously stationary from some stage. the value for which it becomes stationary is not interesting in itself  since the corresponding merged base is either equivalent to the conjunction of the bases of the profile  with the constraints   or to the inconsistent base. but an interesting value of k is the one leading to the last nontrivial merged base.
definition 1 let e = {k1 ... kn} be a profile  뷃 be a formula. let.
1kmax is defined in a model-theoretic way as:
} if non empty 
ki}  = kmax} otherwise.
모while very close to quota operators  the resulting operator 1kmax is not a true quota operator since the value of kmax is not given a priori  but depends on e and 뷃. example 1  continued   1k뷃max e   = {1 1}. at a first glance  1kmax looks similar to the formula-based operator  c1 which selects cardinality-maximal subbases in the union of the bases from the profile  konieczny  1; baral et al.  1; 1 ; however  1kmax and  c1 are distinct; thus  while both operatorssatisfy  disj   1kmax satisfies  ic1  and  maj  while  c1 satisfies none of them. contrastingly  1kmax belongs to two important families of modelbased merging operators  namely the 1 family and the 1gmax family when the drastic distance is used  konieczny and pino pe뫣rez  1b . accordingly  1kmax has very good logical properties:
proposition 1kmax satisfies  ic1 - ic1    maj    disj  and  card .
모1kmax is obtained by considering the problem of optimizing the quota  for  pure  quota operators  k is given  so it does not need to be computed . unsurprisingly  the corresponding inference problem is computationally harder than the inference problem for quota operators  under the standard assumptions of complexity theory :
proposition 1 merge 1kmax  is 붣p1-complete.
모clearly enough if kmax is computedduringan off-linepreprocessingstage and becomes part of the input afterwards  the complexity falls down to conp.
모now  as to strategy-proofness  the kmax operator exhibits all the good properties of quota operators. proposition 1kmax is strategy-proof for the three indexes ip  idw and ids.
1gmin operators
starting from 1kmax  one could wonder whether it is possible to constrain further the quota operators so as to get operators with a higher discriminating power  i.e . allowing more inferences to be drawn. in this section we provide a full family of such operators.
모in order to define a 1gmin operator  the definition of a pseudo-distance between interpretations is first needed:
definition 1 a pseudo-distancebetween interpretations is a total function d from w 뫄 w to in such that for every 뷎1  뷎1 뫍 w
  d 뷎1 뷎1  = d 뷎1 뷎1   and
  d 뷎1 뷎1  = 1 if and only if 뷎1 = 뷎1.
모any pseudo-distance between interpretations d induces a
모 distance  between an interpretation 뷎 and a formula k given by d 뷎 k  = min뷎1|=k d 뷎 뷎1 . examples of some such distances are the drasticdistance  noted dd  that gives 1 when 뷎1 = 뷎1 and 1 otherwise  or the dalaldistance dalal  1   noted dh  that is the hamming distance between interpretations.
then 1뷃d gmin operators are defined as:
definition 1 let d be a pseudo-distance  뷃 an integrity constraint  e = {k1 ... kn} a profile and let 뷎 be an interpretation. the  distance  dd gmin 뷎 e  is defined as the list of numbers  d1 ... dn  obtained by sorting in increasing order the set {d 뷎 ki  | ki 뫍 e}. the models of 1d 뷃 gmin e  are the models of 뷃 that are minimal w.r.t. the lexicographic order induced by the natural order.
뷎 k1 k1 k1 k1 ddh gmin 뷎 e 

	1	1	1	 1 1 
	1	1	1	 1 1 
1	1	1	 1 1 
1	1	1	 1 1 
1	1	1	 1 1 
1	1	1	 1 1 
table 1: 1dh gmin operator.
example 1  continued  .
 1d뷃h gmin e   = {1}. the computations are reported in table 1. each column ki gives the  distance  dh 뷎 ki  between the models of the integrity constraints and ki.
clearly enough  1kmax is a specific gminoperator:
proposition 1dd gmin =  kmax.
모as far as discriminating power is concerned  1gmin operators are interesting operators  since they refine the operator
 kmax  so they refine also every quota merging operator   as stated by the following property:
proposition 1 for any pseudo-distance d  any integrity constraint 뷃 and any profile e  we have

모furthermore  gmin operators exhibit very good logical properties:
proposition 1 let d be any pseudo-distance. 1d gmin satisfies  ic1 - ic1    maj  and  disj . it does not satisfy  card  in general.
모thus  like formula-based merging operators  1gmin operators satisfy  disj   but contrariwise to formula-based merging operators  1gmin operators are ic merging operators.
let us now investigate the strategy-proofness issue for the
1gmin operators. in the general case  strategy-proofness of quota merging operators is lost:
proposition 1 let d be a pseudo-distance. 1d gmin is not strategy-proof for any index among the three indexes idw ip and ids.
모we can guarantee strategy-proofness  but only in some very specific cases: proposition 1
  1d gmin is strategy-proof for ip  idw and ids if the bases are complete  i.e. each base has a unique model  
  1d gmin is strategy-proof for the indexes idw and ids when # e  = 1 and 뷃 =  .
모finally  let us turn to the computational complexity criterion.
proposition 1 assume that the pseudo-distance d of any pair of interpretations 뷎1 and 뷎1 can be computed in time polynomial in |뷎1| + |뷎1|. then merge 1d gmin  is in  p1. proposition 1
  merge-complete.
  merge-complete.
모as expected  the complexity of inference for 1d gmin operators is higher than the complexity of inference for quota operators  under the usual assumptions of complexity theory . however  it remains at the first level of the polynomial hierarchy under reasonable requirements on the pseudo-distance.
1	conclusion
we have considered two families of merging operators  and investigated the properties of their operators with respect to four criteria: rationality  computational complexity  strategyproofness and discrimating power. we claim that those four criteria are the main dimensions along with propositional merging operators have to be evaluated.
모while no merging operators optimizing every criteria exist  we claim that both quota and gminoperators are interesting trade-offs; even if they are not fully rational and discriminating  quota operators exhibit  low complexity  and are strategy-proof; on the other hand gminoperators are slightly more complex and not strategy-proof in the general case  but they are fully rational and much less cautious. they also lead to merged bases implying the disjunction of the bases from the considered profile  thus offering an interesting alternative to formula-basedmerging operators  baral et al.  1; 1; konieczny 1; koniecznyet al.  1   which are typically at least as hard from the complexity point of view and satisfy less rationality postulates.
acknowledgements
the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers. this work has been supported by the iut de lens  the universite뫣 d'artois  the re뫣gion nord/pas-de-calais  the ircica consortium  and by the european community feder program.
