
counterfactual quantities representing pathspecific effects arise in cases where we are interested in computing the effect of one variable on another only along certain causal paths in the graph  in other words by excluding a set of edges from consideration . a recent paper  pearl  1  details a method by which such an exclusion can be specified formally by fixing the value of the parent node of each excluded edge. in this paper we derive simple  graphical conditions for experimental identifiability of path-specific effects  namely  conditions under which path-specific effects can be estimated consistently from data obtained from controlled experiments.
1 introduction
total  direct and indirect effects are important quantities in practical causal reasoning about legal  medical  and public policy domains  among others. the task of explicating  and computing these quantities has been successfully addressed in the framework of linear structural equation models  sem   but encountered difficulties in non-linear as well as nonparametric models. see for instance  robins and greenland  1    galles and pearl  1    pearl  1  
¡¡in the linear sem framework  the total effect of z on y is the response of y to a unit change in the setting of z. on the other hand  the direct effect is the effect of z on y not mediated by any other variable in the model while the indirect effect is the effect of z on y excluding the direct effect.
¡¡in non-parametric models  we can define the controlled direct effect as the change in the measured response of y to a change in z  while all other variables in the model  henceforth called context variables  are held constant. unfortunately  there is no way to construct an equivalent notion of controlled indirect effects  since it is not clear to what values other variables in the model need to be fixed in order to measure such an effect.
¡¡recently  a novel formulation of natural  pearl  1  or pure  robins and greenland  1  effects was proposed which defined effects in a more refined way by holding variables constant not to predetermined values  but to values they would have attained in some situation. for example  the natural direct effect of z on y is the sensitivity of y to changes in z  while the context variables are held fixed to the values they would have attained had no change in z taken place. similarly  the natural indirect effect is the sensitivity of y to changes the context variables would have undergone had z been changed  while z is actually being fixed.
¡¡being complex counterfactual quantities  natural effects tend to have intricate verbal descriptions. it is often easier to explain such effects using the visual intuitions provided by graphical causal models. graphical causal models represent causal assumptions as graphs  with vertices representing variables  and edges representing direct causal paths. in such models  natural direct effect can be interpreted as the effect along the edge z ¡ú y   with the effect along all other edges 'turned off.' similarly  the natural indirect effect can be interpreted as the effect along all edges except the one between z and y . using this interpretation  the suggestive next step in the study of natural effects is to consider effects along a select subset of edges between z and y which are called pathspecific effects.
1 a motivating example
consider the following example  inspired by  robins  1   a study is performed on the effects of the azt drug on aids patients. azt is a harsh drug known to cause a variety of complications. for the purposes of the model  we restrict our attention to two - pneumonia and severe headaches. in turn  pneumonia can be treated with antibiotics  and severe headache sufferers can take painkillers. ultimately  all the above variables  except headache  are assumed to have a direct effect on the survival chances of the patient. the graphical causal model for this situation is shown in fig. 1.
¡¡the original question considered in this model was the total effect of azt and antibiotics treatment on survival. however  a variety of other questions of interest can be phrased in terms of natural effects. for instance  what is the direct effect of azt on survival  if azt produced no side effects in the patient  which is just the natural direct effect of azt on
survival. see fig. 1  a . similarly  we might be interested in how just the side effects of azt affect survival  independent of the effect of azt itself. this corresponds to the natural

figure 1: the azt example. a: azt  p: pneumonia  h:
headaches  b: antibiotics  k: painkillers  s: survival
indirect effect of azt on survival. see fig. 1  b .
¡¡furthermore  certain interesting questions cannot be phrased in terms of either direct or indirect natural effects. for example we might be interested in the interactions between antibiotics and azt that negatively affect survival. to study such interactions  we might consider the effect of administering azt on survival in the idealized situation where the antibiotics variable behaved as if azt was not administered  and compare this to the total effect of azt on survival. graphically  this amounts to 'blocking' the direct edge between antibiotics and survival or more precisely  keeping the edge functioning at the level it would have had no azt been given  while letting the rest of the edges function as usual. this is shown graphically in fig. 1  a . the edges which we wish to block will be crossed out in the graph.
1 outline and discussion of our approach
our goal is to study and characterize situations where pathspecific effects like the one from the previous section can be computed uniquely from the data available to the investigator. our main result is a simple  necessary  graphical condition for the identifiability of path-specific effects from experimental data. furthermore  our condition becomes sufficient for models with no spurious correlations between observables  also known as markovian models.
¡¡the condition can be easily described in terms of blocked and unblocked paths as follows. let x  y be variables in a causal model m inducing a graph g. then given a set of blocked edges g  the corresponding path-specific effect of x on y cannot be identified if and only if there exists a node w with an unblocked directed path from x to w  an unblocked directed path from w to y   and a blocked directed path from w to y . for instance  the effects of a on s are identifiable in fig. 1  a    b   and fig. 1  b   but not in fig. 1  a . therefore  in general we cannot study the interractions of azt and antibiotics in the way described above  but we can study the interractions of azt and painkillers. the latter case is made tractable by an absense of blocked and unblocked paths sharing edges.
¡¡our condition also shows that all identifiable path-specific effects are 'equivalent'  in a sense made precise later  to effects where only root-emanating edges are blocked. thus identifiable path-specific effects are a generalization of both natural direct effects  where a single root-emanating edge is unblocked  and of natural indirect effects  where a single rootemanating edge is blocked.
	a	a

figure 1:  a  natural direct effect  b  natural indirect effect
	a	a

	s	s
	 a 	 b 
figure 1: path specific effects
¡¡to obtain this result formally  we treat effects as probabilities of statements in a certain counterfactual logic. however  rather than manipulating these probabilities directly  we convert them to subgraphs of the original causal model  and reason about and perform manipulations on the subgraphs. we then introduce simple counterfactual formulas whose probabilities are not identifiable  and prove that certain simple graphical conditions must be described by such formulas  and lack of such conditions leads to subgraphs corresponding to identifiable effects.
¡¡due to space considerations  the proofs of some lemmas have been omitted  while the proofs included generally are missing some technical details. our technical report contains the complete proofs.
1 preliminaries
this paper deals extensively with causal models and counterfactuals. we reproduce their definitions here for completeness. a full discussion can be found in  pearl  1 . for the remainder of the paper  variables will be denoted by capital letters  and their values by small letters. similarly  sets of variables will be denoted by bold capital letters  sets of values by bold small letters. we will also make use of some graph theoretic abbreviations. we will write pa a g  de a g  and an a g  to mean the set of parents  descendants  inclusive   and ancestors  inclusive  of node a in graph g. g will be omitted from the subscript when assumed or obvious. if a variable is indexed  i.e. v i  we will sometimes denote the above sets as pai  dei  and ani  respectively.
1 causal models and counterfactual logic
definition 1 a probabilistic causal model  pcm  is a tuple m = hu v  f p u i  where
 i  u is a set of background or exogenous variables  which cannot be observed or experimented on  but which can influence the rest of the mode
 ii  v is a set {v 1 ... v n} of observable or endogenous variables. these variables are considered to be functionally dependent on some subset of u ¡È v .
 iii  f is a set of functions {f1 ... fn} such that each fi is a mapping from a subset of u ¡È v   {v i} to v i  and such that sf is a function from u to v .
 iv  p u  is a joint probability distribution over the variables in u.
¡¡a causal model m induces a directed graph g  where each variable corresponds to a vertex in g and the directed edges are from the variables in the domain of fi  i.e pai  to v i for all the functions. for the remainder of this paper  we consider causal models which induce directed acyclic graphs.
¡¡a markovian causal model m has the property that each exogenous variable u is in the domain of at most one function f. a causal model which does not obey this property is called semi-markovian. by convention  nodes corresponding to variables in u are not shown in graphs corresponding to markovian models.
¡¡for the purposes of this paper  we will represent counterfactual statements in a kind of propositional modal logic  similar to the one used in  halpern  1 . furthermore  the distribution p u  will induce an additional probabilistic interpretation on the statements in the logic.
definition 1  atomic counterfactual formula  let m be a causal model  let x be a variable and z be a  possibly empty  set of variables. then for any value x of x  and values z of z  x is a term  and xz u  is a term  taken to mean 'the value x attains when z is forced to take on values z  and u attain values u.'
¡¡for two terms t1 and t1  an atomic counterfactual formula has the form t1 = t1. we will abbreviate formulas of the form xz u  = x as xz u .
¡¡the 'forcing' of the variables to z is called an intervention  and is denoted by do z  in  pearl  1 . counterfactual formulas are constructed from atomic formulas using conjunction and negation.
definition 1  counterfactual formula 
 i  an atomic formula ¦Á u  is a counterfactual formula.
 ii  if ¦Á u  is a counterfactual formula  then so is   ¦Á  u .
 iii  if ¦Á u  and ¦Â u  are counterfactual formulas  then so is  ¦Á ¡Ä ¦Â  u .
¡¡the satisfaction of counterfactual formulas by causal models is defined in the standard way  which we reproduce from  halpern  1 .
definition 1  entailment  a causal model m satisfies a counterfactual formula ¦Á u   written m |= ¦Á u   if all variables appearing in ¦Á are in m and one of the following is
true
 i  ¦Á u  ¡Ô t1 = t1 and for the given setting of u  the terms t1 and t1 are equal in m.
 ii  ¦Á u  ¡Ô   ¦Â  u  and m |1= ¦Â u .
 iii  ¦Á u  ¡Ô  ¦Â ¡Ä ¦Ã  u  and m |= ¦Â u  and m |= ¦Ã u 
¡¡thus a formula ¦Á u  has a definite truth value in m. if the values u are unknown  we cannot in general determine the truth of ¦Á. however  we can easily define a natural notion of probability of ¦Á in m as follows:
	p ¦Á|m  = x p u 	 1 
{u|m|=¦Á u }
¡¡we will omit the conditioning on m if the model in question is assumed or obvious.
¡¡if we consider each value assignment u as a possible world  then we can view p u  as describing our degree of belief that a particular world is true  and p ¦Á  as our belief that a particular statement is true in our causal model if viewed as a type 1 probability structure  halpern  1 .
1 submodels and identifiability
definition 1  submodel  for a causal model m = hu v  f p u i  an intervention do z  produces a new causal model mz = hu vz fz p u i  where vz is a set of distinct copies of variables in v   and fz is obtained by taking distinct copies of functions in f  but replacing all copies of functions which determine the variables in z by constant functions setting the variables to values z.
¡¡the joint distribution p vz  over the endogenous variables in mz is called an interventional distribution  and is sometimes denoted as pz. for a given causal model m  define p  as {pz|z   v  z a value assignment of z}. in other words  p  is the set of all possible interventional  or experimental  distributions of m.
¡¡intuitively  the submodel is the original causal model  minimally altered to render z equal to z  while preserving the rest of its probabilistic structure.
¡¡because there is no requirement that interventions in atomic counterfactuals in a formula ¦Á be consistent with each other  it is in general impossible to alter the original model using only interventions in such a way as to make the entire formula true. thus  we introduce a causal model which encompasses the 'parallel worlds' described by the counterfactual formula.
¡¡before doing so  we give a simple notion of union of submodels  as follows:
definition 1  causal model union  let mx  and mz be submodels derived from m. then mx ¡È mz is defined to be mx if z = x  and hu vx ¡È vz fx ¡È fz p u i  otherwise.
definition 1  parallel worlds model  let m be a causal model  ¦Á a counterfactual formula. then the parallel worlds model m¦Á is the causal model union of the submodels corresponding to atomic counterfactuals of ¦Á.
¡¡we call the joint distribution p v ¦Á  over the endogenous variables in m¦Á a counterfactual distribution  and will sometimes denote it as p¦Á. in the language of the potential outcomes framework  rubin  1   we can view p¦Á as the joint distribution over the unit-response variables mentioned in ¦Á.
¡¡the parallel worlds model is a generalization of the twin network model  first appearing in  balke and pearl  1   to more than two possible worlds. it displays independence assumptions between counterfactual quantities in the same way a regular causal model displays independence assumptions between observable quantities - by positing counterfactuals are independent of their non-descendants given their parents. given a causal model m and a formula ¦Á  we are interested in whether the corresponding counterfactual joint distribution p¦Á  or its marginal distributions  can be computed uniquely from the set of joint distributions available to the investigator. the formal statement of this question is as follows:
definition 1  identifiability  let m be a causal model from a set of models m inducing the same graph g  m¦Á a parallel worlds model  and q be a marginal distribution of the counterfactual joint distribution p¦Á. let k be a set of known probability distributions derived from m. then q is kidentifiable in m if it is unique and computable from k in any m ¡Ê m.
¡¡it follows from the definition that if we can construct two models in m with the same k but different q  then q is not identifiable. an important  well-studied special case of this problem - which we call evidential identifiability of interventions - assumes ¦Á is an atomic counterfactual  and k is the joint distribution over the endogenous variables in m  or p v  . being able to identify an interventional marginal in this way is being able to compute the effects of an intervention without having to actually perform the intervention  and instead relying on passive  observational data.
¡¡in this paper we are concerned with identifying probabilities of counterfactuals formulas using the set p  of all interventional distributions of m as a given. in other words  we are interested in computing probabilities of counterfactuals from experimental and observational probabilities.
1 path-specific effects
our aim is to provide simple  graphical conditions for the p identifiability of path-specific effects. to do so  we must formalize such effects as counterfactual formulas  and translate the identifiability conditions on the formula to conditions on the graph.
¡¡the following is the formalization of the notion of pathspecific effect in terms of a modified causal model  as it appears in  pearl  1 :
definition 1  path-specific effect  let g be the causal graph associated with model m  and let g be an edgesubgraph of g containing the paths selected for effect analysis  we will refer to g as the effect subgraph . the g-specific effect of z on y  relative to reference z   is defined as the total effect of z on y in a modified model mg formed as follows. let each parent set pai in g be partitioned into two parts pai = {pai g  pai ¡¥g }  where pai g  represents those members of pai that are linked to v i in g  and pai ¡¥g  represents the complementary set. we replace each function fi in m with a new function fgi in mg  defined as follows: for every set of instantiations pai g  of pai g   fgi pai g  u  = fi pai g  pai ¡¥g   u   where pai ¡¥g   takes the value of pai ¡¥g z  u  in m. the collection of modified functions forms a new model mg. the g-specific effect of z on y   denoted seg z z ;y u m is defined as the total effect  abbreviated as te  of z on y in the modified model:
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡seg z z ;y u m = te z z ;y u mg  1  where te z z ;y u mg = yz u mg   yz  u mg.
¡¡if we wish to summarize the path-specific effect over all settings of u  we should resort to the expectation of the above difference  or the expected path-specific effect. to identify this effect  we need to identify p yz  and p yz   in mg. for our purposes we can restrict our attention to p yz   as the second term corresponds to the quantity p yz   in the original model m  and so is trivially p -identifiable.
¡¡in this paper we assume  without loss of generality  edges in g¡¥ = g   g are all along directed paths between z and y . the next theorem states that any path specific effect  expressed as a total effect in the modified model mg  can be expressed as a counterfactual formula in the original model
m.
theorem 1 every path specific effect p yz mg has a corresponding counterfactual formula ¦Á in m s.t for every u 
mg |= yz u     m |= ¦Á u 
¡¡proof outline: the proof is for causal models with finite domains. fix m  u  y  z and g. to prove the theorem  we need to 'unroll' yz and remove any implicit references to modified functions in mg  while preserving the truth value of the statement. our proof will use the axiom of composition  known to hold true for causal models under consideration. in our language  the axiom states that for any three variables z y w  and any settings u z w y   wz = w   yz w = yz  u .
¡¡fix u1. let s = an y  ¡Éde z  then by axiom of composition  yz u1  has the same truth value as a conjunction of atomic formulas of the form vpai i g   where v i ¡Ê s  pai g  is the set of parents of v i in mg  and pai g  and vi are suitably chosen constants. denote this conjunction ¦Á1.
¡¡for every term vpai i g  in ¦Á1 corresponding to v i with pai g    pai  replace it by vpai i g  pa  ¡¥g    in the conjunction  where pai ¡¥g   takes the value of pai ¡¥g z  u1  in m. denote the result . note that  m and mg |= yz u1     m |. we construct a similar conjunction ¦Áj  for every instantiation uj in m. let ¦Á = wj ¦Áj . it's easy to see the claim holds for ¦Á by construction.	1
¡¡an easy corollary of the theorem is  as before  that p yz mg = p ¦Á m. note that different ¦Ái in the proof only differ in the values they assign to variables in s. since m is composed of functions  the values of variables in s are fixed given u  and since p ¦Á  = p{u|m|=wi ¦Ái u } p u  by definition  we can express p ¦Á  as a summation over the variables in s   {y }.
for instance  the first term of the path-specific effect in fig.

figure 1: bold edges represent directed paths  a  r1 rule  b 
r1 rule
1  a  can be expressed as
p sa mg1a = x p sk b p a ¡Ä kh ¡Ä bp ¡Ä pa  ¡Ä ha  
k b p h
	= xp sa h p ¡Ä ha  ¡Ä pa  	 1 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡h p which is just the direct effect. the more general case of fig. 1  a  can be expressed as:1
p sa mg1a = x p sk b p a ¡Ä kh ¡Ä ba  ¡Ä pa ¡Ä ha 
k b p h
	= xp sa b ¡Ä ba  	 1 
b
¡¡it looks as if the expressions in eq.  1  and  1  for the two effects are very similar  moreover we know that direct effects are always p -identifiable in markovian models. surprisingly  the path specific effect of fig. 1  a  and eq.  1  is not p -identifiable as we will show later.
¡¡we will find it useful to modify the effect subgraph g while preserving the value of the path-specific effect. we do so by means of the following two rules. let m be a causal model with the graph g  g an effect subgraph of g  and g¡¥ = g   g. for a node v   let in v   denote the set of edges incoming into v   and out v   denote the set of edges outgoing from v   in g.
r1: if there is a node v in g such that out v     g¡¥  then r1 g  =  g   out v    ¡È in v  . see fig. 1  a .
r1: if there is an edge e ¡Ê g¡¥  such that for all directed paths from z to y which include e  there exists another edge e1 ¡Ê g¡¥  which occurs 'upstream' from e  then r1 g  = g   {e}. see fig. 1  b .
theorem 1  effect-invariant rules  if r1 is applicable the r1 g -specific effect is equal to the g-specific effect. if r1 is applicable the r1 g -specific effect is equal to the g-specific effect.
¡¡proof outline: the proof is by induction on graph structure  and is an easy consequence of the definition of g-specific effect  and the r1 and r1 rules. 1
¡¡intuitively  r1 'moves' the blocked edges closer to the manipulated variable z  and r1 removes redundant blocked table 1: the functions fr1 and fr1
zurr = fr1 z ur r = fr1 z ur 111111111111edges. thus  it is not surprising these two identities cannot be applied forever in a dag.
lemma 1 let m be a causal model  g an effect subgraph. then any sequence of applications of r1 and r1 to g will reach a fixed point g .
1 problematic counterfactual formulas
identification of a distribution must precede its estimation  as there is certainly no hope of estimating a quantity not uniquely determined by the modeling assumptions. furthermore  uniqueness frequently cannot be guaranteed in causal models. for instance  when identifying interventions from observational data  a particular graph structure  the 'bowarc'  has proven to be troublesome. whenever the graph of a causal model contains the bow-arc  certain experiments become unidentifiable  pearl  1 . our investigation revealed that a similarly problematic structure exists for experimental identifiability  which we call the 'kite graph'  due to its shape. the kite graph arises when we try to identity counterfactual probabilities of the form p.
lemma 1 let m be a causal model  let z and r be variables such that z is a parent of r. then p is not
p -identifiable if z  1= z.
¡¡proof outline: the proof is by counter example. we let ¦Á = rz  ¡Ä rz1   and construct two causal models m1 and m1 that agree on the interventional distribution set p   but disagree on p ¦Á . in fact  we only need 1 variables. the two models agree on the following: z is the parent of r  uz  z and r are binary variables  ur be a ternary variable  fz = uz  and p uz   and p ur  are uniform. the two models only differ on the functions fr  which are given by table 1. it's easy to verify our claim holds for the two models for any values z  1= z of z.	1
¡¡the next theorem shows how a particular path-specific effect leads to problematic counterfactuals from the previous lemma.
theorem 1 the g-specific effect of z on y as described in fig. 1  a  is not p -identifiable.
¡¡proof: we extend models m1 and m1 from the previous proof with additional variables v   y   and uy . we assume p uy   is uniform  and both p v y |r  and the functions which determine v and y are the same in both models.
¡¡note that since all variables are discrete  the conditional probability distributions can be represented as tables. if we require |r| = |v | and |y | = |v |   |r|  then the conditional
	z	z

yy a  b figure 1:  a  problematic effect  b  the kite graph
probabilities are representable as square matrices. we fix the functions fv and fy   as well as the exogenous parents of v and y such that the matrices corresponding to p v y |r  and p v |r  are matrices are invertible.
¡¡call the extended models m1 and m1. note that by construction  the two models are markovian. since m1 and m1have the same p   and since the two extended models agree
on all functions and distributions not in m1 and m1  they must also have the same p .
¡¡consider the g-specific effect shown in fig. 1  a . from theorem 1 we can express the path-specific effect in mg1 in terms of m1  in particular:
p yz mg1 = xp yrv ¡Ä rz  ¡Ä vz m1
rv
= x p
r v r1
= x p
r v r1
the last step is licensed by the independence assumptions encoded in the parallel worlds model of yrv ¡Ärz  ¡Ävr1 ¡Ärz1 . the same expression can be derived for p. note that since p  is the same for both models they have the same values for the interventional distributions p yrv  and p vr1 . note that since p y |r v   and p v |r  are square matrices  the summing out of p y |r v   and p v |r  can be viewed as a linear transformation. since the matrices are invertible  the transformations are one to one  and so if their composition. since p yrv  = p y|r v  and p vr1  = p v|r1   and since p is different in the two models  we obtain that p. since adding directed or bidirected edges to a graph cannot help identifiability  the result also holds in semi-markovian models. 1
1 main result
the main result of this section is that a simple sufficient and necessary  in markovian models  graphical criterion exists. this condition is easily stated and can be derived from the effect subgraph g in linear time. by contrast  the only other methods known to us for obtaining identifiability results of probabilities of general counterfactual logic formulas are proof search procedures based on results in  galles and pearl  1    halpern  1 . such procedures are far less intuitive  do not have running time bounds  and cannot be used to obtain non-identifiability proofs. first let's define this criterion:
definition 1  recanting witness criterion  let r 1= z be a node in g  such that there exists a directed path in g from z to r  a directed path from r to y in g  and a direct path from r to y in g but not g. then z  y   and g satisfy the recanting witness criterion with r as a witness
¡¡the recanting witness criterion is illustrated graphically as the 'kite pattern' in fig. 1  b . the name 'recanting witness' comes from the behavior of the variable r in the center of the 'kite.' this variable  in some sense  'tries to have it both ways.' along one path from r to y   r behaves as if the variable z was set to one value  but along another path  r behaves as if z was set to another value. this 'changing of the story' of r is what causes the problem  and as we will show it essentially leads to the the existence of a non p identifiable expression of the type discussed in section 1.
¡¡to proceed  we must make use of the following helpful lemmas: let g be an effect subgraph of g and g  the fixed
point of r1 and r1. let g  = g   g .
lemma 1 g  satisfies the recanting witness criterion iff g does. moreover  if g  does satisfy the criterion  then there exists a witness r s.t out. if g  does not  then g    out z .
¡¡lemma 1 states that repeated applications of rules r1 and r1 preserves the satisfaction of the recanting witness criterion. moreover  if the witness exists in the fixed point g   then some outgoing edge from it is blocked. if the witness does not exist in g   then only root-emanating edges are blocked.
lemma 1 assume the g -specific effect of z on y is p -
identifiable. let e be any set of edges in g . let g1 = e¡Èg . then the g1-specific effect of z on y is p -identifiable.
¡¡lemma 1 states that if a path specific effect is not identified  then adding blocked directed edges 'does not help ' in that the effect remains unidentified. now we can state and prove the main results:
theorem 1 if g satisfies the recanting witness criterion  then the g-specific effect of z on y is not p -identifiable.
proof: let m be our model and assume that g satisfies the recanting witness criterion. by lemma 1 so does g   let r be the witness from the lemma s.t e = r ¡ú v . assume the g-specific effect is identifiable  by theorem 1 so is the g -specific effect. let g1 be the path specific effect obtained by adding all edges to g   but e. by lemma 1 the g1-specific effect is also p -identifiable. now by composing the functions in g1 we can obtain a new model m1 which is exactly the model of fig. 1  a 1 and p yz mg1 = p yz mg1. from
theorem 1 we know that p yz m1 is not p -identifiable 
g
hence  neither is p yz mg1 and the g1-specific effect is not
p -identifiable. contradiction.	1 to illustrate the use of the theorem  consider the example in eq.  1  from section 1. the expression pb p sa b ¡Ä ba   =
= xp
b p
	= x p sa b p	 1 
b p p1
= x p sa b p
b p p1
¡¡the first two steps are by definition  the last step is licensed by the parallel worlds model corresponding to the formula in eq. 1. the theorem shows that  as in this example  nonidentifiability arises because formulas of the form p1a  ¡Ä pa appear whenever the recanting witness criterion holds.
theorem 1 if g does not satisfy the recanting witness criterion  then the g-specific effect of z on y is p -identifiable in markovian models.
proof: from theorem 1 we have that p yz mg  = p yz mg. since g does not satisfy the recanting witness criterion  by lemma 1 all the edges in emanate from z. from theorem 1 there is a formula ¦Á g   corresponding to p yz mg  that contains only atomic counterfactuals of the form vpai i. since all blocked edges emanate from z  it can be easily observed that for each two atomic counterfactuals in ¦Á g    vpai i vpaj j  i 1= j. this follows  since we only introduce atomic counterfactuals with do z   where we cut edges. now since in markovian models any two different variables are independent if you set all their parents  all the atomic counterfactual in ¦Á g   are independent of each other which makes the expression p -identifiable.	1
¡¡for example  we stated earlier that the g specific effect of fig 1  b  is identifiable  this is true since g does not satisfy the recanting witness criterion. in particular the expression for the path-specific effect is:
p sa mg1b = x p sk b p a ¡Ä kh ¡Ä ba ¡Ä pa ¡Ä ha  
k b p h
	= xp sh a ¡Ä ha  	 1 
h
= xp sh a p ha  
h
as before  the first two steps are by definition  and the last step is licensed by the parallel worlds model corresponding to the formula in eq. 1. but now note that p sh a  p ha   ¡Ê p   therefore the above expression can be computed from experiments.
1 conclusions
our paper presented a sufficient and necessary graphical conditions for the experimental identifiability of path-specific effects  using tools from probability theory  graph theory  and counterfactual logic. we related identifiable path-specific effects to direct and indirect effects by showing that all such effects only block root-emanating edges.
¡¡while it is possible to give a sufficient condition for identifiability of general counterfactual formulas in our language  using induction on formula structure  this does not give a single necessary and sufficient condition for semi-markovian models. the search for such a condition is a good direction for future work.
¡¡another interesting direction is to consider special cases of causal models where path-specific effects can be identified even in the presence of the 'kite' - this is true in linear models  for instance.
¡¡finally  our result assumes causal models with finite domains  and 'small' graphs. an interesting generalization is to consider causal models with 'large' or infinite graphs and infinite domains. such models may require adding first-order features to the language.
1 acknowledgements
the authors would like to thank brian gaeke and paul
twohey for proofreading earlier versions of this paper.
