
this paper presents new results on the complexity of graph-theoretical models that represent probabilities  bayesian networks  and that represent interval and set valued probabilities  credal networks . we define a new class of networks with bounded width  and introduce a new decision problem for bayesian networks  the maximin a posteriori. we present new links between the bayesian and credal networks  and present new results both for bayesian networks  most probable explanation with observations  maximin a posteriori  and for credal networks  bounds on probabilities a posteriori  most probable explanation with and without observations  maximum a posteriori .
1 introduction
this paper builds a picture of inferential complexity in graphtheoretical models of uncertainty that goes significantly beyond existing results. we focus on bayesian and credal networks - the former is a purely probabilistic model  while the latter admits interval and set valued probabilities and generalizes several theories of uncertainty. there already is quite a solid understanding about the inferential complexity of bayesian networks; we add to this picture a new class of networks that strengthens existing results  and a new type of problem  maximin a posteriori  mmap   that can be of interest in game-theoretic settings. our main contributions are related to credal networks  as little is known at this point concerning their inferential complexity: we present new results concerning computation of probability bounds  most probable explanations  mpe  and maximum a posteriori  map . we show that  rather surprisingly  the mpe problem without observations in credal networks of bounded width is polynomial  while the mpe problem with observations and the map problem are ¦²p1-complete for credal networks.
¡¡we also strengthen the connection between bayesian and credal networks by showing links between the computation of probability bounds  the map and the mmap problems. our results suggest that moving from point to interval/set valued probabilities takes us  one step up  in terms of complexity classes.
¡¡section 1 presents a few definitions and  most importantly  tries to justify our interest in credal networks. section 1 describes the problems we are interested in. section 1 contains our new results; in particular  table 1 offers a summary of our contributions. section 1 concludes the paper and suggests future research.
1 bayesian and credal networks
a bayesian network  or bn  represents a single joint probability density over a collection of random variables. we assume throughout that variables are categorical; variables are uppercase and their assignments are lowercase. definition a bayesian network is a pair  g p   where: g =
 vg eg  is a directed acyclic graph  with vg a collection of vertices associated to random variables x  a node per variable   and eg a collection of arcs; p is a collection of conditional probability densities p xi|pa xi   where pa xi  denotes the parents of xi in the graph  pa xi  may be empty   respecting the relations of eg.
in a bn every variable is independent of its nondescendants nonparents given its parents  markov condition . this structure induces a joint probability density by the expression p x1 ... xn  = qi p xi|pa xi  . given a bn  e denotes the set of observed variables in the network  the evidence ; e denotes the observed value of e.
¡¡we consider the class of networks with bounded induced-width  or biw ; that is  networks where the subjacent graph  obtained removing arc's directions  of g has maximum degree and induced-width bounded by log f s  . we define f s  as a polynomial function in the size s of input  this size is evaluated over all information needed to specify the problem . we also consider the class of polytrees  or pt ; that is  a biw network where the subjacent graph of g has no cycles. otherwise  a network is said multiply-connected. note that our definition of biw networks is not  as usually done  based on fixed inducedwidth; rather  we allow the induced-width to vary with the network size.
¡¡credal networks generalize bayesian networks by allowing each variable to be associated with sets of joint probability measures rather than single probability measures  cano et al.  1; cozman  1a . such graph-theoretical models can be viewed as bayesian networks with relaxed numerical parameters; they can be used to study robustness of probabilistic models  to investigate the behavior of groups of experts  or to represent incomplete or vague knowledge about probabilities. sets of probability measures are sufficiently powerful to represent belief functions  possibility measures  qualitative probabilities  and probabilistic logic statements  thus offering a general language that can convey many models of interest in artificial intelligence  walley  1 .
a set of probability distributions is called a credal set
 levi  1 . a credal set for x is denoted by k x . a conditional credal set is a set of conditional distributions  obtained applying bayes rule to each distribution in a credal set of joint distributions  walley  1 . given a credal set k x   the lower probability and the upper probability of event a are defined respectively as p a  =

minp x ¡Êk x  p a  and p a  = maxp x ¡Êk x  p a . we assume that  given a credal set  finding a lower/upper probability is a polynomial operation.
definition a credal network is a pair  g k   where: g =
 vg eg  is a directed acyclic graph  with vg a collection of vertices associated to random variables x  a node per variable   and eg a collection of arcs; k is a collection of conditional credal sets k xi|pa xi    respecting the relations implied by eg.
we assume a markov condition in credal networks: every variable is independent of its nondescendants nonparents given its parents. in this paper we adopt the concept of strong independence; that is  the joint credal set represented by a credal network is a set where each vertex factorizes as a bayesian network  cozman  1b . thus we can really view a credal network as a set of bayesian networks  all with identical graphs. credal networks can also be classified as polytree  bounded induced-width or multiply-connected.
1 reasoning
in this section we present decision versions of the inferences we focus in this paper.
definition bn-pr: given a bayesian network  g p   evidence e = e with e   x  a query variable q ¡Ê x   e and its category q  and a rational number r  is p q|e    r 
note the following distinction between mpe problems with or without evidence; the reason for this will be indicated later: definition bn-mpe: given a bayesian network  g p   evidence e = e with e   x and a rational number r  is there an instantiation x for x   e such that p x e    r 
definition bn-mpee: given a bayesian network  g p   evidence e = e with e   x and a rational number r  is there an instantiation x for x   e such that p x|e    r 
definition bn-map: given a bayesian network  g p   evidence e = e with e   x  a set q   x   e and a rational number r  is there an instantiation q for q such that p q|e    r 
we introduce the maximin a posteriori problem  which may be of interest in applications involving game-theoretic behavior with maximizers and minimizers  kakade et al.  1 :
definition bn-mmap: given a bayesian network  g p   some evidence e = e with e   x  the sets a   x   e and b   x   e  with a ¡É b =   and a rational number r  is there an instantiation a for the a variables such that minb p a b|e    r 
the corresponding problems in cn are now defined.
definition cn-pr: given a credal network  g k   evidence e = e with e   x  a query variable q ¡Ê x   e and its category q and a rational number r  is p q|e    r 
in this definition we use upper queries  but lower queries may be of interest too. we can show that both queries lead to identical complexity results:
lemma 1 evaluating marginal lower probabilities in cn is as hard as evaluating marginal upper probabilities.
proof suppose we have a cn-pr with marginal query q = q. the calculation of can be done by inserting a binary child q1 to q  where p q1|q  = 1 if q 1= q and 1 otherwise.
now. ¡è
we now define maximin versions of mpe and map in credal networks  we could alternatively define maximax versions for these problems  with possibly different complexities .
definition cn-map: given a credal network  g k   some evidence e = e with e   x  a set q   x   e and a rational number r  is there an instantiation q for the q variables such that 
cn-mpee is obtained when cn-map has q = x   e. cn-mpe is cn-mpee without evidence  that is  q = x. we use abbreviations to refer to these problems  e.g. pt-cn-pr is the belief updating problem in a polytree credal network .
1 complexity results
table 1 summarizes relevant complexity results.1 we start by explaining the origin of the results in this table  numbering matches the numbers in the table :
1.  dechter  1  describes algorithms with exponential time complexity on the induced-width of an elimination order;  eyal  1  shows how to obtain a constantfactor approximation to optimal order in polynomial time for networks with bounded degree and bounded induced-width by log f s  . note that the result here is sightly different from the one in  dechter  1 ; we refer to the actual induced width of the graph  not the induced width of an ordering.
1.  roth  1  shows complexity of functional version   litmman et al.  1  takes the decision version.
1.  shimony  1  shows  by reduction from the vertex cover problem  that bn-mpe is np-complete  while theorem 1 shows that bn-mpee is pp-complete.
problempolytreebounded induced-widthmultiply-connectedbn-prpolynomial  1 polynomial  1 pp-complete  1 bn-mpepolynomial  1 polynomial  1 np-complete  1 bn-mpeepolynomial  1 polynomial  1 pp-complete  1 bn-mapnp-complete  1 np-complete  1 nppp-complete  1 bn-mmap¦²p1-complete  1 ¦²p1-complete  1 nppp-hard  1 cn-prnp-complete  1 np-complete  1 nppp-complete  1 cn-mpepolynomial  1 polynomial  1 np-complete  1 cn-mpee¦²p1-complete  1 ¦²p1-complete  1 ¦²p1-hard and pp-hard  1 cn-map¦²p1-complete  1 ¦²p1-complete  1 nppp-hard  1 table 1: complexity results; numbers in parenthesis indicate the item that discusses the result.1.  park  1  reduces maxsat problem to bn-map in polytrees  a result that can be extended to biw networks as both problems belong to np  given the polynomial nature of bn-pr in biw networks .
1.  park	and	darwiche 	1 	by	reduction	from e-majsat.
1. theorem 1.
1. the complexity of bn-map implies it.
1. theorem 1.
1.  cozman et al.  1  by a reduction from e-majsat.
1. theorem 1. 1. theorem 1.
1. theorem 1.
1. bn-mpe and pt-cn-mpee ensure it.
¡¡in the context of bayesian networks  the difference between mpe and mpee may seem academic  because any most probable explanation can be found with bn-mpe. however the same is not true for credal networks  where one cannot find a most probable explanation with evidence by simply running a version of mpe - and note that cn-mpe and cn-mpee do display non-trivial differences. in fact  these differences were our motivation for differentiating mpe from mpee. the following theorem clarifies the difference between these problems for bayesian networks.
theorem 1 bn-mpee is pp-complete.
proof pertinence is obtained from the fact that  after making a pp query to find p e   this query is made once   we can decide whether a given instantiation x has p x|e    r in linear time  by multiplying the probabilities. to show hardness  we reduce the decision problem #1sat ¡Ý 1n/1  to it  which is pp-complete  bailey et al.  1  and can be stated as: given a set of boolean variables x = {x1 ... xn} and a 1cnf formula ¦Õ x  with clauses {c1 ... cm}  is ¦Õ x  satisfied by at least 1n/1 of the instantiations of x 
¡¡we construct a bn with binary nodes x1 ... xn  xi and xi are the categories  and c1 ... cm  ci and ci   where xi has no parents and uniform prior and ci has three parents  the variables contained in the clause  with probabilities respecting the truth table for the clause. furthermore  we insert a dummy binary node y appearing non-negated in every clause  there will be 1n instantiations with {y = y} satisfying ¦Õ; this ensures that the formula is satisfiable . now we solve the bn-mpee problem with queries x1 ... xn y and evidence ci = ci for all 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü m  indicating that all ci are true . then p x y |c1 ... cm  is equal to

satisfies ¦Õ and 1 otherwise 
where #sats is the total number of satisfying instantiations.
so   implies that formula ¦Õ x  is satisfied by at least 1n/1 of all x instantiations.
note that if   then p x y |c1 ... cm  = ¦Á for all satisfying instantiations  which implies that there are less than 1n/1 instantiations of x satisfying ¦Õ x . ¡è
¡¡the hardness of pt-cn-pr was stated by  da rocha and cozman  1   but the proof there was flawed  and the central argument used zero probabilities and vertex-based description in an essential way. the following proof corrects these difficulties.
theorem 1 pt-cn-pr and biw-cn-pr are	np-
complete.
proof pertinence of biw-cn-pr  which ensures pertinence of pt-cn-pr  is immediate  as choosing a vertex of each credal set we have a biw-bn-pr problem to solve  which is polynomial. to show hardness we reduce the max-1-sat problem to pt-cn-pr. it can be formulated as follows: given a set of boolean variables {x1 ... xn}  a 1cnf formula with clauses {c1 ... cm} and an integer 1 ¡Ü k ¡Ü m  is there an assignment for the variables that satisfies at least k clauses  initially we remove all clauses that have both xi and xi and decrement k for each elimination  because those clauses are already satisfied . for each variable xi we construct two nodes  namely xi and si. the former is binary  has no parents and represents the state of xi; the probabilities
p xi = xi  and p xi = xi  are in ¦Å  is a small constant . the latter may assume m + 1 categories

figure 1: polytree used in the network of theorem 1.
 from 1 to m   has si 1 and xi as parents and is defined by
p si = c|si 1 = c xi 	=	1 if xi ¡Ê cc  or 1 otherwise
p si = c|si 1 = c xi 	=	1 if xi ¡Ê cc  or 1 otherwise
p si = c|si 1= c xi  = 1 for xi ¡Ê {xi xi}  for c 1= 1. when si = 1  we have:

the rules above guarantee coherency in probabilities; note that we include a dummy node s1 with for all c. now  consider p sn = c  for c 1= 1. note that p sn = c  = p s1 = c qi p si = c|si 1 = c  because  for c 1= 1  every time {si = c} and {si 1= c} appear together we are led to zero. let ac i be defined as follows:
.
we get. note that ac i may assume three values: ac i = 1 if xi does not influence
cc; ac i = ¦Å if xi satisfies cc and ac i = 1   ¦Å if xi does satisfy cc. we may conclude that if p sn = c  ¡Ü ¦Á =  1    1¦Å  then some xi satisfied cc. furthermore  we know that if cc was not satisfied  then p sn = c  = ¦Â =  1   ¦Å 1. note that ¦Á   ¦Â. to find out how many clauses were not satisfied  we have to sum over all categories of sn  obtaining p sn = 1  = 1   pc¡Ê{1 ... m} p sn = c  and thus p sn = 1  minimizes this sum. we define

¡¡¡¡rh =   m + 1  1   p sn = 1     h¦Â / m   h . and then calculate r1 r1 ... until rh ¡Ü ¦Á or h = m   1. we know that 1   p sn = 1  is the minimum sum of all p sn = c   for c 1= 1. this sum is composed by two types of terms: those which are equal to ¦Â and those which are less than or equal to ¦Á. so what we are verifying with rh is whether there are more than h terms of the sum that are equal to ¦Â or not. the last thing should be noted is that ensures that if just one term of the sum equals to ¦Â  then the sum is greater than m¦Á  that is  if the sum is composed by m   1 terms equal to ¦Å1 and just one equal to ¦Â  it must sum greater than m¦Á  because one clause was not satisfied.
 ensures that everywhere it is necessary  for any h .
thus the inference p sn = 1  solves max-1-sat problem. if rh   ¦Á for all 1 ¡Ü h ¡Ü m 1  then no clause was satisfied.
otherwise h counts how many clauses were not satisfied. ¡è
¡¡because of the reduction from max-1-sat  we can state that there is no polynomial time approximation scheme for pt-cn-pr  or biw-cn-pr  unless p=np.
remark the proof still holds if we substitute all ¦Å by zero; the proof becomes simpler but depends on events of zero probability  which may be inconvenient  as pointed out by  zaffalon  1 . note also that the proof can be rewritten using inequalities instead of vertices  because all credal sets are in binary nodes  pertinence and hardness still hold .
it is known that cn-pr is solvable by bn-map  by conducting a ccm transform in a credal network  cozman  1a . the following lemma presents the reverse connection between inferences in bayesian and credal networks.
lemma 1 bn-map is solvable by cn-pr with joint queries without changing the topology of the network among the three types defined.
proof suppose x1 ... xn are the map variables. add a binary child xi1 to each xi with p xi1|xi  ¡Ê  1  and the constraint pxi p x1i|xi  = 1. now we have

¡¡after evaluating  we just have to look at each xi1 node and set xi according to which of the p x1i|xi  is equal to one  exactly one will be . ¡è
it should be noted that joint queries are not more difficult than single marginal queries: we have that cn-pr with joint queries is still nppp-complete and biw-cn-pr with joint queries is still np-complete.
theorem 1 pt-cn-mpe and biw-cn-mpe are solvable in polynomial time.
proof it is enough to realize that the inner min of the biw-cn-mpe query maxx minp¡Êk x  qi p xi|pa xi   factorizes  as the network is locally specified  note that xi's are consistent with the observation e . the optimization becomes maxx qi p xi|pa xi    which is equivalent to
biw-bn-mpe. ¡è theorem 1 cn-mpe is np-complete. proof hardness is immediate  because bn-mpe is npcomplete and can be trivially transformed to a cn-mpe  we just have to use credal networks composed by single probability densities . pertinence is reached because  given an assignment x to the variables  the value of p x  is given pa xi  . this holds because each credal set k xi|pa xi   is locally specified. ¡è
theorem 1 pt-cn-mpee  biw-cn-mpee  pt-cn-map and biw-cn-map are all ¦²p1-complete.
proof pertinence of them is immediate as biw-cn-map belongs to ¦²p1  given the map variables  we get a biw-cn-pr to solve . to see hardness we reduce to pt-cn-mpee a version of qsat1 that is ¦²p1-complete: given a set of variables
x1 ... xn  an integer 1   k ¡Ü n and a boolean 1cnf formula ¦Õ x  over these variables  is it true that  for all instantiations to the first k variables  there is an instantiation of the remaining n   k that satisfies ¦Õ x  
¡¡initially we construct a network similar to that of theorem 1. the variables x1 ... xk are defined the same way as there. the variables xk+1 ... xn become ternary  assuming the categories xi xi oi.	their probabilities are:
p xi = oi  = ¦Å and p xi = xi   p xi = xi  belong to  1   ¦Å   where  a small constant. the probabilities of si given its parents are the same as there  except when i   k. in these cases we have p si = c|si 1 = c oi  = 1  for c 1= 1  the case when c = 1 remains the same  that is  equals to 1 .
¡¡furthermore  we add a dummy node q with sn as parent and p q|sn = c  = 1 for c 1= 1 and 1 otherwise. we will solve the pt-cn-mpee problem   where s = {s1 ... sn} and x = {x1 ... xn}. let x  be
{x1 ... xk} and x+ be {xk+1 ... xn}; then
p x  x+ s|q¡é =	p q|s p s|x p x  p x+ .
p q 
¡¡first note that the given q forces sn = 1 to get a nonzero probability. furthermore  for all instantiations x  x+ s of the variables  there is another instantiation with s1 = { isi = 1} that has its probability greater than the former 
. this holds be-
cause the si nodes are not credal and the conditional probabilities p si = 1|si 1 = 1  are equal to 1  for all i. thus we know that the solution of the mpee problem will be attained in an instantiation where all si are set to 1. besides that  we have that choosing the category oi for all x+ variables lead us to greater probabilities than if we choose any other. that is 
	max	p x  x+ s|q¡é = max  p x  o s|q¡é 
	x  x+ s	x
where o denotes {xi = oi for i ¡Ê {k + 1 ... n}} and s denotes { i si = 1}. if we choose a category different from oi whenever possible  the maximum probability would not reach the same value  in fact it will be zero  because p xi 1= oi  ¡Ê  1 ¦Å   and thus it may assume value zero .
.
when finding p x  o s|q   the numerator p x   will become ¦Åk  because any solution that does not make p x   = ¦Åk will not be a minimum for p x  o s|q   remember that
 this holds because just one x  variable using the extreme point  1   ¦Å  instead of ¦Å is enough to make  too large:

where r and r1 are any possible values for the sum pc=1 p sn = c  that appears in the denominator  note that these sums are restricted in  by the probabilities of the network .
¡¡summarizing  all s variables in the solution of mpee are set to zero  all x+ variables are set to o  and the instantiation chosen for x  makes p x   = ¦Åk  which implies that if xi belongs to the instantiation of x   then p xi  = ¦Å and p xi  = 1   ¦Å  the opposite case is analogous . this means that the vertices of the credal sets of the x  nodes are completely fixed by the instantiation chosen. thus the only credal sets that can float in the denominator are the x+ variables  si variables are not credal and x  are already fixed as indicated . so  processing the mpee we have
 
where minpc1 p sn = c  is evaluated over all possible vertices of the x+ credal sets  we know that p xi = oi  is set to ¦Å  but the probabilities p xi = xi  and p xi = xi  may vary between 1 and 1   ¦Å .
¡¡the formula ¦Õ x  will be satisfied by x  and x+ if the sum pc1 p sn = c  is less than
¦Å n k  this is the maximum value that a satisfied ¦Õ x  may assume . all unsatisfied formulas lead to greater values. in fact the smallest value that a unsatisfied formula implies in the sum is greater than . note that ¦Ä1   ¦Ä1.
¡¡if we query the pt-cn-mpee problem with and get a negative answer  then for all instantiations to x   there is an instantiation to x+ that satisfy ¦Õ x   that is  the sum is bounded by ¦Ä1 . if the answer is positive  then there does exist an instantiation to x  where no instantiation to x+ can make ¦Õ x  satisfied. ¡è theorem 1 pt-bn-mmap and biw-bn-mmap are ¦²p1-
complete.
proof pertinence of biw-bn-mmap  which ensures pertinence of pt-bn-mmap  is trivial. given a instantiation for the map variables  we need to solve a minimization over the y variables  which is np-complete  see it as a biw-cn-pr using lemma 1 . hardness of pt-bn-mmap  which ensures hardness of biw-bn-mmap  is reached by a reduction from another version of qsat1 that is ¦²p1-complete: given a set of variables x1 ... xn  an integer 1   k ¡Ü n and a boolean 1dnf formula ¦Õ x  over these variables  is there an instantiation to the first k variables such that  for all instantiations of the remaining n   k  ¦Õ x  is satisfied 
¡¡we construct again a network following the ideas of theorem 1. it includes a binary node to each xi  without parents and with uniform prior. there are n nodes si with parents si 1 and xi. they have m + 1 categories and are defined as follows  for c ¡Ê {1 ... m} and i ¡Ê {1 ... n} :
	   1	if xi ¡Ê clause c
	p si = c|si 1 = c xi 	=	1	if xi ¡Ê clause c
	otherwise
the conditional probabilities of si given xi are defined analogously. the probabilities of p si = 1|si 1 xi  ensure that they sum exactly 1  as done in theorem 1. furthermore  p s1  has uniform prior and we insert an additional binary node q with sn as parent  having p q|sn = c  = 1 if c 1= 1 and 1 otherwise.
so  we have that is equal to

where ac i = pxi p si = c|si 1 = c xi p xi  for i ¡Ê {1 ... n}. ac i assumes value zero only when the variable it represents denies the clause c. the numerator of p x|q  sums how many clauses are satisfied by the instantiation of x variables. let x  = {x1 ... xk} and x+ =
{xk+1 ... xn}. we have minx+ p x  x+|q  = 1 if  given the instantiation for the x  variables  there is an assignment to x+ variables that can deny ¦Õ x . this way  questioning if pt-bn-mmap problem with map variables x  and evidence q  which maximizes minx+ p x|q   has non-zero answer is enough to solve the qsat1 problem. given this x  instantiation  all x+ will satisfy ¦Õ x . ¡è
1 conclusion
we can summarize the contributions of this paper as follows. concerning bayesian networks  we have first introduced a more general definition of bounded induced-width networks  demonstrating that many problems where inducedwidth actually grows with the network remain polynomial   and we have shown the difference between the bn-mpe and the bn-mpee problems. more importantly  we have introduced the mmap problem and presented its complexity. a possible improvement of our results would be to present a completeness result for multiply-connected networks.
¡¡our most significant results pertain to credal networks  with direct implications to models that handle interval and set probabilities  belief functions  possibility measures  qualitative probabilities  and families of probabilistic logic. we have clarified the so far unexplored complexity of cn-mpe  cn-mpee  and cn-map. the polynomial character of cn-mpe in some cases is rather surprising.
¡¡there are several interesting problems still to be explored. for example  binary networks  bayesian and credal  could display lower complexity than their non-binary counterparts in problems such as pt-bn-map  biw-bn-map and biw-cn-pr. these problems belong to np and are clearly related  but are there polynomial time algorithms to solve them  we conjecture there are not  even as we note that there is a polynomial algorithm to solve cn-pr in binary polytrees  fagiuoli and zaffalon  1 .
acknowledgments
we thank aritanan gruber for indicating relevant complexity results  carlos guestrin for pointing out a flaw in  da rocha and cozman  1   thomas lukasiewicz for initial thoughts on the complexity of credal networks  and a reviewer for suggesting a short proof for theorem 1. this research received support from hp brazil r&d; the second author was partially supported by cnpq  brazil. 