
we present a data structure and an algorithm for real-time path planning of a humanoid robot. due to the many degrees of freedom  the robots shape and available actions are approximated for finding solutions efficiently. the resulting 1 dimensional configuration space is searched by the a* algorithm finding solutions in tenths of a second on lowperformance  embedded hardware. experimental results demonstrate our solution for a robot in a world containing obstacles with different heights  stairs and a higher-level platform.
1 introduction
path-planning is one of the fundamental problems in mobile robot navigation. it has been shown long before that the problem of moving an object through space is pspace-hard with a time complexity exponential in the degrees of freedom of the object  latombe  1 . in mobile robots the degrees of freedom are usually small  three or less  which opens the application of a range of search techniques specifically tailored to the problem. if one can neglect orientation  e.g. a cylindrical holonomic system  the resulting 1 dimensional configuration space can be searched efficiently by a*  d*  stentz  1   or dynamic programming  buhmann et al.  1 .
　humanoid robots while being mobile allow for more than the usual three degrees of freedom. their feet can be placed with a greater choice and the change of body posture allows to overcome obstacles where wheeled robots fail in passing through. this enables humanoids to step onto objects  kuffner et al.  1   climb up and down stairs  hirai et al.  1; gutmann et al.  1   step over obstacles  guan et al.  1   or crawl underneath objects  shiller et al.  1; kanehiro et al.  1 .
　the higher degrees of freedom can be tackled e.g. by probabilistic roadmaps  kavraki et al.  1 . however  if one can employ a non-probabilistic approach by finding a suitable approximationthen the solution can be seen preferabledue to its deterministic nature. one possible approximation is to model the robot as a cylinder or by its convex hull which allows for efficient collision checking  okada et al.  1 .
　care should be taken though not to over-simplify the problem. humanoid robots are non-holonomic  i.e. they cannot turn in place without requiring additional space. the trajectory of the body center describes a curve similar to a car-like robot  although the turn radius is generally quite small. it is possible to account for the extra turning space in a cylinder model of the robot enlarged by twice the turn radius  li et al.  1; sabe et al.  1 . however such an approximation is overly pessimistic and prevents the robot from passing through narrow space as we will show.
　discretizing the possible actions of the robot into a small set of well-chosen actions  e.g. different foot placements  leads to another way for finding solutions efficiently. the induced search graph grows exponentially with the number of steps and thus  only a small number of foot steps can be explored in a real-time system  lorch et al.  1 . such a foot-step planning system is nevertheless a valuable tool in a hybrid system where a higher level planner provides waypoints for this sub-system  chestnutt and kuffner  1 .
　shiller et al.  discretize the actions and orientations of a digital figure that can walk forward  sideways  turn and crawl. they maintain an obstacle space for each combination of action and orientation and find solutions efficiently for trajectories of several ten steps.
　we compute a trajectory for the body-centerof a humanoid robot by approximating the shape of the robot using multiple cylinders and discretizing configurations into a set of orientations. when following this trajectory  the next few foot steps are computed using an analytical method. this enables a humanoid robot to find paths of up to a few meters in real-time and includes actions such as sideways walking through narrow space and climbing up and down stairs.
　our work differs from shiller's in that we do not plan behaviors but select the behavior depending on the environment when following a found path  e.g. stair-climbing over a sill. we also maintain only one obstacle space and show how to perform collision checking efficiently. last but not least  our system is demonstrated on a real robot where stereo range data incrementally updates a representation of the world.
　our approximations of configuration space and actions are presented in the next section. section 1 briefly describes our approach for generating a navigation map for collision checking. section 1 details our application of the a* algorithm for path searching. experimental results on sony's humanoid robot qrio are described in section 1. finally  we discuss limitations and extensions of our approach in section 1.
1 configuration space and actions
the robot moves in a 1 dimensional world. obstacles  different floor levels and stairs are projected onto one plane. we do not neglect the orientation of the non-holonomic robot  thus the configurations space c is 1 dimensional. for allowing efficient search we discretize c into a regular grid of evenly spaced cells using 1 different orientations:
	c	=	x 〜 y 〜 Φ
	x y	=	{i ， cs | 1 ＋ i   n}	 1 
	Φ	=	{i 1 ＋ i   1}
where cs defines the cell size and	the number of cells.
　we restrict the movement of the robot's body center to the following six actions a = { forward . for eachbackward action theturn-left transiturn-right  side-left  side-right} 1  and 1  in figure 1. for tion in c is given for orientations other orientations the transitions are analogous.
　when concatenating turn-left  or turn-right  actions  the resulting trajectory describes a curve  see figure 1 a . the turn actions thus model the non-holonomicconstraint of a humanoid where changing the orientation requires extra space for turning. if we approximate this curve with an arc of a circle  we find that the cell size cs coincides with the turn radius of the robot and therefore cs should be chosen as such.
　the shape of the robot is approximated by two cylinders sharing the same axis as shown in figure 1 b . cylinders allow for fast collision checking and the smaller cylinder for the legs enables the robot to pass close to low obstacles where upper body and arms are above the obstacle.
　the cylinders are a tight fit to the shape of the robot standing still. when the robot moves  however  additional space is needed for the transition in c as body and legs are swinging while walking. figure 1 shows snapshots of the robot when moving forward  turning left and stepping sideways. we account for the additional space by enlargingthe cylindersat the start and end configurations depending on the action. both  upper and lower  cylinders are enlarged by the same amount. only when walking sideways  no additional space is needed. as we will see in section 1 this enables the robot to pass through narrow space by choosing the sideways walk.
　it is worth noting that the humanoid robot does not necessarily need to be able to exactly perform the 1 actions defined in this section. for example  the robot could well use several foot steps for performing the 1  rotation in our turn actions. the only requirement is that the enlarged cylinders cover all the space the robot requires for completing the 1  turn.

forward backward turn-left turn-right side-left side-right figure 1: change in configuration for our 1 actions.

	 a 	 b 
figure 1:  a  turn aroundby concatenating1 turn-leftactions.  b  multi-cylinder model for approximating robot shape.
　one might think of our approach to be specifically tailored to humanoids as the proposed actions and the cell size matching the turn radius are probably only found for this kind of robot. while this seems to be true  the contribution of this work is to demonstrate the abilities of such a system in a complex real-world environment. we will discuss the limitations and possible extensions of our approach in section 1.
1 navigation map and collision checking
collision checking is one of the crucial factors in path planning. cylinder models of robots allow to perform this check in constant time if the distance to the nearest obstacle is known; the distance is simply compared to the radius of the cylinder. our two cylinder model allows to check for collision in the same amount of time.
for efficient collision checking we make the following as-
sumptions about the world the robot is navigating in:
1. the world is partitioned into floor and obstacles.
1. floor is planar and horizontal  else it is an obstacle .
1. there are no multiple floor levels at the same location.
1. the robot is able to distinguish between floor and obstacles and can can estimate their relative position and height using its sensors.
assumption 1 is general  1 rules out inclined surfaces and treats them like obstacles  1 is true for most but a few environments and enables the use of a 1d map for representing

	forward	turn	sideways
figure 1: space required for performing an action. enlarged upper cylinders approximate the additional space needed.
the world. finally  assumption 1 is a practical consideration and can be achieved e.g. by plane extractionfrom range data.1
　under these assumptions  the robot is able to build a floor and obstacle height map fog of its environment. we employ a combination of a 1d occupancy grid with a 1d floor height map where range data from stereo vision is segmented into planes and integrated in a probabilistic way  gutmann et al.  1 . each cell in fog holds a type and a height:
	fog :  x y 	1★	 t h  	 1 
andwith x （rx is the height of the floor or obstacle.y （ y  t （ t = {floor obstacle unknown} 
　from（ this map a navigation grid nav is computed storing h refined floor types and distances to nearest obstacles:
	nav :  x y 	★1	 t1 d 	 1 
where{forfloor stairst =t1floor（i.e.t1}inthe.=navthetdistancefollowing way.“refines the type of{stairs borderto the closestlet}foguand obstaclex y dx y （be rfora=neigh-is tt h1the（  clearance 
borhood around position  x y  and  h  be the maximum absolute difference in floor height to cells in u x y :
　 h  =  x1 y1 （u x y  fogmax x1 y1 = floor h1 |h   h1|.  1  the refined type is then computed as:

where dfloor is the maximumstep height for regular walk and dstairs the corresponding one for climbing up or down stairs.
　the refinement of floor cells allows to treat stairs and borders differently from regular floor. we will make use of stairs in path-planning by assigning a different cost for traversal. borders are treated similar to obstacles and as such prevent the robot from getting close to or over the end of a floor layer. the clearance of a cell is defined in the following way.
for a cell  x y  with fog x y  =  floor h  we compute the difference in height  h x1 y1  to cell  x1 y1  with fog x1 y1  =  t1 h1   refine t1  （ {obstacle border}:
	 h1 x1 y1 	=	h1   h.	 1 
this height difference then decides which cylinder of our two-cylinder model comes into effect for computing the distance d1 x1 y1  to this obstacle  or if it can be ignored:

wherebetweene =thepcells  x1  andx 1 +rl  yr1u andy 1his the euclidean distancel  hu are the radii and heights of the two cylinders as depicted in figure 1  b .

figure 1: example navigation map for a simulated world.
the clearance d floor  of cell  x y  is then defined as the
minimum distance to all obstacles and borders.

the computation of this value can be implemented efficiently by regiongrowing of obstacles and bordersuntil a preset maximum distance is reached.
　note that  1  only applies for cells where nav  x y  =  floor ， . for other types t （ t the clearances are set to:
 1 
with nav x y  =  
order not to collide with an obstacle.， d   the clearancefor unknown terrain wed must be positive in are optimistic in that there could be a floor height well above all obstacles and thus ignore obstacles.
we can define the free configuration space cfree as
 cfree = { x y θ  （ c | nav x y  =  ， d  d   1}.  1  as an example figure 1 a  shows a simulated world fully observed by an ideal sensor. the resulting nav grid is shown in figure 1 b . floor heights are drawn in white  yellow and green  stairs are marked with brown crosses  the border is filled in brown  and obstacles are black. different shades of gray show the clearance of cells where brighter cells indicate a larger clearance than darker ones. note how the taller obstacle in the bottom right grows more to the bottom and right of the map  where the distance to the floor is larger than hl  and less to the higher level floor.
1 path-planning
we have now the basic tools for defining the path-planning problem in our domain. let c c1 （singlec beactionconfigurations.a giventhe transitionin figurec1.=wesuccdefine c asucc  for fora a sequence of （actionsa is a1 ...am in a recursive way as succ c a1 ...am  = succ succ c a1  a1 ...am .  1  in order to test whether action a is applicable in configuration c  we check the type and clearance of c in nav:
app c a  = allow c a …  1  clear c ra  … clear succ c a  ra 
where allow c a  forbids certain actions depending on the type t1 in nav at the position of c  e.g. we do not allow backward and sideways walk in unknown terrain and only allow forward walk on stairs   ra is additional space required for execution of a  see figure 1   and clear c r  = d   r  c =  x y ，  nav x y  =  ， d .  1  we also define app on a sequence of actions a1 ...am
　　　app c a1 ...am  =	 1  app c a1  … app succ c a1  a1 ...am . and call the sequence a path if  1  holds.
　the problem of path-planning for given start and goal configurations cstart cgoal （ cfree is then to find a path π = a1 ...am such that
	cgoal	=	succ cstart π .	 1 
　problems for which a path exists are called solvable. in general there can be more than one solution for a given solvable problem. we are interested in an optimal path  i.e. a path π  that minimizes a cost function g over the path:
	π 	=	argmin g cstart π .	 1 
π
in our system we found the following cost function valuable: g c a1 	=	ga a1  + gt1 c1  + go c1   1  g c a1 ...am 	=	g c a1  + gc a1 a1  +	 1 
　　　　　　　　　g c1 a1 ...am  where c1 = succ c a1   ga is a cost depending on the action  e.g. forward walk has less cost than sideways which takes more time   gt1 a cost dependingon the type t1 in the nav grid
 floor is preferred over stairs and unknown   gc a constant for changes in action  the robot might have to do additional foot steps   and go considers the clearance of c1 in nav in order to prefer safer paths more distant from obstacles:
	go c 	=	g o max dmax   d 1 .	 1 
here dmax is the maximum clearance above which no further improvementin safety is expected  d is defined as in  1   and g o is a predefined constant.
　we employ the well-known a* algorithm for finding solutions. a* maintains a priority queue where candidates are ranked according to an evaluation function f composed of the cost function g and an estimated heuristic h to cgoal: f cstart π  = g cstart π  + h succ cstart π  .  1  for our chosen discretization of c we can employ the following heuristic which is optimistic and a larger cost estimate than the euclidean distance:
 
gnatewhere a is the minimum action cost.differences from x = |x xg| andc =  x y y = ，| y toycggoal| are absolute coordi-=  xg yg ，  and
　from the properties of the a* algorithm and our chosen cost and heuristic functions it follows that a* finds the cost optimal path π  according to  1  if a solution exists.
　an important factor for the efficiency of a* is to detect whether a configuration has already been visited before. by using a regular grid  we can pre-compute the search graph  but not the optimal paths since the environment is unknown  and check for duplicates in constant time. this is an advantage over methods that build the tree at the time of search as checking for duplicates needs further processing e.g. by applying nearest-neighbor methods.
robot specifications and grid dimensions


allowed actions depending on nav typeallow c a  floor unknown stairs border obstacleforward true true true false false turn true true false false false sideways true false false false false backward true false false false falseadditional clearance ra depending on action
aforwardturnsidewaysbackwardra1mm1mm1mmcost of action ga a  depending on orientation
ga a forwardturnsidewaysbackward1 
1 1
〔1.1
1 1 1〔1 1〔1cost of action at1 depending on nav type

　　　floor unknown stairs border obstacle gt1 c 	1.1	±	±
other constants for cost function
     1 a1  g o = 1/dmaxtable 1: parameters used in our implementation
1 results
we implemented our approach on qrio  sony's small humanoid robot with 1 degrees of freedom  fujita et al.  1 . the robot is equipped with 1 mips r1 cpus clocked at 1mhz and a stereo camera system with a 1  field of view providing disparity images at 1 fps. this stereo data is segmented into planes from which our fog and nav grid representations are updated in real-time.
　table 1 lists parameters used in our implementation for all variables introduced in the previous sections. for stairs we restrict actions to forward walk only. thus  the robot only finds paths on straight staircases unless there is a larger floor area where turns are possible. we forbid sideways and backward walk in unknown terrain because the robot is not able to see into its moving direction. we set a high cost for backward motion since it is generally more unsafe. costs are added for walking in unknown terrain and on stairs which focuses the algorithm to search for a path on known floor even if the distance traveled is larger than when moving on other terrain.
　for our experiments we built a 1 meters long and 1 meter wide stage whereseveral obstacles  a 1cm highsill  a staircase with 1 steps each 1cm high  and a higher-level platform were arranged as shown in figure 1.
　we placed qrio at the left end of the stage and let it observe the environment by rotating on the spot. we then commanded the robot to find and follow a path to a position 1 meters ahead  the center of the higher-level platform . our path-planning system continuously evaluates the current nav

figure 1: experimental setup. several obstacles and a sill are placed on a stage. a staircase leads to a higher-levelplatform.

figure 1: path-planning in narrow environment: the robot decides to use sideways walk for passing through the obstacles.

figure 1: path-planning over a sill: the robot finds a straight path over the sill and then moves around the next obstacle.

figure 1: path-planning to the higher platform: first the robot aligns with the staircase and then climbs up in a straight way. grid and sends paths to a path-following system which computes the next two foot steps and feeds them to the robot's motion control system. figures 1 show 1 snapshots of the robot while moving on the stage. we use the same encoding for floor  border  stairs and obstacles as before. the color indicator on the right shows the floor height as estimated by the robot. unknown space is left blank. green dots mark the search space of the a* algorithmwhile the path is shown with blue arrows. brown bars on the path indicate stair transitions.
　in the beginning the system has to find a path leading between two close obstacles  see figure 1 . since space between the obstacles is narrow  forward walk is not possible due to the lack of the required clearance rforward. therefore  the system decides to walk sideways between the obstacles.
　after passing through the narrow passage  the robot plans a path over the sill in the center of the stage  see figure 1 . for overcoming the sill  the system employs a separately developed stair-climbing module  gutmann et al.  1 .
finally  as the robot walks closer to the higher platform  it
finds a path on the staircase to the target location  figure 1 .
　the time required for finding a path on our fixed-size configuration space depends on the environment and the path length. in the examples above the time for planning was always below 1 ms on the robot's embedded cpu. in order to investigate the run-time dependencyon path length we randomly selected goal configurations in the final map after the robot reached its target. if a path to the goal could be found  we recorded the length of the path and the time needed for computation. figure 1 shows the runtime versus path length measured on a pentium iii  1ghz computer. although the curve shows a slope at least quadratic in path length  for our chosen dimensions of c the runtime increases only slowly and does not exceed 1 ms even for longer paths.
　the worst case run-time occurs when the goal is placed at an unreachable location  e.g. a free position completely surrounded by obstacles. in this case all but a few of the 1 = 1 configurations have to be examined. the robot's embedded processor needs close to 1 ms for exploring this search space  1 ms on a pentium iii  1ghz .
1 conclusion
we presented and evaluated a path-planning algorithm that provides collision free trajectories of up to a few meters for a humanoid robot in a layered environment in real time.

path length in cells
figure 1: time for path-planning depending on path length.
　in our approach unknown terrain is treated in an optimistic way  i.e. their clearingis assumed arbitrarylarge. as the robot moves closer to unknown area and observes the situation  the navigation map is refined and a new path is planned automatically. this allows navigation in unknown environments.
　our perception system distinguishes between floor  border  stairs and obstacles and interprets them in a meaningful way for path planning. we believe our approach advances previous methods on simulated worlds  and real robot systems with mainly reactive  short distance navigation capabilities.
　the limitations of our approach are various. our discretization onto a grid is an approximate cell decomposition and as such is only complete up to the resolution of the grid. furthermore  using only 1 orientations can prevent finding paths in certain environments  for example in a narrow corridor oriented at an angle of 1 .
　our approach may be extended to 1m orientations  m   1  by changing cell size and actions such that repeated application of a turn action describes a curve with the minimum turn radius of the robot. other actions might move the robot over more than one cell in order to align with the grid.
　our set of actions and the navigation map do not consider the possibility of stepping over an obstacle. we believe that for such a capability  a foot step planner using precise 1d information is of importance. however  our approach could be combined with such a system by marking obstacles the robot can step over similar to as we mark stairs.
　at current  only straight paths are allowed on stairs. by introducing new actions left-forward and right-forward we can also find paths on spiral staircases at the cost of a higher runtime. in practice  we observed an increase of about 1% in run-time for the worst case scenario described in section 1 when adding these two actions.
　we think it is also possible to extend our approach to find areas where the robot can crawl underneath an obstacle. our current floor and obstacle map and the navigation grid  however  do not support such a detection yet and have to be extended first. we will follow this direction in the future.
acknowledgment
we would like to thank stefan edelkamp  thilo weigel and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. we also thank all developers of the sony qrio robot for making this work possible.
