 
in this paper  we propose a method of automatically extracting word hierarchies based on the inclusion relations of word appearance patterns in corpora. we applied the complementary similarity measure  csm  to determine a hierarchical structure of word meanings. the csm is a similarity measure developed for recognizing degraded machine-printed text. there are csms for both binary and gray-scale images. the csm for binary images has been applied to estimate one-to-many relations  such as superordinate-subordinate relations  and to extract word hierarchies. however  the csm for gray-scale images has not been applied to natural language processing. here  we apply the latter to extract word hierarchies from corpora. to do this  we used frequency information for co-occurring words  which is not considered when using the csm for binary images. we compared our hierarchies with those obtained using the csm for binary images  and evaluated them by measuring their degree of agreement with the edr electronic dictionary.  
1 introduction 
the hierarchical relations of words are useful language resources. progress is being made in lexical database research  notably with hierarchical semantic lexical databases such as wordnet  miller et al.  1  and the edr electronic dictionary   which are used for natural language processing  nlp  research worldwide. these databases are essential for enabling computers  and even humans  to fully understand the meanings of words because the lexicon is the origin of language understanding and generation. in current thesauri with hierarchical relations  words are categorized manually and classified in a top-down manner based on human intuition. this may be a practical way of developing a lexical database for nlp. however  these word hierarchies tend to vary greatly depending on the lexicographer. in fact  each thesaurus includes original hierarchical relations that differ from those in other thesauri. there is often disagreement as to the make-up of a hierarchy. in addition  hierarchical relations based on different data may be needed depending on the user. a statistical method of creating hierarchies from corpora would thus be useful. we therefore attempted to automatically extract hierarchies most suited to the information that a user handles. to do this  we extract hypernym-hyponym relations between two words from corpora and then build hierarchies by connecting these relations. as the initial task  we attempted to extract hierarchies of abstract nouns that co-occur with adjectives in japanese.  
　in finding word hierarchies in corpora  it is usual to use patterns  such as  a part of    is a    such as   or  and   obtained from the corpora  hearst  1; berland and charniak  1; caraballo  1 . methods for extracting hypernyms of entry words from definition sentences in dictionaries  tsurumaru et al.  1; shoutsu et al.  1  and methods using collocations retrieved from corpora  nakayama and matsumoto  1  have been described previously. a hybrid method that uses both dictionaries and the dependency relations of words taken from a corpus has also 
been reported  matsumoto et al.  1 . recently  a similarity measure developed for recognizing degraded machine-printed text  hagita and sawaki  1  was used to estimate one-to-many relations  such as that of superordinate-subordinate  from a corpus  yamamoto and umemura  1 . this measure is called the complementary similarity measure  csm  for binary images and indicates the degree of the inclusion relation between two binary vectors. in that study  each binary vector corresponds to certain appearance patterns for each term in a corpus. the csm for binary images has also been applied to extract word hierarchies from corpora  yamamoto et al.  1  and to trace the distribution of abstract nouns on a self-organizing semantic map  kanzaki et al.  1 . 
　in the experiments described in this paper  we attempted to use the csm for gray-scale images  sawaki et al.  1  to extract hypernym-hyponym relations between two words. specifically  we used not only binary vectors with elements of 1 or 1  but also vectors consisting of weights based on the frequencies of co-occurring words in corpora. we compared the hierarchies extracted using the csm for gray-scale images with those extracted using the csm for binary images. finally  to verify the effectiveness of our approach  we evaluated our hierarchies by measuring the degree to which they agreed with the edr electronic dictionary. 
1 experimental data  
a good deal of linguistic research has focused on the syntactic and semantic functions of abstract nouns  nemoto  1; takahashi  1; kanzaki et al.  1 . in the example  
 yagi  goat  wa seishitsu  nature  ga otonashii  gentle   goats have a gentle nature    takahashi  recognized that the abstract noun  seishitsu  nature   is a hypernym of the attribute expressed by the predicative adjective  otonashi  gentle .  to classify adjectives on the basis on these functions  kanzaki et al.  defined such abstract nouns that co-occur with adjectives as hypernyms of these adjectives. they produced linguistic data for their research by automatically extracting the co-occurrence relations between abstract nouns and adjectives from corpora. 
　in our experiment  we used the same corpora and abstract nouns as kanzaki et al.. the corpora consist of 1 novels  1 essays  and 1 years' worth of newspaper articles  including 1 years of the mainichi shinbun  1 years of the 
nihon keizai shinbun  1 years of the sangyoukinyuuryuutsuu shinbun  and 1 years of the yomiuri shinbun. the abstract nouns were selected from 1 years' worth of the mainichi shinbun newspaper articles by kanzaki et al..  
　however  we produced our experimental data using only the sentences in the corpora that could be parsed using knp  which is a japanese parser developed at kyoto university. the parsed data consisted of 1 abstract nouns and 1 adjectives and included the following examples  the number after each adjective is the frequency which the abstract noun co-occurs with the adjective : 
omoi  feeling : ureshii  glad  1  kanashii  sad  1  shiawasena  happy  1  ... 
kimochi  thought : ureshii  glad  1  tanoshii  pleasant  1  hokorashii  proud  1  ... 
kanten  viewpoint : igakutekina  medical  1  rekishitekina  historical  1  ... 
1 complementary similarity measure 
as mentioned above  we used the complementary similarity measure  csm  to estimate the hierarchical relations between word pairs. the csm was developed for recognizing degraded machine-printed text  hagita and sawaki  1; sawaki et al.  1 . there are two kinds of csms  one for binary images and one for gray-scale images.  
1 complementary similarity measure for binary images  
the csm for binary images was developed as a character recognition measure for binary images and is designed to be robust against heavy noise or graphical design  hagita and sawaki  1 . it was applied to estimate one-to-many relationships between words by yamamoto and umemura . they estimated these relations from the inclusion relations between the appearance patterns of two words. an appearance pattern is expressed as an n-dimensional binary feature vector. let f =  f1  f1  ...  fi  ...  fn   where fi = 1 or 1  and let t =  t1  t1   ...  ti  ...  tn   where ti = 1 or 1  be the feature vectors of the appearance patterns for two words. the csm of f to t is then defined as follows: 
ad  bc
csm f t      =
 a +c b   + d 
　　　　n	n a = i=1 fi  ti 	b = ‘i=1 fi   1 ti   	. 
	n	n
c = 1  fi   ti 	d = ‘  1  fi    1 	 ti    i=1	i=1 n = a +b +c + d
　in our experiment  each  word  is an abstract noun  and n is the number of adjective types in the corpus  1 . therefore  a indicates the number of adjective types co-occurring with both abstract nouns and b indicates the number of adjective types co-occurring only with the abstract noun corresponding to f. in contrast  c indicates the number of adjective types co-occurring only with the abstract noun corresponding to t and d indicates the number of adjective types that do not co-occur with either abstract noun. 
1 complementary similarity measure for gray-scale images 
the csm for gray-scale images is an extension of the csm for binary images. although the csm for binary images is robust against graphical design  it is strongly affected by binarization or scanning conditions  sawaki et al.  1 .  
　the csm for binary images is a special case of the four-fold point correlation coefficient. therefore  sawaki et al.  defined the csm for gray-scale images as a general form of the four-fold point correlation coefficient. because it handles gray-scale images directly  this csm is less affected by binarization or scanning conditions. 
　let fg =  fg1  fg1  ...  fgi  ...  fgn   where fgi = 1 through 1  and let tg =  tg1  tg1   ...  tgi  ...  tgn   where tgi = 1 through 1  be the feature vectors of two gray-scale patterns. then  the csmg of fg to tg is defined as follows: 
　　　　　　　a dg g  b cg g csm g  f tg   g   ntg1  tg
n
ag	fgi tgi 	bg = ‘ fgi   1 tgi    i=1	. 
n
cg =	 1  fgi   tgi 	dg = 1  fgi    1 	 tgi    i=1
tg	t	t	tgi1
　in our experiment  fgi and tgi are the weights based on the frequency at which an abstract noun co-occurred with an i-th type of adjective. in this paper  we used the following weighting function  where freq noun  adj  is the frequency at which the abstract noun co-occurs with the adjective:  
freq noun  adj 
	weight noun  adj  = 	  . 
freq noun  adj  + 1
　we paid particular attention to situations in which the noun co-occurred with the adjective. if the noun does not co-occur with the adjective  that is  freq noun  adj  is 1  the weight is 1. if freq noun  adj  is 1  it is 1. if freq noun  adj  was more than 1  the weight increased gradually until it approaches 1. this is because information on whether or not the noun co-occurs with the adjective is more important than information on how many times the noun co-occurs with the adjective. 
1 hierarchy extraction process 
word hierarchies were extracted as follows  where  th  is a threshold value for each word pair under consideration; 
1. compute the similarity between appearance patterns for each pair of words. the hierarchical relation between the two words in a pair is determined by the similarity value. the pair is expressed as  x  y   where x is a hypernym of y and y is a hyponym of x. 
1. sort the pairs by their normalized values and eliminate pairs with values below th.  
1. for each abstract noun c:  
i choose the hypernym-hyponym pair  c  d  with the highest value. this pair  c  d  is placed in the initial hierarchy.  
ii choose a pair  d  e  such that the hyponym e is not contained in the current hierarchy and  d  e  has the highest value among the pairs where word d  at the bottom of the current hierarchy  is a hypernym.  
connect the hyponym e to d at the bottom of the current hierarchy.  
iii choose another pair  e  f  according to the previous step  and repeat the process until no more such pairs can be chosen. 
iv choose a pair  b  c  such that the hypernym b is not contained in the current hierarchy and  b  c  has the highest value among the pairs where the top word c of the current hierarchy is a hyponym. 
connect the hypernym b in front of c at the top of the current hierarchy. 
v choose another pair  a  b  according to the previous step  and repeat the process until no more such pairs can be chosen. 
1. if a short hierarchy is included in a longer hierarchy and the order of the words stays the same  the short one is dropped from the list of hierarchies. 
1 parameters 
the conditions of our experiments were set as follows:  
  csm for binary images: th = 1;   csm for gray-scale images: th = 1. 
if we set th to a low value  it is possible to obtain long hierarchies. when the th is too low  however  the number of word pairs that have to be considered becomes overwhelming and the reliability of the measurement decreases. we experimentally set th as shown above so as to obtain  koto  matter   as the top word of all hierarchies. because  koto  co-occurred with the most number of adjectives  we predicted that  koto  would be at the top of the hierarchies.  
1 comparison and evaluation 
1 overlap between extracted hierarchies  
first  we compared the hierarchies obtained using the csm for binary images  csmb  and the csm for gray-scale images  csmg . table 1 lists the number of extracted hierarchies. the csmb extracted 1 hierarchies  while the csmg extracted 1. there were only 1 common hierarchies with most of them having depths ranging from 1 to 1. one of the common hierarchies is shown below. 
koto  matter  ---  
jyoutai  state  ---  
kankei  relation  ---  tsunagari  relationship  ---  
en  ties/bonds . 
the number of hierarchies obtained by the csmg that included one or more hierarchies obtained by the csmb was higher than the number obtained by the csmb that included one or more obtained by the csmg  i.e.   d     e . this suggests that the csmg might be able to extract longer hierarchies than the csmb can. 
type of hierarchy number a hierarchies obtained by csmb 1 b hierarchies obtained by csmg 1 c common hierarchies 1 d inclusion of csmg hierarchies  in csmb hierarchies 1 e inclusion of csmb hierarchies  in csmg hierarchies 1table 1: number of extracted hierarchies 
　the csmg hierarchies shown below include one or more csmb hierarchies. the underlined nouns are those that appear in one of the csmb hierarchies. 
koto  matter  ---  
tokoro  point  ---  
imeeji  image  ---  
inshou  impression  ---  
gaiken  appearance  ---  monogoshi  manner  --- kihin  elegance  --- 
hinkaku  grace  --- 
kettou  pedigree  --- 
kakei  family line  
koto  matter  ---  
tokoro  point  ---  
shigusa  behavior  ---  omokage  visage  ---  
kawaisa  loveliness  
　in fact  the depths of the csmb hierarchies ranged from 1 to 1  while the depths of the csmg hierarchies ranged from 1 to 1. we also found that the csmg extracted more deep hierarchies than the csmb but fewer shallow hierarchies. overall  these results show that the csmg extracted deeper hierarchies than did the csmb  though the number of extracted hierarchies was smaller  see figure 1 .  

figure 1: distribution of hierarchies by depth 
1 agreement with the concept hierarchies in the edr electronic dictionary  
next  we compared each of the hierarchies obtained by the csmb and the csmg with the concept hierarchies for adjectives in the edr electronic dictionary.  
　in this paper  we extracted the hierarchies from corpora consisting mostly of newspaper articles. because the newspaper articles cover a wide range of topics  the information we obtain from our corpora is general knowledge. therefore  it is reasonable to compare our hierarchy of abstract nouns with existing general purpose hierarchies such as the edr hierarchy. 
　the number of hierarchies for adjectives obtained from the edr dictionary is 1  and the maximum depth is 1  whereas our hierarchies had maximum depths of 1 and 1  as noted above  figure 1 . because both the edr and our two types of hierarchies had similar maximum depths  it was appropriate to evaluate our hierarchies by comparing them with those of the edr dictionary.  
hierarchy in the edr electronic dictionary 
the edr electronic dictionary   which was developed for advanced processing of natural language by computers  is composed of 1 sub-dictionaries  including a concept dictionary  word dictionaries  bilingual dictionaries  etc.  
　although we could verify and analyse our extracted hierarchies by comparing them with the edr dictionary  there were two problems with this approach. first  many concepts in the edr dictionary are defined by sentences or phrases  whereas the concepts in our extracted hierarchies are defined by abstract nouns only. therefore  we replaced the sentences and phrases in the edr concept definitions with sequences of words for a more accurate comparison. secondly  there was a difference of words between those used to define concepts in the edr and the abstract nouns used for our extracted hierarchies. to solve this problem  we extracted synonyms from the edr dictionary and added synonyms to both the words in the edr concept definitions and the abstract nouns in our hierarchies. we thus transformed the conceptual hierarchies of adjectives in the edr dictionary into hierarchies consisting of sequences of word sets to enable a comparison with our hierarchies consisting of adjective hypernyms. 
measurement of agreement level 
for the comparison  we measured the degree of agreement with an edr hierarchy for each extracted hierarchy  i.e.  we counted the number of nodes that agreed with nodes in the corresponding edr hierarchy  while maintaining the order of each hierarchy. a node in one of our hierarchies is a set of abstract nouns and their synonyms. we represented the node by node abstract noun  synonym1  synonym1  ...   where node was a name identifying the node  while a node in an edr hierarchy is a set of sequences of words and synonyms and was represented by node content word1  synonym1  synonym1  ...  content word1  synonym1  synonym1  ... . therefore  if a word in a node of one of our hierarchies was included in a node of an edr hierarchy  we considered that the nodes agreed. for example  if our hierarchy is 
a a  a'  a   --- b b  b'  b   ---  c c  c'  c   ---  
d d  d'  d    
and a corresponding edr hierarchy is  
p a  a'  x  x'  ---  
q  b  b   ---  r r  r'  r   ---  s s  s'  d  f  f'  f   ---  
t t  t'  g  g'    
we count three agreement nodes  because a  b  d match to p  q  s  respectively. the bold words indicate words which match between our hierarchy and an edr hierarchy. and we define the level of agreement as three.  
 in comparing hierarchies  we found cases in which a hypernym and its hyponym in our hierarchy were treated as synonyms in the edr electronic dictionary. for example  consider the following hierarchy obtained using our approach: 
koto  matter  ---  
tokoro  point  ---  
imeeji  image  ---  
funiki  atmosphere  ---  
kuuki  atmosphere in a place  ---  
kanjyou  feeling/emotion  --- 
shinjyou  one's feelings/one's sentiment  --- 
shinkyou  mental state/one's heart  --- kangai  deep emotion  --- 
omoide  memories . 
　in the edr electronic dictionary  each word is linked to its concept  and a synonymous relation is defined as words linked to the same concept. that is  we can gather synonyms via edr dictionary. in fact  in the above hierarchy  we obtained  shinjyou  one's feelings/one's sentiment   and  shinkyou  mental state/one's heart   as synonyms of  kanjyou  feeling/emotion   from the edr dictionary. also  we know that  kuuki  atmosphere in a place   is a synonym of  funiki  atmosphere  .  
　if we count the agreement of the above hierarchy with the edr dictionary strictly  the level of agreement is 1.  the agreement nodes are  koto  matter  -- tokoro  point  -- imeeji  image  -- funiki  atmosphere  or kuuki  atmosphere in a place  -- kanjyou  feeling/emotion   shinjyou  one's feelings/one's sentiment   or shinkyou  mental state/one's heart  
-- omoide  memories  . however  if we accept hypernym-hyponym relations among synonyms  the agreement level is 1. in this case  the agreement nodes are  koto  matter  -- tokoro  point  -- imeeji  image  -- funiki  atmosphere  -- kuuki  atmosphere in a place  -- kanjyou  feeling/emotion  -- shinjyou  one's feelings/one's sentiment  -- shinkyou  mental state/one's heart  -- omoide  memories  . 
results 
table 1 shows the distribution of csmb hierarchies for various agreement levels. table 1 shows the same results for the csmg. the numbers in italics in the tables indicate that the number of hierarchies at that depth which are completely included in an edr hierarchy. in the last column  we show the average agreement level at each depth. the value in the bottom right-hand corner is the average agreement level for all hierarchies.  
　figure 1 is a graph of the average agreement level at each depth shown in tables 1 and 1. in figure 1  except at the depths of 1 and 1  the average agreement levels for the csmg hierarchies are higher than those of the csmb hierarchies. as shown in tables 1 and 1  the deeper hierarchies tended to have higher agreement levels. therefore  we consider that overall the csmg hierarchies were closer to the edr hierarchies than were the csmb hierarchies. that is  the csmg hierarchies were more in accordance with human intuition than were the csmb hierarchies. 
　we also verified the ability of the csm to estimate hypernym-hyponym relations between two nouns. some of noun pairs whose relations were estimated by two csms were opposite each other. table 1 shows some such pairs. for each of them  the csmg estimated that the noun on the left was a hypernym and the one on the right was a hyponym. the csmb estimated the reverse. 
 depth of hierarchy1agreement level 
1 	1 	1 	1 1ave. level11    1111    1111 1   1111 1 1  1111 1 1 1 111 1 1  111 1 1 1 1111 1 1  1.11  1  111    1.1overall ave.    1table 1:  distribution of csmb hierarchies for various agreement levels 
 depth of hierarchy1agreement level 
1 	1 	1 	1 1ave. level11    1111    1111 1   1111 1 1  1111 1 1  111 1 1  111 1 1  11 1 1 1 1111 1 1 1 11    111   1 11    111    1.1overall ave.    1table 1:  distribution of csmg hierarchies for various agreement levels 

noun pair 
tokoro  point  imeeji  image  tokoro  point  men  side  tokoro  point  inshou  impression  tokoro  point  seikaku  character  tokoro  point  seishitsu  property  tokoro  point  kanshoku  touch  kimochi  
 thought/feeling/intention omoi  
 feeling/mind/expectation  kagayaki  brightness  koutaku  gloss  kuukan  space  men  side  kotoba  speech  iken  opinion  kokoro  mind  shinjyou  
 one's feelings/one's sentiment hiyori  fine weather  ondo  temperature  table 1: noun pairs estimated oppositely 

figure 1:  comparison of csmb and csmg hierarchies by average agreement level 　in our experiment  there were 1 such pairs. as the total number of pairs considered was 1  these pairs amounted to less than 1%. we also found that in most cases these pairs appeared in the middle of a hierarchy. 
　let us consider the hypernym-hyponym relation between  kimochi  thought/feeling/intention   and  omoi  feeling/mind/expectation  . a csmg hierarchy including  kimochi  and  omoi  was as follows:  
koto  matter  ---  
tokoro  point  ---  
imeeji  image  ---  
inshou  impression  ---  
kanji  feeling/sense  ---  
kibun  feeling/mood  --- 
kimochi  thought/feeling/intention  --- 
omoi  feeling/mind/expectation  --- negai  wish  --- 
nen  desire . 
　here   kimochi  was estimated as a hypernym of  omoi.  however  csmb estimated the opposite  i.e.   omoi  was a hypernym of  kimochi.  we examined the values given by the csmb and csmg to  kimochi  and  omoi   see table 1 . 
 f  t    omoi    kimochi     kimochi    omoi   diff.csmb 1 1 1csmg 1 1 1table 1: differences in csm values for  omoi  and  kimochi  
　as shown in table 1  the values of csmg in both directions were similar  as was the case for csmb. as the csm is a measure of inclusion  if the values of the csm for two words in both directions are similar  it might mean that the two words are synonymous. both the csmg and csmb estimated that  kimochi  and  omoi  were similar. however  due to the very small differences in values  they extracted opposite results. in fact  in the edr electronic dictionary   kimochi  and  omoi  are synonymous because both have the meaning of  feeling . the pairs estimated oppositely by the two csms may have a synonymous relation. in future work  we will introduce the csm-based definition to estimate two words as synonyms. 
　a small number of word pairs were estimated oppositely by the two csms  with large differences in the csm value of each direction. for example  csmg estimated that  tokoro   point   was a hypernym of  imeeji  image   and csmb estimated that  imeeji  was a hypernym of  tokoro   see table 1 .  
 f  t   tokoro    imeeji    imeeji    tokoro  diff.csmb11+1csmg11-1table 1: differences in csm values for  tokoro  and  imeeji  
　the introduction of frequency information for csmg may be the reason for this difference. in future work  we will analyze this in more detail.  
1 conclusion 
we proposed a method of automatically extracting hierarchies based on the inclusion relations of the appearance patterns of words from corpora. in this paper  we described our attempts to extract objective hierarchies of abstract nouns co-occurring with adjectives in japanese. we applied the complementary similarity measure for gray-scale images  csmg  to search for better hierarchical word structures. in our experiment  we found that the csmg could extract word hierarchies from corpora  even though it was developed for recognizing degraded machine-printed text. we also compared the csmg with the csm for binary images  csmb   and found that the csmg hierarchies were more in accordance with human intuition than were the csmb hierarchies  as measured by their degree of agreement with the edr electronic dictionary. as a next step  it would be interesting to compare this method to existing statistical methods such as agglomerative clustering. it would also be necessary to estimate confidence.  
　in this paper  we thus verified the suitability of the proposed method for extracting hierarchies from corpora. we consider that hierarchies tuned to specific corpora could be used for query expansion in information retrieval for specific domains. our future work will include extracting hierarchies of key words in corpora and trying to utilize them as a special thesaurus for domain-oriented information retrieval. 
