
although there has been much discussion of belief change  e.g.   ga몮rdenfors  1; spohn  1    goal change has not received much attention. in this paper  we propose a method for goal change in the frameworkof reiter's theory of action in the situation calculus  mccarthy and hayes  1; levesque et al.  1   and investigate its properties. we extend the framework developed by shapiro et al.  and shapiro and lespe뫣rance   where goals and goal expansion were modelled  but goal contraction was not.
1 introduction
one of the commonsense abilities people possess is the ability to predict the behaviour of others. we attribute goals and beliefs to others and assume they will act on their beliefs to achieve their goals. one strategy for endowing machines with a similar ability is to explicitly model the beliefs and goals of agents and assume they are acting to achieve their goals in accordance with their beliefs. in dynamic environments  the beliefs and goals of agents are likely to change. although there has been much discussion of belief change  e.g.   ga몮rdenfors  1; spohn  1    goal change has not received much attention. in this paper  we propose a method for specifying and reasoning about goal change in the framework of reiter's  theory of action in the situation calculus  mccarthy and hayes  1; levesqueet al.  1 . we thus inherit reiter's solution to the frame problem  and iterated goal change is achieved seamlessly using sequences of actions. our approach to goal contraction is simpler than most approachesto belief revision and relies on using the history of requests rather than a specification of entrenchment. this work extends the framework developed by shapiro et al.  and shapiro and lespe뫣rance   where goals and goal expansion were modelled but goal contraction was not.
모we model agents that adopt goals if they are requested to do so and they do not already have a conflicting goal. they maintain their goals unless they are explicitly requested to drop them by the agent who requested the goal in the first place. we first define goals using an accessibility relation  w  which picks out the situations that the agent wants to be the case. we then give a successor state axiom for w that is affected by two communicative actions: request actions  which cause agents to adopt goals  and cancelrequest actions  which cause agents to drop goals that had been adopted followingprior requests. we then consider some properties of our axiomatization: expansion  contraction  and persistence. finally  we identify the restrictions on the accessibility relations that give us positive and negative introspection of goals  and show that these restrictions persist  if they are asserted of the initial situations.
모the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. in sec. 1  we give a brief review of the situation calculus  reiter's theory of action  and shapiro et al.'s  framework for representing knowledge expansion in the situation calculus. in sec. 1  we introduce our framework for goal change  and in sec. 1  we investigate properties of this framework. in sec. 1  we present an example  and in sec. 1  we conclude  discuss related work  and suggest avenues for future work.
1 representation of action and knowledge
the basis of our framework for goal change is an action theory  reiter  1  based on the situation calculus  mccarthy and hayes  1; levesque et al.  1 . the situation calculus is a predicate calculus language for representing dynamically changing domains. a situation represents a possible state of the domain. there is a set of initial situations corresponding to the ways the agents believe the domain might be initially. the actual initial state of the domain is represented by the distinguished initial situation constant  s1. the term do a s  denotes the unique situation that results from the agent doing action a in situation s. thus  the situations can be structured into a set of trees  where the root of each tree is an initial situation and the arcs are actions. the sequence of actions that produces a situation is called the history of the situation.  resp.  means there is a
 nonempty  resp.  path from situation s to situation s1. the initial situations are defined as those having an empty history: init s  def=   a s1.s = do a s1 .
모predicates and functions whose value may change from situation to situation  and whose last argument is a situation  are called fluents. for instance  we might use the fluent inroom agt r1 s  to represent the fact that agent agt is in room r1 in situation s. the effects of actions on fluents are defined using successor state axioms  reiter  1   which provide a succinct representation for both effect axioms and frame axioms  mccarthy and hayes  1 .
모we will be quantifying over formulae  so we assume that we have an encoding of formulae as first-order terms  we can adapt de giacomo et al.'s  axioms for this purpose  but we omit the details here . therefore  we will freely quantify over formulae here. to simplify notation  we ignore the details of the encoding and use formulae directly instead of the terms that represent them. we use 뷍 to denote a formula that can contain the situation constants now and then  and 뷋 to denote a formula that can contain now but not then. we use 뷋 s   뷍 s s1   resp.  to denote the formula that results from substituting s for now in 뷋  s for now and s1 for then  resp. .
모to axiomatize a dynamic domain in the situation calculus  we use reiter's  action theory  which consists of  1  successor state axioms for each fluent  including k and w introduced below ;  1  initial state axioms  which describe the initial state of the domain and the initial mental states of the agents;  1  precondition axioms  which specify the conditions under which the distinguished predicate poss a s  holds  i.e.  when it is physically possible to execute an action a in situation s;  1  uniquenames axioms for the actions  and domain-independent foundational axioms  we adopt the ones given by levesque et al.  which accommodatemultiple initial situations  but we do not describe them further here ; and  1  the axioms to encode formulae as terms.
모moore  defined a possible-worlds semantics for a logic of knowledge in the situation calculus by treating situations as possible worlds. scherl and levesque  adapted this to reiter's theory of action. scherl and levesque gave a
모successor state axiom for k that states how actions  including sensing actions  affect knowledge. shapiro et al.  adapted this axiom to handle multiple agents and inform actions  which we adopt here. k agt s1 s  will be used to denote that in situation s  agt thinks that situation s1 might be the actual situation. note that the order of the situation arguments is reversed from the convention in modal logic for accessibility relations. inform infr agt 뷋  is the action of the agent infr informing another agent  agt  that 뷋 holds. here
모is shapiro et al.'s  successor state axiom for k.1
axiom 1

 infr 뷋.a = inform infr agt 뷋    뷋 s1 
first note that for any action other than an inform action directed towards agt  the specification ensures that the only change in knowledge that occurs in moving from s to do a s  is that it is known  by all agents  that the action a has been successfully executed. this is true because the k-alternative1 situations to do a s  are the situations that result from doing a in a k-alternative situation to s where a is possible to execute  denoted by poss a s1  . for the action inform infr agt 뷋   the idea is that in moving from s to do inform infr agt 뷋  s   agt not only knows that the action has been executed  as above   but it also knows that 뷋 holds. in this case  the k-alternative situations to do a s  for agt are the situations that result from performing a in a k-alternative situation to s where a is possible to execute  except the ones where 뷋 is false.1 as usual  we say that an agent knows a formula 뷋 in s  if 뷋 holds in all situations k-accessible from s  i.e.  know agt 뷋 s  def=  s1.k agt s1 s    뷋 s1 .
모following shapiro et al.   we say that an agent can only execute an inform action if it knows that the content of the action is true.
axiom 1
poss inform infr agt 뷋  s  뫖 know infr 뷋 s .
모since we are dealing with knowledge here  not belief  we assert that k is  initially  reflexive.1
axiom 1 init s    k agt s s .
모following scherl and levesque  we also assert that initial situations can only be k-related to other initial situations. we use an initial state axiom for this purpose:
axiom 1 k agt s1 s  뫇 init s    init s1 .
this axiom and the successor state axiom for k imply that only situations with the same history can be k-related. introspection will be discussed in sec. 1.
1 goal change
just as an agent's beliefs can change  its goals should also be able to change. for example  if an agent's owner requests it to do something  the agent's goals should change to reflect the request. we extend the framework developed by shapiro et al.  and shapiro and lespe뫣rance   where goals and goal expansion were modelled but not goal contraction.
모followingcohen and levesque   we modelgoals using an accessibility relation over possible worlds  situations  in our case . the accessible worlds are the ones that are compatible with what the agent wants to be the case. cohen and levesque's accessibility relation for goals  g  was a subset of their accessibility relation for beliefs. this constraint precludes an agent wanting something that it believes is impossible  unless its goals are inconsistent . in our case  we define g in terms of a more primitive accessibility relation  which we call w and is intended to model what the agent wants independently of what it knows. we can then define cohen and levesque's goal accessibility relation  g  to be the intersection1 of w and k.
모an agent's goals are future oriented. for example  an agent might want some property to hold eventually  i.e.  the agent's goal is of the form eventually 뷍   for some formula 뷍. we evaluate formulae such as these with respect to a path of situations rather than a single situation  and we call such formulae path formulae. cohen and levesque used infinite time-lines to evaluate such formulae  but for simplicity  we evaluate path formulae with respect to finite paths of situations which we represent by pairs of situations   now then   such that now  then. now corresponds to the  current time  on the path of situations defined by the sequence of situations in the history of then. path formulae may contain two situation constants  now and then. for example   r.inroom john r now 뫇 inroom john r then  could be used to denote the goal that john eventually leaves the room he is in currently.
모our w relation  like our k relation  is a relation on situations. while k only relates situations with the same histories  w can relate situations with different histories. intuitively  w agt s1 s  holds if in situation s  agt considers that in s1 everything that it wants to be true is actually true. for example  if the agent wants to become a millionaire in s  then in all situations w-related to s  the agent is a millionaire  but these situations can be arbitrarily far in the future.
모recall that the situations in the w accessibility relation are the ones that the agent wants to actualize independently of what it knows. following cohen and levesque  we want the goals of the agent to be compatible with what it knows. the situations that the agent wants to actualize should be on a path from a situation that the agent considers possible. therefore  the situations that will be used to determine the goals of an agent will be the w-accessible situations that are also compatible with what the agent knows  in the sense that there is
k-accessible situation in their history. we will say that s1
kagt s-intersects. we will suppress agt or s if they are understood from the context. we define the goals of agt in s to be those formulae that are true in all the situations s1 that are w-accessible from s and that k-intersect some situation  s1:
goal agt 뷍 s  =def
.
 note that s1 corresponds to the  current situation   or the current time  in the path defined by s1.
모as noted by konolige and pollack   one has to be careful when using this definition of a goal. suppose an agent has a conjunctive goal  뷍 뫇 뷍1. according to this definition of goal  both 뷍 and 뷍1 are also goals. therefore  we could imagine a rational agent working to achieve one of the conjuncts as a subgoal. but it is easy to think of circumstances where achieving only one component of a conjunctive goal is undesirable. for example  i may have as a goal to be holding the bomb and that the bomb be defused. however  i want these to be true simultaneously and i do not have the goal to be holding the bomb if it is not also defused. as konolige and pollack did for their intention modality  i   we consider formulae that are an agent's  only goals   i.e.  formulae that are true in all and only the w-paths:
ogoal agt 뷍 s  =def
	  1.k	1	1
.
	we	now	give	the	successor	state	axiom	for	w.
w+ agt a s1 s   w  agt a s1 s   resp.   which is defined below  denotes the conditions under which s1 is added to  dropped from  resp.  w due to action a:
axiom 1
w agt s1 do a s   뫖
 w+ agt a s1 s  뫈  w agt s1 s  뫇  w  agt a s1 s   .
an agent's goals are expanded when it is requested to do something by another agent. after the
request requester agt 뷍  action occurs  agt should adopt the goal that 뷍  unless it currently has a conflicting goal  i.e.  we assume agents are maximally cooperative . therefore  the request requester agt 뷍  action should cause agt to drop any paths in w where 뷍 does not hold.
this action is taken into account in the definition of w  :
w  agt a s1 s  def=
 requester 뷍 s1.a = request requester agt 뷍  뫇
 
   do a s   s  .
accordingto this definition  s1 will be droppedfrom w  if for some requester and 뷍  a is the request requester agt 뷍  action and agt does not have a conflicting goal  i.e.  the goal that  뷍 in s1  and s1 k-intersects some s1 such that 뷍 does not hold on the path  do a s1  s1 . the reason that we check whether  뷍 holds at  do a s1  s1  rather than at  s1 s1  is to handle goals that are relative to the current time. if  for example  뷍 states that the very next action should be to get some coffee  then we need to check whether the next action after the request is getting the coffee. if we checked  뷍 at  s1 s1   then the next action would be the request action.
모if the agent gets a request for 뷍 and it already has the goal that  뷍  then it does not adopt the goal that 뷍  otherwise its goal state would become inconsistent and it would want everything. this is a simple way of handling goal conflicts. a more interesting method would be to give more credence to requests from certain individuals  or requests of certain types. for example  if an agent gets a request from its owner that conflicts with a previous request from someone else  it should drop the previous request and adopt its owner's request instead. we reserve a more sophisticated handling of conflicting requests for future work.
모we assume that request actions are always possible to execute  although executability conditions could easily be added. axiom 1 poss request reqr agt 뷍  s .
모we now turn our attention to goal contraction. suppose that the owner of an agent asks it to do 뷍 and later changes his mind. the owner should be able to tell the agent to stop working on 뷍. we use the action cancelrequest requester agt 뷍  for this purpose. this action causes agt to drop the goal that 뷍. a cancelrequest action can only be executed if a corresponding request action has occurred in the past.
axiom 1 poss cancelrequest reqr agt 뷍  s  뫖 do request reqr agt 뷍
모we handle cancelrequest actions by determining what the w relation would have been if the corresponding request action had never happened. suppose a cancelrequest requester agt 뷍  action occurs in situation s. we restore the w relation to the way it was before the corresponding request occurred. then  starting just after the request  we look at all the situations do a  s   in the history of s and removefrom w any situation s1 that satisfies w  agt a s1 s  ; such situations s1 should be removed to reflect the adoption of a subsequent request. we first define the predicate cancels a a1   which says that action a cancels the action a1. in our case  only cancelrequest actions cancel the corresponding request's:
cancels a a1  def=
 reqr 뷍.a = cancelrequest reqr agt 뷍  뫇 a1 = request reqr agt 뷍 .
모we now define w+ which states the conditions under which s1 is added to w+ after a is executed in s:
 w  agt a  s1 s    
to help explain this definition  we will refer to fig. 1  where a segment of a situation forest is shown. the situation s1 is not w-related to s. however  s1 was w-related to s1  which is in the history of s. the next action after s1 in the history of s was request requester agt 뷍 . we suppose s1 was dropped from w after the request. if none of the actions between do request requester agt 뷍  s1  and
cancelrequest requester agt 뷍 
a 
request requester agt 뷍 
figure 1: an example of goal contraction.
s also cause s1 to be dropped from w  then s1 is returned to w after the cancelrequest requester agt 뷍  action is executed in s. in other words 
w+ agt  cancelrequest requester agt 뷍  s1 s  holds because the following hold: w agt s1 s1   do request requester agt 뷍  s1   s 
cancelrequest requester agt 뷍 	cancels
request requester agt 뷍    and for every situation do a  s   between do request requester agt 뷍  s1  and s   w  agt a  s1 s   holds. note that for our definition of w+ to work properly  we must assume that there is only one request action in the history that is cancelled by each cancelrequest. this assumption will be relaxed in future work.
1 properties
we now consider some properties of goal change. let  consist of the foundational  encoding  and unique names axioms  and the axioms from sections 1 and 1. first  we show that our theory supports goal expansion. if an agent does not have  뷍 as a goal  then a request for 뷍 causes it to adopt 뷍 as a goal.
theorem 1
 |=  agt 뷍 requester s. goal agt  뷍 s   
goal agt 뷍 do request requester agt 뷍  s  
모we also show the conditions under which an agent's only goals are expanded. if an agent has the only goal that 뷍  뷍1 is requested of the agent  the agent knows that the request does not affect the truth value of 뷍  and 뷍1 does not conflict with the agent's goals  then its only goals expand to include 뷍1.
theorem 1
 |=  a agt 뷍 뷍1 reqr s.
ogoal agt 뷍 s  뫇 a = request reqr agt 뷍1  뫇
know agt   then.poss a now   
 뷍 now then  뫖 뷍 do a now  then    s  뫇
 goal agt  뷍1 s   
ogoal agt 뷍 뫇 뷍1 do a s  .
모next  we examine the persistence of goals. a goal 뷍 persists over an action a  if a is not a cancel request  and the agent knows that if 뷍 holds then a does not change its value.
theorem 1
 |=  a agt 뷍 s.
goal agt 뷍 s  뫇
  reqr 뷍1.a 1= cancelrequest reqr agt 뷍1   뫇
know agt   then.poss a now  뫇 뷍 now then    뷍 do a now  then   s    goal agt 뷍 do a s  .
we have a similar result for  only goals .
theorem 1
 |=  a agt 뷍 s. ogoal agt 뷍 s  뫇   requester 뷍1.
 a = request requester agt 뷍1   
모goal agt  뷍1 s   뫇 a 1= cancelrequest requester agt 뷍1   뫇
know agt   then.poss a now   
 뷍 now then  뫖 뷍 do a now  then    s    ogoal agt 뷍 do a s  .
모we now show a property about only goal contraction. suppose that an agent only has the goal that 뷍 in s  and just after s  reqr requests 뷍1 of the agent. in some future situation s1  reqr cancels its request that 뷍1  yielding the situation s1. we assume that there was only one request of the agent for 뷍1 from reqr  and that no other request or cancelrequest actions occurred between s and s1. we also assume that 뷍 always persists  this condition can be weakened; we assumed it to simplify the proof . then  we can show that the agent only has the goal that 뷍 in s. in other words  the request for 뷍1 was indeed cancelled  and the other  only goals  persisted.
theorem 1
. ogoal agt 뷍 s  뫇 do request s1 = do cancelrequest reqr agt 뷍1  s1  뫇
  s1 s1.do request do request s1 = s1  뫇
  s  a .
do request reqr agt 뷍1  s    do a  s   뫇 do
	 	reqr	.
a  = cancelrequest
a  = request reqr1 agt 뷍1    뫇
  a s1 s1.뷍 s1 s1  뫖 뷍 do a s1  s1     ogoal agt 뷍 s1 .
모just as agents introspect their knowledge  we want agents to be able to introspect their goals  i.e.  if an agent has a goal  does not have a goal  resp.  that 뷍  it should know that it has  does not have  resp.  뷍 as a goal. we identify constraints that yield these properties. they are constraints on k and
w. we will need the following definitions of transitivity and euclideanness  starting in a situation s. note that the order of the situations is reversed from the traditional definitions.
ktrans
keuc agt s  =def  s1 s1.k agt s1 s  뫇 k agt s1 s    k agt s1 s1 .
모theorem 1 of scherl and levesque  showed that if k is initially reflexive  and transitive or euclidean  then the successor state axiom for k guarantees that the properties are preserved over executable sequences of actions. this result carries over here. first  we show that reflexivity is preserved. recall that we asserted that k was initially reflexive in axiom 1. our successor state axiom for k preserves reflexivity over all executable sequences of actions.
theorem 1
 |=  agt s.executable s    k agt s s  
where executable poss a s1 .
모similarly  if k is initially transitive and euclidean  then it remains so over any executable sequence of actions.
theorem 1
 |=   agt s.init s    ktrans agt s  뫇 keuc agt s    
  agt s.executable s    ktrans agt s   뫇
  agt s.executable s    keuc agt s   
모for positive introspection of goals  we need a constraint similar to transitivity  but that involves both k and w. we call this constraint cross-transitivity:
crosstrans agt s  =def
	 	.k	k
if this constraint is satisfied  and k is transitive  then the agents will have positive introspection of goals:
theorem 1
 |=  agt s 뷍.ktrans agt s  뫇 crosstrans agt s   
 goal agt 뷍 s    know agt goal agt 뷍  s  .
모for negative introspection of goals  we need a constraint similar to euclideanness  which we call cross-euclideanness:
crosseuc agt s  def=
 s  s  s .k agt s  s 뫇 k agt s  s 뫇
모if this constraint is satisfied  and k is euclidean  then the agents will have negative introspection of goals:
theorem 1
 |=  agt s.keuc agt s  뫇 crosseuc agt s   
  goal agt 뷍 s    know agt  goal agt 뷍  s  .
모crosstrans and crosseuc persist if they hold of the initial situations  and k is initially transitive and euclidean.
theorem 1
 |=   s1.init s1   
 ktrans agt s1  뫇 keuc agt s1  뫇
crosstrans agt s1  뫇 crosseuc agt s1     
 agt s.executable s    crosstrans agt s  뫇 crosseuc agt s .
it follows that positive and negativegoal introspectionpersist  if these constraints hold initially.
1 meeting scheduler example
to illustrate how such a formalizationof goal change is useful in specifying multiagent applications  we now summarize the meeting scheduler example from shapiro  that is based on the one given by shapiro et al.   but was modified to include goal contraction using cancelrequest.
모we specify the behavior of agents with the notation of the programminglanguagecongolog  de giacomo et al.  1   the concurrentversion of golog  levesque et al.  1 . here are the congolog constructs we will use:
a 	primitive action 뷋  	wait for a condition 붻1;붻1 	sequence 붻1 | 붻1  nondeterministic choice of programs if 뷋 then 붻1 {else 붻1} endif  conditional for x 뫍 l do 붻 endfor  for loop while 뷋 do 붻 endwhile while loop
in the above  a denotes a situation calculus action; 붻  붻1  and 붻1 stand for programs; and l is a finite list.
모in the meeting scheduler example  shapiro et al.  1; shapiro and lespe뫣rance  1; shapiro  1   there are meeting organizer agents  which are trying to schedule meetings with personal agents  which manage the schedules of their  human  owners. to schedule a meeting  an organizer agent requests of each of the personal agents of the participants in the meeting to adopt the goal that its owner attend the meeting during a given time period. if a personal agent does not have any goals that conflict with its owner attending the meeting  i.e.  it has not previously scheduled a conflicting meeting   it adopts the goal that its owner attend this meeting and informs the meeting organizer that it has adopted this goal  i.e.  that it accepts the meeting request. otherwise  the personal agent informs the meeting organizer that it has not adopted the goal that its owner attend the meeting  i.e.  that it declines the meeting request.
모the procedure that defines the behaviour of meeting organizer agents  organizemeeting  is given in fig. 1 their task is to organize a meeting for a given period and set of participants on behalf of the chair of the meeting. they do this by asking the personal agent of each participant to have their owner meet during the given period. the participants' personal agent will then reply whether they have declined the meeting. the behaviour of the personal agents is specified by the manageschedule procedure which is not shown here  due to space constraints. in that procedure  a personal agent responds to a meeting request by adopting the goal that its owner be at the requested meeting  unless it has already scheduled a conflicting meeting  and then informs the requester whether it has adopted the requested goal. the meeting organizer waits until it knows whether one of the participants' agent declined the meeting. this will happen when either someone has declined the meeting or everyone has agreed to it. if the organizer discovers that someone declined the meeting  it cancels its request for a meeting with the personal agents of all the participants in the meeting. the personal agents that agreed to the meeting will then drop the goal that their owners be at the requested meeting.
1 conclusions and future work
	1	def	1
informwhether agt agt  뷋  =  know agt 뷋  ; inform agt agt  뷋   |
 know agt  뷋  ; informkwhether agt 뷋  ; informkwhether agt 뷋   
someonedeclined per chair parts s  =def
 p.member p parts  뫇  goal pag p  during per  atmeeting p chair   s 
organizemeeting oa chair parts per  def= for p 뫍 parts do
모request oa  pag p  during per  atmeeting p chair    endfor; kwhether oa someonedeclined per chair parts   ; if know oa someonedeclined per chair parts   then
for p 뫍 parts do
모cancelrequest oa  pag p  during per  atmeeting p chair    endfor endif; informwhether oa chair someonedeclined per chair parts  
figure 1: procedure run by the meeting organizer agents.in this paper  we defined the goals and  only goals  of an agent  and examined properties of these definitions: expansion  contraction  and persistence. we identified the restrictions on k and w that give us introspection of goals  and showed that these restrictions persist  if they hold initially. note that our approach is quite different and simpler than most existing approaches to belief change. these require a specification of the plausibilities of alternate situations. our approach avoids this and instead relies on the history to undo previous goal expansions. however  we do not handle arbitrary goal contractions  only cancellations of previous requests. note there are some related approaches in the belief change literature  booth et al.  1; roorda et al.  1 . this raises the question of using belief change frameworks to handle goal change  or applying our goal change approach to belief change. it would be interesting to investigate whether there are essential differences between belief revision and goal revision that warrant different solutions  or whether the same solutions can be applied to both problems. also  it would be interesting to identifypostulates for goal change and examine how they differ from belief change postulates  ga몮rdenfors  1 . our handling of the cancelling of requests needs further work and analysis. first of all  it does not properly handle nested requests for the same goal. for the successor state axiom to work properly for goal contraction  we must assume that there is only one request action in the history that is cancelled by each cancelrequest. this would not be too difficult to remedy  but it leads us to another difficulty. the definition of w+ is already quite complex  which makes proving properties about it somewhat awkward. since the definition refers to a sequence of situations  the proofs will often involve inductions. we would like to investigate the possibility of simplifying the definition.
