
in this paper we present an unsupervised model for learning arbitrary relations between concepts of a molecular biology ontology for the purpose of supporting text mining and manual ontology building. relations between named-entities are learned from the genia corpus by means of several standard natural language processing techniques. an in-depth analysis of the output of the system shows that the model is accurate and has good potentials for text mining and ontology building applications.
1 introduction
bioinformatics is one of the most active fields for text mining applications because of the fast rate of growth of digital documents collections such as medline and swissprot. the ultimate goal of text mining in bioinformatics is knowledge discovery by means of natural language processing  nlp  and machine learning. to achieve this objective it is necessary to access the information contained  inside  the documents  i.e. their content. one possible strategy to get to the content is through information extraction. one starts with a conceptualization of the domain; i.e.  a domain ontology  which specifies relevant concepts as well as semantic relations  such as is-a  part-of  and more complex relations encoding important interactions between concepts. then it is necessary to apply extraction techniques to recognize where  in the documents  concepts are instantiated by specific entities  and where important interactions are expressed by linguistic structures.
¡¡several ontologies which define concepts and structural semantic relations  e.g.  is-a  are available. instead there is a need for ontologies that specify relevant arbitrary semantic relations between concepts; for example  that  cell expressthe-receptor-for protein  or that  virus replicate-in cell . in this paper we investigate the problem of enriching an existing ontology with arbitrary semantic relations which are strongly associated with orderedpairs of concepts. we design an unsupervised system that combines an array of off-the-shelf nlp techniques such as syntactic parsing  collocation extraction and selectional restriction learning. we apply our system to a corpus of molecular biology literature  the genia corpus  ohta et al.  1   and generate a list of labeled binary relations between pairs of genia ontology concepts. an indepth analysis of the learned templates shows that the model  characterized by a very simple architecture  has good potentials for text mining and ontology building applications.
¡¡in the next section we describe the problem of learning relations from text and related work. in section 1 we describe our system and the data used in our study in detail. in section 1 we discuss the evaluation of the system's output.
1 problem statement and related work
the genia ontology contains concepts related to gene expression and its regulation  including cell signaling reactions  proteins  dna  and rna. much work in bioinformatics has focused on named-entity recognition  ner   or information extraction  ie   where the task is the identification of sequences of words that are instances of a set of concepts. as an example one would like to recognize that  ns-meg cells    mrna  and  epo receptor  are  respectively  instances of the genia classes  cell line    rna family or group  and  protein molecule  in the following text  example 1 :
 1   untreated  cell line ns-meg cells  expressed  rnafamily or group mrna  for the
 protein molecule epo receptor  
¡¡a natural extension of ner is the extraction of relations between entities. ner and relation extraction could provide a better support for mining systems; e.g.  patterns of entities and relations could be compared across document collections to discover new informative pieces of information  as in  swanson and smalheiser  1  for example . currently most of the work on relation extraction applies hand-built rule-based extraction patterns; e.g.  friedman et al.  on identifying molecular pathways and saric¡ä¡¦ et al.  1b  on finding information on protein interactions which use a manually-built ontology similar to that described in  ratsch et al.  1 . one problem with rule-based ie is that systems tend to have good precision but low recall. machine learning oriented work has focused on extracting manually-
compiled lists of target relations; e.g.  rosario and hearst  address the relation extraction problem as an extension of ner and use sequence learning methods to recognize

figure 1: a small fraction of the genia ontology. continuous lines represent unspecified taxonomic relations  dashed lines represent other regions.
instances of a set of 1 predefined relations about  diseases  and  treatments . these systems yield good precision and recall but still need that sets of relations between classes be defined first. yet another problem which deals with semantic relations is that addressed by craven and kumlien  who present a model for finding extraction patterns for 1 binary relations involving proteins. a similar work is that of pustejovsky et al.  pustejovsky et al.  1  on automatically extracting  inhibit  relations. semantic relations have been used as templates  or guiding principles  for the generation of database schemata  rojas et al.  1 . another application of ontological relations is that of consistency checking of data in molecular biology databases to individuate errors in the knowledge base  e.g.  by checking the consistency of the arguments  or to align different databases.
¡¡biological text mining systems that involve relations require predefined sets of relations that have to be manually encoded  a job which is complex  expensive and tedious  and that as such can only guarantee narrow coverage - typically a handful of relations and one pair of classes. our aim is to automatically generate all relevant relations found in a corpus between all ontological concepts defined in an ontology. this work is also valuable to ontologists since ontology building and evaluation are becoming more and more automatized activities and most of the corpus-based work has focused only on structural relations such as is-a and part-of  pantel and ravichandran  1; berland and charniak  1 .
1 learning relations from text
our model takes as input a corpus of texts in which namedentities  corresponding to ontology concepts  have been identified. here we use the genia corpus  for which the tagging has been carried out manually  but the corpus data can be also generated automatically using an appropriate ner system. the model outputs a set of templates that involve pairs of genia ontology classes and a semantic relation. for example  a template might be  virus infect cell .
1 data
the genia ontology was built to model cell-signaling reactions in humans with the goal of supporting information extraction systems. it consists of a taxonomy of 1 nominal concepts with underspecified taxonomic relations  see figure 1. the ontology was used to semantically annotate biological entities in the genia corpus. we used the g1 version consisting of 1 articles  1 sentences  roughly half a million word tokens  and 1 types of labels. this corpus has complex annotations for disjunctive/conjunctive entities  for cases such as  erythroid  myeloid and lymphoid cell types . we excluded sentences that contained only instances of complex embedded conjunctions/disjunctions and also excessively long sentences  more than 1 words . the final number of sentences was 1  1 word tokens  1 tags . many tags have nested structures; e.g.   other name  dna il-1 gene  expression  . here we only considered the innermost labels  although the external labels contain useful information and should eventually be used.
¡¡one potential drawback of the genia ontology is the relatively small number of biological concepts and their coarse granularity which causes groups of similar but distinct entities to be assigned to the same class. some relations fit very well to subsets of the entities of the related concepts  whereas they don't fit well for other entities of the same concept. for example  the concept  dna domain or region  contains sequences with given start and end positions  as well as promoters  genes  enhancers  and the like. even if promoters  genes  and enhancers are pieces of sequences too  with start and end positions   they also are functional descriptions of sequences. therefore  different statements can be made about such kinds of dna domains or regions and  pure  sequences. the relation  dna domain or region encodes protein molecule  makes sense for genes  but not for enhancers  and may make sense or not for  pure  sequences  depending on their  unknown  function. on the other hand any nlp oriented resource cannot have many fine-grained concepts defined  otherwise ie wouldn't be accurate. in this respect the genia corpus is unique in that it provides extensive namedentity annotationswhich can be used to train appropriatener systems  cf.  kazama et al.  1 .
1 relations as dependency paths
nnp
figure 1: parse tree for the sentence of example 1. entities are substituted with their tags. phrases are labeled with their syntactic heads. the dependency graph is depicted with dashed directed edges pointing to the governed element.the 1 sentences were parsed with a statistical parser  charniak  1 .1 since we are interested in relations that connect entities as chunks we want to avoid that the parser analyzes an entity that is split among different phrases. this can happen because entity names can be fairly long  complex and contain words that are unknown to the parser. to avoid this problemwe substituted the entity tags for the actual named-entities; the result can be seen in figure 1 which shows the substitution and the relative parse tree for the sentence of example 1. trees obtained in this way are simpler and don't split entities across phrases. for each tree we generated a dependency graph: each word1 is associated with one governor  defined as the syntactic head1 of the phrase closest to the word that differs from the word itself. for example  in figure 1  cell line  is governed by  express   while  protein molecule  is governed by the preposition  for .
¡¡in this way it is possible to formalize the notionof semantic relation between two entities. a related application of dependency relations concerns the recognition of paraphrase sentences  lin and pantel  1 . a relation r between two entities ci and cj in a tree is the shortest path between ci and cj following the dependency relations. for example  in figure 1 the path between  cell line  and  protein molecule  is  ¡ûexpress¡úfor¡ú . there is a path for every pair of entities in the tree. paths can be considered from both directions since the reverse of a path from a to b is a path from b to a. a large number of different patterns can be extracted  overall we found 1 paths in the data. for the sake of interpretability  by inspection  of the outcome of the model in this paper we focused on a subset of these patterns. we selected paths from ci to cj where j   i and the pivotal element  the word with no incomingarrows  is a verb v. in addition we imposed the following constraints: ci is governed by v under an s phrase  i.e.  is v's surface subject  subj   e.g.   cell line  in figure 1; and one of the following six constraints holds:
1. cj is governed by v under a vp  i.e.  is v's direct object  dir obj   e.g.   rna family or group  in figure 1;
1. cj is governedby v under a pp  i.e.  is v's indirect object  ind obj   e.g.  protein molecule  in figure 1;
1. cj is governed by v's direct object noun  i.e.  is a modifier of the direct object  dir obj mod   e.g.  virus  in  ... influenced virus replication ;
1. cj is governed by v's indirect object noun  i.e.  is the indirect object's modifier  ind obj mod   e.g.   protein molecule  in  ..was induced by protein molecule stimulation ;
1. cj is governed by a pp which modifies the direct object  dir obj mod pp ; e.g.   protein molecule in  .. induce overproduction of protein molecule ;
1. cj is governed by a pp which modifies the indirect object  ind obj mod pp ; e.g.   lipid  in  ..transcribed upon activation with lipid .
for the sentence in figure 1 we identify two good patterns:  subj¡ûexpress¡údir obj  between  cell line  and  rna family or group   and  subj¡ûexpress¡úfor¡úind obj   between  cell line  and  protein molecule . overall we found 1 instances of such relations distributed as follows:
typecountsrelfreqsubj-dirobj11subj-ind obj11subj-dirobj mod pp11subj-dirobj mod1.1subj-ind objmod pp1.1subj-ind objmod1.1the data contained 1 types of entity pairs  1 types of patterns and 1 entity pair-pattern types.
1 learning relations  stage 1 
let us take a to be an orderedpair of genia classes; e.g. a =  protein domain dna domain or region   and b to be a pattern; e.g.  b = subj¡ûbind¡údir obj. our goal is to find relations strongly associated with ordered pairs of classes  i.e.  bi-grams ab. this problem is similar to finding collocations; e.g.  multi-wordexpressionssuch as  real estate   which form idiomatic phrases. accordingly the simplest method would be to select the most frequent bi-grams. however many bigrams are frequent because either a or b  or both  are frequent; e.g.  subj¡ûinduce¡údir obj is among the most frequent pattern for 1 different pairs. since high frequency can be accidental and  additionally  the method doesn't provide a natural way for distinguishing relevant from irrelevant bi-grams  we use instead a simple statistical method.
¡¡as with collocations a better approach is to estimate if a and b occur together more often than at chance. one formulates a null hypothesis h1 that a and b do not occur together more frequently than expected at chance. using corpus statistics the probability of p ab   under h1  is computed and h1 is rejected if p ab  is beneath the significance level. we use a chi-square test for this purpose. for each observed bi-gram we create a contingency table of the frequencies ab   ab  a b  and  a b; e.g.  for a = protein molecule-dna domain or region and b = subj¡ûbind¡údir obj the table computed from the corpus would contain respectively the values 1  1  1 and 1. the chi-squaretest comparesthe observedfrequenciesvs. the frequencies expected under h1. together with the test we use

figure 1: the  virus  concept with the selected and generalized relations  and related concepts  in the enriched ontology.
the log-likelihood chi-squared statistic: 1
 1 	
where i and j range over the rows and columns of the contingency table  and the expected frequencies are computed off the marginal frequencies in the table. in the previous example g1 is equal to 1  which is above the critical value 1 for ¦Á = 1  hence b is accepted as a relevant pattern for a. the following table shows the three highest ranked class pairs for pattern b. there is strong evidence that entities of the protein type tend to bind dna locations  which is a reasonable conclusion:
b = subj¡ûbind¡údir objag1sigprotein domain-dna domain or region1yesprotein family or group-dna d. or r.1yesvirus-protein molecule1noin this study we used ¦Á = 1. in general  ¦Á is an adjustable parameter which might be set on held-out data in order to maximize an objective function. we also ignored bi-grams occurring less than 1 times and pairs a  patterns b  occurring less than 1 times. overall there are 1 suitable ab pairs  1  1%  have a value for g1 higher than ¦Á.
1 generalization of relations  stage 1 
relations can share similar arguments as in  bind  above where  in both significant cases  the direct object is  dna domain or region  while the subject is some kind of protein. this can be evidence that  in fact  we are facing a more general template holding between superordinates of the arguments found in the first stage. it is desirable  when possible  to learn more general relations such as  protein subj¡ûbind¡údir obj dna   because the learned ontology is more compact and has greater generalization power  i.e.  relations apply to more entities. finding such generalizations is similar to learning selectional restrictions of predicates  that is  the preferences that predicates place on the semantic categoryof their arguments; e.g.  that  eat  prefersobjects that are  foods . several methods have been proposed for learning such restrictions. we use here the method proposed in  clark and weir  1  which is accurate and simple. we use the taxonomy defined in the genia ontology  see figure 1  to generalize arguments of the learned patterns.1
¡¡clark and weir define an algorithm  top c r s   which  adjusting the terminology to our case  takes as input a relation r  a class c and a syntactic slot s  and returns a class c1 which is c itself or one of its ancestors  whichever provides the best generalization for p r|c s . the method uses the chi-squared test to check if the probability p r|c s  is significantly different from p r|c1 s   where c1 is the parent of c. if this is false then p r|c1 s  is supposed to provide a good approximation for p r|c s   which is interpreted as evidence that  r s  holds for c1 as well. the procedure is iteratively applied until a significant difference is found. the last class considered is the output of the procedure  the concept that best summarizes the class that r  selects  in syntactic slot s. we computed the frequencies of patterns involving superordinate classes summing over the frequencies  from the genia corpus  of all descendants of that class for that pattern.
¡¡for each relation r  slot s and class c  learned in stage 1  we used clark and weir's method to map c to top c r s . we again used the g1statistic and the same ¦Á value of 1. using these maps we generalized  when possible  the original 1 patterns learned. the outcome of this process is a set of 1 templates 1 of which have generalized arguments. as an example  the templates above  protein domain binds dna domain or region and  protein family or groupbinds dna domain or region  are mapped to the generalized template  protein binds dna . figure 1 depicts the set of labeled relations the concept virus is involved in  and the respective paired concepts  after stage 1 and 1.
1 evaluation
we discuss now an evaluation of the model carried out by a biologist and an ontologist  both familiar with genia. the biological evaluation focuses mainly on the precision of the system; namely  the percentage of all relations selected by the model that  according to the biologist  express correct biological interactions between the arguments of the relation. from the ontological perspective we analyze semantic aspects of the relations  mainly the consistency with the genia classes.
1 biological evaluation
the output of stage 1 is a set of 1 patterns  composed of an ordered pair of classes and a semantic relation. 1 of these patterns  involving in one or both arguments the class  other name   were impossible to evaluate and excluded altogether. this genia class is a placeholder  for very different sorts of things  which needs partitioning and structuring. relations involving  other name   e.g.   treat   might prove correct for a subset of the entities tagged with this label  e.g.   inflammation   but false for a different subset  e.g.   gene expression  . of the remaining 1 patterns 1%  1  are correct  i.e.  express valid biological facts such as  protein molecule induce-phosphorylation-of protein molecule   while 1%  1  are incorrect  e.g.  protein inhibit-expression-oflipid . evaluation involvedthe exhaustive inspection of the original sentences to verify the intended meaning of the pattern and spot recurring types of errors. half of the mistakes  1  depend on how we handle coordination  which causes part of the coordinated structure to be included in the relation. for example  the first two dna entities in the noun phrase  dna  dna  and dna  are governed by the head dna rather than by  say  the main verb. thus wrong relations such as  protein bind-dna dna  are generated in addition to good ones such as  protein bind dna . fixing this problem involves simply the specification of a better dependency structure for coordinations. finally  1 errors involved the class  other name  embedded somewhere within the relation  suggesting again generalizations that cannot be judged with enough confidence. the remaining errors are probably due to sparse data problems. in this respect we plan to implement an ner system to produce more data and consequently more reliable distributional information. finally  we notice that  although the genia ontology was intended to be a model of cell signaling reactions  it lacks important concepts such as signaling pathway. this leads to some errors as in the following case:  an intact tcr signaling pathway is required for p1vav to function. . in this case we derive the relation:  protein molecule is-requiredfor protein molecule  since only  tcr  is annotated as  protein molecule  neglecting signaling pathway.
¡¡to the best of our knowledge we can compare these results with one other study. reinberger et al.  evaluate  also by means of experts  1 subject-verb-object relations  extracted from data similar to ours1 but with a different approach. they report an accuracy of 1% correct relations. their method differs from ours in three respects: relations are extracted between nouns rather than entities  i.e.  ner is not considered   a shallow parser is used instead of a full parser  and relations are selected by frequency rather than by hypothesis testing. a direct comparison of the methods is not feasible. however  if the difference in accuracy reflects the better quality of our method this is likely to depend on any  or on a combination  of those three factors.
¡¡as far as stage 1 is concerned we first removed all relations involving  other name   1 out of 1   which does not have superordinates nor subordinates  and evaluated if the remaining 1 generalized patterns were correct. of these  1  1%  provided valid generalizations; e.g.   protein molecule induce-phosphorylationof amino acid monomer  is mapped to  protein inducephosphorylation-of amino acid monomer . excluding mistakes caused by the fact that the original relation is incorrect  over-generalization is mainly due to the fact that the taxonomy of the genia ontology is not a is-a hierarchy; e.g.   dna substructure  is not a kind of  dna   and  protein  is not a kind of  amino acid . generalizations such as selectional restrictions instead seem to hold mainly between classes that share a relation of inclusion. in order to support this kind of inference the structural relations between genia classes would need to be clarified.
1 ontological assessment
the 1 patterns validated by the expert are potential new components of the ontology. we compiled genia  including the newly learned relations  in owl  ontology web language  mcguinness and van harmelen  1   to assess its properties with ontology engineering tools. ignoring  other name   the genia taxonomy branches from two root classes:  source  and  substance . genia classes  by design  tend to be mutually exclusive  meaning that they should be logically disjoint. our main objective is to verify the degree to which the new relations adhere to this principle.
¡¡to analyze the relations we align  i.e.  map   source  and  substance  to equivalent classes of another more general ontology. ideally  the alignment should involve an ontology of the same domain such as tambis  stevens et al.  1 . unfortunately tambis scatters the subordinates of  source   organisms  cells  etc.  across different branches  while  substance  in tambis does not cover protein and nucleic acidrelated subordinates of  substance  in genia.1 in genia substances are classified according to their chemical features rather than biological role  while sources are biological locations where substances are found and their reactions take place. this distinction assumes a stacking of ontology layers within the physical domain where the biological is superimposed to the chemical level. this feature of genia makes it suitable for alignment with dolce-lite-plus  dlp  http://dolce.semanticweb.org   a simplified translation of the dolce foundational ontology  gangemi et al.  1 . dlp specify a suitable distinction between  chemical  and  biological  objects. it features about 1 classes  1 relations and 1 axioms and has been used in various domains including biomedicine  saric et al.  1a .
¡¡we aligned  source  and  substance  to the biological and chemical classes in dlp. there are 1 types of relations out of 1  1% of them  1  occur only with one pair of classes  i.e.  are monosemous  while 1 have multiple domains or ranges  i.e.  are polysemous. since the root classes of genia are disjoint we checked if there are polysemous relations whose domain or range mix up subclasses of  source  with subclasses of  substance . such relations might not imply logical inconsistency but raise doubts because they suggest the possibility that a class of entities emerged from the data  which is the union of two classes that by definition should be disjoint. interestingly  there are only 1 such relations out of 1  1% ; e.g.   encode   whose subject can be either  virus  or  dna . in biology  dna encodes a protein  but biologists sometimes use the verb  metonymically . by saying that a virus encodes a protein  they actually mean that a virus' genome contains dna that encodes a protein. the small number of such cases suggests that relations emerging from corpus data are consistent with the most general classes defined in genia.
¡¡at a finer semantic level relations are composed as follows: 1  1%  are eventive  they encode a conceptualization of chemical reactions as events taking place in biological sources; 1% of the relations between biological and chemical classes are eventive  supporting the claim made in genia that biologically relevant chemical reactions involve both a biological and chemical object. non-eventive relations have either a structural  e.g.  consist-of    locative   locatedin    or epistemological meaning   identified-as  .
1 conclusion and future work
we presented a study on learning semantic relations from text in the domain of molecular biology. we investigated an unsupervised approach using the genia ontology and its corpus. our model is based on a representation of relations as syntactic dependency paths between an ordered pair of namedentities. to select  good  relations  class pairs and dependency paths can be interpreted as bi-grams  and scored with statistical measures of correlation. we showed that it is also possible to generalize over the argumentsof the relation using a taxonomy and algorithms for selectional restrictions learning. the results of a biological and ontological analysis of the acquired relations are positive and promising.
¡¡other aspects need to be addressed beyond precision  in particular we are interested in evaluating the recall  i.e.  the coverage  of the system 1 the precision of alternative selection criteria  and the usefulness of automatically learned relations in information extraction tasks. the latter will imply the identification of synonymic relations; e.g.  in the context of protein-protein interaction  positively-regulate  is equivalent to  activate    up-regulate    derepress    stimulate  etc. representing relations as dependency paths one can frame this problem straightforwardly as that of finding paraphrases  e.g. as in  lin and pantel  1  .
