
several high level methodological debates among ai researchers  linguists  psychologists and philosophers  appear to be endless  e.g. about the need for and nature of representations  about the role of symbolic processes  about embodiment  about situatedness  about whether symbol-grounding is needed  and about whether a robot needs any knowledge at birth or can start simply with a powerful learning mechanism. consideration of the variety of capabilities and development patterns on the precocial-altricial spectrum in biological organisms will help us to see these debates in a new light.
1	introduction
attempts to design intelligent systems often encounter two objections:  a  for non-trivial systems the task is impossibly difficult  and  b  a system that has been designed is not intelligent since everything it does is a result of the designer's decisions  not its own. these and similar arguments lead some people to the conclusion that intelligent systems must start off without any knowledge  and acquire what knowledge and skills they need by interacting with the environment  possibly guided by a teacher  using only general learning capabilities.
　this view assumes that something like human adult intelligence could be a product of neonates born with very little innate knowledge  but possessing a powerful general-purpose learning mechanism  e.g. reinforcement learning using positive and negative reinforcement based on drives  needs  and aversions. then all knowledge would gradually be built up by continual shaping of internal and external responses to various combinations of internal and external stimuli. there have been several ai robotics projects and synthetic agent projects based on this line of thought  e.g.  grand  1; mccauley  1; weng  1   among others. 
　this view ignores some powerful genetic influences in biological organisms. most species show a mosaic of skills and abilities some of which develop mainly under genetic influence  while others grow  usually gradually  as a result of

 
many thanks to colleagues on the ec cosy project.learning and experience. even learning mechanisms can have constraints tailored by natural selection to the probability of certain events co-occurring in their environment. for example  domjan and wilson  showed that rats readily learned to associate the taste of water with sickness  and ringing bells with electric shock  but could not learn to associate noise with sickness or taste with shock.
　our ability to design artificial systems could benefit from a better understanding of the very varied spectrum of cases found in nature. at one extreme are biological species  often labelled 'precocial'  whose young are born or hatched relatively well developed and able to cope with tasks that are far beyond what our current robots can do: newly hatched chickens look for food which they peck  and new-born deer can  within hours  find a nipple to feed from  and run with the herd. at another extreme  often labelled 'altricial'   animals are born or hatched helpless and underdeveloped  yet sometimes grow into adults with far more impressive cognitive skills than their precocial cousins  e.g. humans  hunting mammals and nest-building birds. how 
　precocial skills that appear in a relatively constant form in different environments can be fine-tuned by the individual experience of the animal. in contrast  altricial capabilities can vary widely within a species  as languages do between cultures  and as many kinds of competence do from one generation to another within a culture. many children now have knowledge and skills beyond the wildest dreams of their parents at the same age. it is implausible that a combination of environmental differences and some simple general learning mechanism  or any known learning algorithms  could produce such variation. evolution seems to have found something more powerful  which supports and enhances cultural evolution.
　we propose that in addition to knowledge-free reinforcement learning mechanisms and the unlearned kinds of knowledge acquisition  like maturation  and peri-natally generated precocial skills   there are capabilities produced by powerful mechanisms characteristic of the altricial end of the spectrum  that explain how adult members of the same species can have hugely varying knowledge and skills. these mechanisms  a  aquire many discrete chunks of knowledge through play and exploratory behaviour which is not directly reinforced  and  b  combine such chunks in novel ways both in solving problems and in further play and exploration. this process depends on a collection of very abstract 'internal' skills and knowledge with a strong innate component - though the collection can develop over time  especially in humans.
　so evolution provides much information that animals do not have to learn: some used in overt behaviour in precocial skills and some in more abstract internal behaviour  e.g. skill-bootstrapping behaviour  towards the altricial end. we present a number of conjectures about how this happens and discuss implications for robot designers.
1	precocial vs. altricial developmental mode
conjecture 1: there is no sharp altricial/precocial distinction between species  nor a continuum of cases  but a spectrum of capabilities  with many discontinuities. each species exhibits a unique collection of skills from different parts of the spectrum. a similar variety of designs may be useful in robots.
　a number of factors determine the extent to which a
　behaviour or skill is modified by the animal's own experience. the outcomes of these factors map very approximately on to the precocial and altricial developmental modes  though altricial species may have some precocial skills and vice versa. analysis of these issues will prove valuable in deciding which sorts of robots will need 'precocial' capabilities  which 'altricial' capabilities  and what sorts of mechanisms are needed.
factors promoting precocial skills and knowledge
the following will tend to favour evolution of precocial skills over altricial ones  if both are possible .
  opportunity: if it would be very difficult for the animal to learn a skill given the constraints of its environment the skill has to be precocial. e.g. young blackcaps migrating for the first time on their own  helbig  1   and the species-specific 'password' vocalisation in a brood parasite  the brown-headed cowbird  hauber et al.  1   which is raised by other species.
  risk: learning depends on exposure to certain stimuli at the right time. if failing to perform a vital skill correctly would result in animals dying before reproduction  the skill is more likely to be precocial. e.g. predator recognition in atlantic salmon   hawkins et al.  1   flight in cliff-nesting altricial birds.
  time constraints: if learning would take too long to meet a need  a skill is more likely to be precocial. e.g. running in wildebeest calves  who must keep up with the herd soon after birth.
　the young of species with many precocial skills start highly competent  requiring little or no parental care other than a degree of protection from predators.1 they appear to have a great deal of information about structures in the world  how to perceive them  and how to behave in relation to them  even if they can be changed later in subtle ways as a result of adaptive processes  reinforcement learning or the like.
　since evolution can  and often does  provide huge amounts of information in the form of knowledge and skills. should not a large amount of precocial information be the norm  if all those millions of years of evolution are not to be wasted 
factors promoting altricial skills and knowledge
in conditions opposite to those outlined above  abundant opportunity for learning  low risk outcome  no time constraints   altricial skills will tend to be favoured. in addition  the following factors are also important:
  unpredictability: if the environment is very variable or unpredictable  there will be no consistent pattern for natural selection to act on. the fact that fleeing prey are relatively unpredictable  while grass tends to be highly predictable might explain why predatory mammals and birds tend to have altricial developmental patterns  while grazers have many precocial skills.
  new niches: this is related to unpredictability. if an animal encounters conditions which have never been encountered before in the evolutionary history of its species  individual learning will be the only possible response. some niche variation can be accommodated by individual adaptation and calibration. but not when quite new concepts and new behavioural structures are required  e.g. if opponents often invent new weapons  or new defences against old weapons and strategies.
　if altricial skills provide so much flexibility and diversity of responses  why don't more animals show altricial skills  a partial answer is cost: neural tissue is expensive to build and maintain  in humans  the brain consumes about 1% of the basal metabolic rate . learning can be time-consuming and risky. young animals need to be protected from the harsh realities of life while acquiring altricial skills  so the intensity and duration of parental care can also be significant. the extended commitment of resources by parents to guarding  feeding  and in some cases helping their offspring to gain hunting skills  can both endanger the adults  make them more vulnerable to predation  deprive them of food given to the offspring   and reduce their breeding frequency.
1	the altricial-precocial spectrum for robots
analysis of the altricial/precocial trade-offs already explored by evolution can provide a basis for a new understanding of the varied requirements and tradeoffs in robot design. applications where tasks and environments are fairly static and machines need to be functional quickly  and where mistakes during learning could be disastrous  e.g. flight control  require precocial skills  with some adaptation and self-calibration   whereas others require altricial capabilities  e.g. where tasks vary widely and change in complex ways over time  and where machines need to learn to cope without being sent for re-programming  e.g. robots caring for the elderly . architectures  mechanisms  forms of representation  and types of learning may differ sharply between the two extremes. and the end results of altricial learning by the same initial architecture may differ widely  as happens in humans.
1	combining precocial and altricial skills
precocial skills can provide sophisticated abilities at birth. altricial capabilities add the potential to adapt to changing needs and opportunities. so it is not surprising that many species have both. however evolution seems to have discovered something deeper than just a mixture of some innate modules and some learning capabilities. humans  and presumably some other animals  seem to have a hybrid architecture where the mechanisms for learning are themselves a mixture of precocial and altricial mechanisms.
conjecture 1: evolution 'discovered' and deployed the power of an architecture towards the more sophisticated  altricial  end of the spectrum  based not on specific knowledge about the environment  but on mechanisms using abstract knowledge about ways in which physically possible environments can differ. so powerful altricial learning arises from sophisticated genetically determined  i.e. precocial  learning mechanisms  which may be expanded during development.
　instead of starting off able to recognise and react to specific stimuli  an altricial learner might have mechanisms that use knowledge about how to generate varied exploratory actions and how to seek recognisable patterns.1 such 'playful' actions reveal which among possible patterns are instantiated in the environment  and which ways of combining various kinds of pre-programmed or learnt action capabilities have effects that are 'interesting' not merely in terms of useful or harmful effects  but also according to criteria such as symmetry  elegance and power  e.g. producing big effects with little effort  or making something work that previously failed   thereby bootstrapping a wide variety of competences through interactions with the environment.1
1 what are the mechanisms 
this may sound like standard reinforcement learning  except for some innate biases to learn about certain classes of things only a subset of which are actually learnt under the influence of any particular environment  cummins and cummins  1 . but such mechanisms produce only gradual changes in behaviour  and it seems that at least some species  including humans  apes  and some corvids are - in addition - capable of kinds of discontinuous learning where hard problems are solved creatively by recombining previously acquired concepts  knowledge chunks and action chunks.
1	gradual change vs learning chunks.
conjecture 1: altricial learning is not always driven by biological needs and desires  e.g. for food  shelter  escape  mating  etc.  using rewards and punishments to drive gradual change through positive and negative feedback; instead the key feature is constant  often unmotivated  experimentation with external and internal actions during which re-usable chunks of information are learnt about what can be done and what can occur  and the preconditions and effects. chunks are discovered both in passively perceived inputs  e.g. using self-organising classifiers to chunk sensory inputs  and also in behaviour patterns and their consequences.
　re-use  in new combinations  of previously stored chunks  might explain the creative problem-solving of new caledonian crows  chappell and kacelnik  1; weir et al.  1   and chimpanzees  kohler  1   the ability of social animals to absorb a culture; and  in humans  the ability to learn and use a rich and highly structured language. a key feature of such processes is learning new ontologies  discussed further below. 
1	combinatorics: the origins of syntax
for these kinds of learning  mechanisms that gradually change weights or probabilities do not suffice: instead some chunks once learnt are explicitly referenced and available to be combined with other chunks  so as immediately to produce external and internal states and processes that are qualitatively  e.g. structurally  novel for the individual.1conjecture 1: some altricial species can not only store  label and categorise input and output 'chunks' that can be re-used later  but can also combine them to form larger chunks that are explored  and if found 'interesting' also stored  labelled  categorised  etc. so that they become available as new  larger units for future actions. a simple example would be picking something up and transferring something to one's mouth  being combined to form a new unit to pick up an object and bring it to one's mouth. another example is combining moving right and moving left in a repeated sequence which can produce changes of visual input that provide useful information about 1-d structure  philipona et al.  1 .
　a simple demonstration of how this can enormously reduce search spaces  originally suggested by oliver selfridge over 1 years ago can be found in a tutorial program file provided with the poplog system.1 in that example the 'agent' is given tasks which it attempts to solve using its primitive actions  previously learnt useful actions  and combinations of primitive and previously learnt actions formed by simple syntactic operations  including use of a 'repeat construct'. if it is given a complex task initially it searches for a solution and gives up after a certain length of search. but as it gradually builds up useful re-usable chunks the space of actions in which it searches in a given number of steps gets more and more complex. if suitably trained by giving it the right problems to 'play' with it can suddenly become able to solve a class of quite difficult 'counting' problems.
　this is a very simple example  but it illustrates a general point: that an altricial learning agent may need to be able to learn many things that are not intrinsically rewarding  but which are stored as a result of innately driven exploratory drives and then provide a basis for newer more complex explorations and learning - which could be specially well suited to the environment in which the simpler chunks  including perceptual and action chunks  have been learnt.
　we have here a kind of syntactic competence which generates structures with compositional semantics. conjecture 1: not only external  but also internal actions - e.g. actions of goal formation  problem-solving  concept formation - may be composed  forming layers of complexity.
　if the methods of syntactic composition are themselves subject to the same process then the result may be production of ontological layers in many parts of the system including perceptual layering  action layering and various kinds of internal layering of control and description. different kinds of competence may produce different kinds of layering.
1	possible benefits of the hybrid design
there may be several different biological advantages gained by the hybrid architecture over the more obvious 'precocial' and 'altricial' architectures  which can be framed in terms of ways of overcoming resource limitations.
advantage over precocial strategies
  the capabilities required in adults of some species may be too rich to be encoded in the genome if there is a 'space' limitation .  genetic information capacity as a scarce resource 
  the evolutionary history of some species may not have provided any contexts in which certain currently useful capabilities could have been selected for  or may constrain the direction in which evolution can proceed  i.e. phylogenetic constraints   evolutionary history is a biological resource  and may have limitations like any other biological resource. 
advantage over altricial strategies
  although rapid  one-trial reinforcement learning is possible  reinforcement generally requires multiple exposures to a pairing of stimulus and reinforcer  and such slower forms of learning  involving gradual  adaptive  shaping  processes  may not be able to cope with the very varied environments and challenges facing adults of some species.  time to learn as a limited resource 
  for some new problems an individual may have to produce a discontinuous change from previous behaviours  i.e. novel  creative behaviour  as opposed to interpolating or extrapolating in a space that is already well explored. that is because prior learning does not always take the individual 'close' to problems that can occur.  individual learning opportunities as a limited resource 
  the benefits of precocial strategies may be outweighed by the risks of over-commitment in a particular direction. if there are constraints on types of learning that make certain sorts of developmentally fixed competence incompatible with kinds of learning e.g. because the prior commitment provides the wrong building-blocks for the required new competence and because it is difficult to re-wire or otherwise re-implement the required building blocks. in that case  the advantages of being precocial may be best abandoned in favour of the advantages of flexibility: provided that parents are available to care for helpless young.  flexibility as a limited resource. 
　all this points to the need for learning  decision-making  and acting capabilities that support discontinuous development either in the evolution of the species  or in learning by the individual  without adversely affecting fitness.
1	effect of body and physical environment
although innate altricial bootstrapping mechanisms encode a great deal of abstract know-how enabling specific kinds of development  the space of possible learnt concepts and action schemas permitted by such mechanisms  the 'epigenetic landscape'  may be very large  leaving the environment scope to determine which subset of that space is actually learnt in both early and late development. even within one environment  different kinds of bodies and different kinds of initial brain mechanisms will produce variation:  a  in the kinds of chunks that can be learnt   b  in the number of different chunks that can be learnt  c  in the variety of forms of combination of previously learnt chunks.
　having two hands with five fingers each with several  more or less independently controllable  joints can produce huge combinatorial possibilities. having grippers that can move independently of the eyes  i.e. hands vs beaks  can make a huge difference to perceivable patterns. different designs for mouths  or beaks  and tongues or vocal mechanisms may also produce different combinatorial spaces to be explored.
　a fixed learning mechanism may be able to acquire different sorts of reusable chunks and perhaps even different ways of combining chunks  when it is combined with different physical bodies  or different physical environments. compare the different behavioural and conceptual results of exploratory play in children surrounded by rocks  sand  sticks  stones  mud and water  on the one hand and children surrounded by stackable blocks and cups  dolls  toy animals  meccano sets  lego sets  computers with mice and keyboards  on the other.1
　such learners start with both a control system that performs systematically varied internal and external operations driving these mechanisms  as well as mechanisms for learning  storing  labelling and re-using various kinds of chunks.  compare macro-formation mechanisms in planners  e.g. hacker
 sussman  1  and soar's chunking. 
　so the variety of sensory and motor chunks learnt will depend on  a  the physical design of the organism or robot  e.g. having independently movable limbs  digits  jaws  tongue  neck  head  eyeballs  ears  with motion changed in various ways  such as accelerating  decelerating  changing direction etc.  b  the richness of the organism's environment  particularly during development  e.g. learning in rats improves with environmental enrichment  iuvone et al.  1  .  c  the genetically determined collection of internal operations on data-structures  especially  d  the 'syntactic' mechanisms available for combining old chunks into new structures1 in perception  e.g. parsing   or in action  e.g. synthesising plans   and  e  whether those syntactic mechanisms can be applied not only to representations of external actions  but also to representations of internal actions such as operators used in problem formation  plan construction and debugging  as in sussman's hacker .
　so different altricial species will differ in many ways related to these differences. in particular some may have much richer combinatorial competence than others.
　some of the processes are clearly amenable to cultural influences: e.g. what sorts of toys and games are found in the environment during early development will make a difference to which ontologies can be acquired. the processes could lead to different kinds of understanding and representation of space  time  motion and causality in different species  and perhaps in different cultures within a species.
　after mechanisms for chunking and composing evolved in forms that we share with some other mammals  further typical evolutionary processes of duplication plus differentiation could have produced variants that were particularly suited to human language  which  if used internally  would have enormously amplified all the effects discussed above. but our discussion implies that a powerful form of internal language developed earlier  to support processes of altricial bootstrapping that we appear to share with some non-verbal altricial species  sloman  1 .
1	symbol 'attachment'  not 'grounding'
the existence of precocial species demonstrates that sophisticated visual and other apparatus need not be learned  implying that the semantic content of the information structures is somehow determined by pre-existing structures and how they are used. this eliminates  at least for such precocial species  one of the supposed explanations of where meaning comes from   there is really only one viable route from sense to symbols: from the ground up   harnad  1  .
　how then can innate abstract structures determine meaning  as we claim happens for precocial species  our answer  presented in  sloman  1; 1   is inspired by ideas about models in meta-mathematics and proposals in philosophy of science about scientific terms that could not possibly get their meaning by abstraction from perceptual processes   e.g. 'electron'  'quark'  'neutrino'  'gene'  'economic inflation'  'grammar' .
　a  consistent  formal system determines a non-empty class of possible  tarskian  models  which may be either abstract mathematical objects or collections of objects  properties  relations  events  processes etc. in the world. for a given formal system not every such collection can be a model  though it may have many different models. as  non-redundant  axioms are added the set of possible models decreases. so the meaning becomes increasingly specific. a formal system can determine precise meanings for its theoretical terms  by ruling out the vast majority of possible things in the universe as referents.
　there is typically residual ambiguity  but  as carnap  and other philosophers have shown  this residual indeterminacy of meaning may be eliminated  or substantially reduced  by the use of bridging rules or 'meaning postulates'. as strawson  noted  further ambiguity in reference to individuals can in some cases be eliminated or reduced by causal relations between the event of use of symbols and the things referred to.
　we can call this process 'symbol attachment'  because it is a process in which a complex symbolic structure with rich structurally-determined meaning can be pinned down to a particular part of the world. this is very different from the theory of symbol grounding which requires all meaning to be derived bottom up by abstraction from sensory experience of instances  which is actually a very old philosophical theory  concept empiricism  put forward hundreds of years ago by empiricist philosophers and refuted by kant. our impression is that many of the ai researchers who now use the phrase 'symbol grounding' have ignored its original meaning  arising out of concept empiricism  and actually use it  unwittingly  to refer to something like what we have called

there are many intermediate cases between pure symbol grounding and extreme symbol-attachment. arrows on the left indicate abstraction of concepts from instances or sub-classes. on the right arrows indicate a mixture of constraints that help to determine possible interpretations  models  of the whole system and/or make predictions that enable the system to be used or tested.
'symbol attachment'. we suggest that in altricial species:  a  symbol attachment  in which structures produced by a combination of evolution  and exploratory 'play' and problem solving  acquire most of their meaning from their formal structure  with perceptual/action bridging rules to reduce their ambiguity  is far more important than what is normally called
'symbol grounding'  and
 b  learning of chunks and combinatory procedures tailored to the current environment but constrained by powerful innate boot-strapping mechanisms that evolved to cope with general features of the environment  e.g. concerning space  time  motion  causation  etc.  is far more powerful than most forms of learning now being studied.
1	conclusion
the rapid  automatic  non-need-driven collection/creation of a store of labelled  reusable  perceptual and action chunks  along with 'syntactic' mechanisms for combinatorial extensions of those 'basic' chunks  provides a rich and extendable store of rapidly deployable cognitive resources  using mechanisms that will already sound familiar to many ai researchers who have worked on planning  problem solving  reasoning  1d vision  and language understanding  though we have said very little about how they might work.
　it may be that if some of this happens while the brain is still growing the result can be 'compiled' into hardware structures that support further development in powerful ways  explaining why the process needs to start while the infant is still physically under-developed.  this is very vague. 
　we are not saying that precocial species cannot learn and adapt but that the amount of variation of which they are capable is more restricted and the processes are much slower  e.g. adjusting weights in a neural net trained by reinforcement learning  as contrasted with constructing new re-usable components for combinatorially diverse perceptual and action mechanisms .
　so we suggest that in addition to the experiments where we pre-design working systems with combinations of different sorts of competence in order to understand ways in which such competences might work and cooperate  we should also begin the longer term exploration of architectures and mechanisms for a robot towards the altricial end of the spectrum described above  growing its architecture to fit opportunities  constraints and demands provided by the environment. some further details regarding requirements for such architectures can be found in  sloman et al.  1 .
　readers with some knowledge of the history of philosophy will recognise all this as an elaboration of ideas put forward by i. kant in his critique of pure reason around 1. he would have loved ai. future tasks include relating this work to the ideas piaget was trying to express  in his theories about a child's construction of reality. using inadequate conceptual tools  group theory  truth tables   and to the taxonomy of types of cognitive evolution in  heyes  1 .
　application domains where tasks and environments are fairly static and machines need to be functional quickly  require precocial skills  possibly including some adaptation and self-calibration   whereas others require altricial capabilities  e.g. where tasks and environments vary widely and change in complex ways over time  and where machines need to learn how to cope without being sent for re-programming. architectures  mechanisms  forms of representation  and types of learning may differ sharply between the two extremes. and the end results of altricial learning by the same initial architecture may differ widely.
　if all this is correct  it seems that after evolution discovered how to make physical bodies that grow themselves  it discovered how to make virtual machines that grow themselves. researchers attempting to design human-like  chimplike or crow-like intelligent robots will need to understand how. whether computers as we know them can provide the infrastructure for such systems is a separate question.
