 
this paper discusses a means for automatically supporting humans in information and task prioritizing. a new generic method based on the competitive task model is described. its implementation is able to calculate priorities of competing information entities  which provides a way of allocating tasks to the process operator. due to a combination of dynamic states and information entities  it is usable as an adaptive control mechanism for attention and task allocation. 
 
1 introduction 
the objective of an intelligent information system is to support the operator with the decision making process by means of offering the right information at the right time and place. this appears not an easy job as experience and research in the field of adaptive decision support learns  e.g.  weiland et al.  1 . information with a high interruption level is intended to focus the attention of the operator on important information. a popular scenario in literature describes a process operator facing an emergency situation where the operator is overwhelmed by a huge amount of information  which increases the operator workload and is making it almost impossible to deal with the emergency  sheridan  1 . the mentioned scenario typically occurs when time is limited. it is therefore crucial to use valuable time carefully and it seems obvious to support the operator in managing information flow after  or before  a problematic event.  
a reduction of information seems to be a logical first approach  but unfortunately several studies show that the reduction of information not necessarily results in improvement of efficiency  e.g.  baker et al.  1 . the removed information apparently is relevant for the operator. this may be because this information provides insight into the state of the process  stanton  1 . in the present research a combination of research suggested by freed   nugent et al.  and covery  is further explored and used for a description of a model called the competitive task model  ctm . after this a first description of an algorithm based on ctm is shown. 
1 	the competitive task model 
in the ctm information entities  ies  are prioritized by means of estimating their relevance  urgency  and importance  in the context of the goal profile  user  and task knowledge  figure 1 . relevance describes which user tasks have a relation with an offered ie and urgency describes the temporal  response  aspect of the ie for a particular task. relevance and urgency estimation is done by means of two interpreters that require knowledge of the user and its tasks. user and task knowledge is used to determine if the offered ie reduces uncertainty  shannon et al.  1  and to provide an indication of the relation between an ie and a specific task  respectively. the act of combining these interpretations per specific task yields a delta score  indicating the priority of the ie with respect to a certain user  

           figure 1 - the competitive task model task. for each user task the delta scores are combined for all offered ies. this results in a task score  indicating the priority of a certain task given a set of ies. finally  the task scores are related to the specific goals using a two-layered goal profile  gp . the first layer describes the goals and every goal implies one or more tasks. these tasks populate the second layer. the gp yields an indication of the importance of a specific task with respect to the user's higher goals. the combination of importance of a certain user task and its related task score results in a goal task score  indicating the eventual prioritization of user tasks. 
as an example of applying the ctm  imagine a navy officer on a frigate. the task profile consists of three high level goals  i.e. to fight  to sail and to float. suppose that an ie concerning a fire in the engine room reaches the officer. this ie is highly urgent and relevant for the sailing task  but to a lesser extent for the floating task. hence the delta score of the sailing task is higher than that of the floating task. but according to the gp  domain knowledge  floating is more important than sailing if the floating capability is in danger  and therefore the ctm indicates that the floating task should receive attention instead of the sailing task. 
1 the basic algorithm 
according to the ctm there are three terms needed to prioritize ies: relevance  r   urgency  u  and importance  i . the first two terms describe task 而 and state 考 dependent information for which ri  而 考  and ui  而 考  are numbers in the interval  1   where i is an ie. these two terms are quantified via relevance and urgency interpreters  figure 1  and are combined as a quantitative expression of the priority of the ie on the task and state using a function called the delta score  汛s : 
﹛﹛﹛﹛汛si  而 考  = ri  而 考  ui  而 考      1  where  is an operator combining r and u. in order to calculate the priorities of the competing tasks  a task score  ts  is calculated by means of the summation of all 汛s's per task  given a state: 
	ts 而 考 = ﹉汛si  而 考        	             1  
i﹋ies
the above task score is not taking into account the related higher level importance. therefore ts and i are combined: 
	tsimp  而 考  = i 而 考   ts 而 考        	 1  
where   is a operator combining ts and i. the combining operators   and  can be for instance normalized linear functions with its form possibly dependent on the given task 而  state 考  and ie i.  
1 discussion 
the ctm model described in this paper is able to calculate the priorities of competing tasks based on a set of ies. the ies are analysed in the context of the current activities of the operator  the importance of the ie regarding the main goals  and the urgency and relevance of the ie regarding the operator's tasks. because of the combined input of ies and dynamic states it can be used as an adaptive control mechanism for operator attention or as task allocation strategies  that are crucial in  automating  adaptive decision support. this is different from traditional models of preference choice from game theory  where preferences are given a priori. though  further research is needed to optimize the theoretical framework. for instance  freed  mentions that switching between hierarchies can be an efficient approach when information is applicable for a number of subtasks. the ctm does not elaborate on this. furthermore  the automatic relevance and urgency interpreters  and the combining operators in de basic algorithm need further experimentation and specification. 
acknowledgments 
this research is funded by the dutch ministry of defense under programme numbers v1 and v1.  
