 
the human visual system can interpret two dimensional  1-d  line drawings like the necker cube as three dimensional  1-d  wire frames.  we focus attention on a principle to minimize the entropy of angle distribution between line segments in a 1-d wire frame as a concrete definition of the law of pragnanz in gestalt psychology.  and we implement the principle with the perceptual preference of planarity to the loops of wire frames using a genetic algorithm.  experimental results show the good coincidence with human perception. 
1 introduction 
line drawings are more often used in documents which illustrate the functions and shapes of products  buildings  and so on rather than the photo-realistic images of them created by computer graphics  because line drawings are more suitable to convey the shapes of 1-d objects than the photo-realistic images. 
single line drawings have many possibilities in 1-d in-
terpretation  that is  there are infinite 1-d shapes which produce a same line drawing.  human vision selects one or two of them based on some internal criteria.  previously  shoji et. al.  proposed a principle to minimize the entropy of angle distribution  mead  between line segments in a 1-d wire frame as a concrete definition of the law of pragnanz in gestalt psychology.  the mead principle seems to be appropriate  but the results of their simulation are not sufficient to support the principle. 
¡¡in this work  we focus attention on the mead principle and other perceptual tendencies.  and we propose a 1-d interpretation model based on the mead principle and the perceptual preference of planarity to the loops of wire frames.  in the implementation of the model for simulation we use a genetic algorithm  ga  based on the minimal generation gap  mgg  model as a generation alternation model and the unimodal normal distribution crossover  undx  as a crossover  ono et. al.  1 . 
 
1 	definition of problem 
line drawings as the input of a simulation program are represented by the x and y coordinates of vertices and the pairs of vertex numbers which are corresponding to the both ends of line segments.  for example  the line drawing in figura 1  a  is represented by the list of x-y coordinates of vertices #1 to #1 and the list of pairs of vertex numbers such as  #1  #1    #1  #1    #1  #1    #1  #1   and so on.  we suppose the type of projection to be approximately orthographic.  then  the task of the simulation program is to estimate the z coordinate of each vertex.  estimated z coordinates and given x and y coordinates produce a 1-d wire frame object.  figura 1  b  shows the x-y-z coordinate system  an input line drawing  and an estimated 1-d object  a wire frame . 

figure 1: a given 1-d line drawing and an estimated 1-d wire frame. 
1 	model and its implementation 
a proposed model for 1-d interpretation is to search an optimal solution that maximizes the weighted sum f of evaluation values fe and fp based on the mead principle and the perceptual preference of planarity to the loops of wire 
frames  respectively. that is  
f=fe +wp fp 
where wp is a weight and its value was 1 in simulation. 
1 mead principle 
the evaluation value fe based on the mead principle is  
fe =1/ h where h is the entropy of angle distribution as follows: 
h  
where p ¦È  is a probability density function of angle between two 1-d line segments sharing an end point which is a vertex of a 1-d wire frame.  figure 1 shows an example of angle distribution. 

angle  deg.  between two 1-d line segments
	sharing same vertex	 
figure 1: an example of angle distribution. 
1 planarity to loops 
loop is a cycle of graph of vertices connected by line segments of a wire frame as shown in figure 1.  perception tends to interpret such loops as flat faces of polyhedron.  the evaluation value fp represents this perceptual preference as 
       ¡Æi¡Êl¦Ëi fp =1 ¡Æi¡Êl si
where l is the set of the indices of loops having 1 or more vertices.  ¦Ëi is the minimal eigen value of the covariance matrix of x  y  and z coordinates of the set of vertices on the i-th loop.  si is the area of i-th loop on xy plane. 
	1	loop 1-1
1
loop 1-1 loop 1-1
1
	1	 
figure 1: loops of a wire frame. 
1 ga with mgg and undx 
for the optimization the set of real numbers  a real-coded ga is often used.  we also use it with mmg and undx  ono et. al.  1 .  the chromosome consists of the sequence of z coordinates.  we set a population size to be 1  the number of crossovers to be 1  the number of generations to be 1.  that is  we randomly pick up two sequences from the 1 sequences of  z coordinates  the population   and generate 1 sequences based on the undx referring the two sequences and a sequence randomly selected from the rest of the population.  the 1 plus two sequences are evaluated and sorted by f value  and the best and a sequence selected by roulette based on its rank are return to the population.  the above procedure is repeated 1 times and the best in the last population is the simulation result. 
1 	simulation 
we used the data of 1 line drawings for simulation that were used by shoji et. al. .  the data can be obtained from the url http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/feneric/msdsm.html.  all of these line drawings are regular. so  we also prepare irregular ones.  from all of the regular 1 line drawing the proposed model makes 1-d wire frames coincident with perception  while shoji's model using only the mead fails in 1 of the 1 line drawings.  on the irregular line drawings which are made from a quadrangular pyramid truncated two non-parallel planes  the proposed model also succeeds. only the characteristic results are shown in figure 1. 

figure 1: examples of the results of the simulation.  1-d line drawings are shown on xy planes. 
1 	conclusions 
we implemented the proposed model based on the mead principle and the perceptual preference of planarity to the loops of wire frames using a genetic algorithm.  simulation results show the good coincidence with human perception.  as a future work  we plan to use the proposed model for the evaluation engine of the e-learning system for illustrators.  that is  a learner draws a line drawing observing an actual wire frame object  and then the system evaluates the drawing comparing the 1-d wire frame made from it with the 1-d data of the original one. 
