incremental diagnosis of discrete-event systems
alban grastien
irisa - universite뫣 rennes 1 rennes - france agrastie irisa.frmarie-odile cordier
irisa - universite뫣 rennes 1 rennes - france cordier irisa.frchristine largouet몮
university of new caledonia
noumea - new caledonia largouet univ-nc.nc모
1 introduction
it is established that diagnosing dynamical systems  represented as discrete-eventsystems amountsto findingwhat happened to the system from existing observations. in this context  the diagnostic task consists in determining the trajectories  a sequence of states and events  compatible with the observations. the diagnosis is generally defined as resulting from the synchronization of the automaton modelling the behavior of the system with the automaton that represents the observations sent by the system during the diagnosis period.
모in this article  we are interested in avoiding the global computation by slicing the automaton of observations and building the diagnosis on successive slices of observations.
모we introduce the concept of automata chain to represent an automaton by a sequence of automata slices. we then provide the properties such an automata chain has to satisfy to be a correct slicing and define a reconstruction operation to get the global automaton back. we demonstrate that  given a correct slicing of the observations  we can compute a global and correct diagnosis from the reconstruction of a diagnosis automata chain.
1 automata chain
in this section we introduce the concept of automata chain whose goal is to enable us to slice an automaton into pieces. we use the well-known definitions of automata  with i the set of initial states and f the set of final states   path and trajectories  paths between an initial and a final state . the main property of an automata chain  first bullet  is that a state is not allowed to appear in two distinct automata of the chain  except if it is a frontier state between two successive automata  i.e it is a final state of the former and an initial state of the later. more generally  if a state belongs to the ith automata and also to the jth automata  with j   i  it appears also in all the automata between the ith and the jth as a frontier state.
definition 1  automata chain  a sequence of automata  a1 ... an  with ai =  qi e ti ii fi  is called automata chain  and denoted ea  if:
   i j  j   i  q  q 뫍 qi 뫌 qj   q 뫍 fi 뫇 q 뫍 ii+1 
 then  p  path of ai
between q and q1  p is also a path of aj.
an automata chain is given in figure 1.

figure 1: chain of three automata
모let ea be an automata chain  a1 ... an . a trajectory of ea is defined as being the ordered from 1 to n  concatenation of n trajectories  one for each automaton. for instance  the path going from state 1 to state 1 through the states 1 and 1 is a trajectory of the automata chain of figure 1. conversely  the path going from state 1 to 1 through 1 is not a trajectory.
definition 1  correct slicing  let a be an automaton and ea =  a1 ... an  an automata chain. ea is a correct slicing of a  denoted ea = sli a   iff the set of trajectories of ea is equal to the set of trajectories of a.

figure 1: the chain in figure 1 is a correct slicing of this automaton obtained by reconstruction  see def. 1  of the chain
definition 1  automaton reconstruction  let
ea =  a1 ... an  be an automata chain with ai =  qi e ti ii fi . we call reconstruction of the chain ea  the simplified automaton obtained from  q1뫋 ... 뫋 qn e t1뫋 ... 뫋 tn i1 fn .
theorem 1 let a be an automaton and ea an automata chain. if ea is a correct slicing of a  then a is obtained by the reconstruction of ea. the proof is not given here.
모the reconstruction of ea is denoted sli 1 ea . if ea is a correct slicing of a  then a = sli 1 ea .
모we call prefix-closed automaton of a  resp. suffix-closed automaton of a  denoted a+  resp. a   the automaton a whose all states are final  resp. initial . we denote a#  the automaton which is both prefix-closed and suffix-closed.
definition 1  automata chain synchronization  we call synchronization of an automata chain ea =  a1 ... an  with an automaton ea   m
by: ea   m =  a1   m+ a1   m# ... a  1   m# an   m  .
theorem 1 let ea be an automata chain and m an automaton  then ea   m is an automata chain and ea   m is a correct slicing of sli 1 ea    m. the proof is not given.
1 diagnosis by slices
let us first recall the definitions used in the domain of discrete-event systems diagnosis where the model of the system is traditionnallyrepresented by an automaton. the model of the system describes its behaviour and the trajectories of mod represent the evolutions of the system.
definition 1  model  the model of the system  denoted mod  is an automaton  qmod emod tmod imod fmod . imod is the set of possible states at t1. all the states of the system may be final  thus fmod = qmod  mod+ = mod and mod# = mod .
모let us turn to observations and diagnosis definitions. generally  we don'tknow the total order on the observationsemitted by the system. consequently  the observations are represented by an automaton  each trajectory of which represents a possible order of emission of the observations.
definition 1  observations  the observations  denoted obsn  is an automaton describing the observations emitted by the system during the period  t1 tn .
definition 1  diagnosis  the diagnosis  denoted  n  is an automaton describing the possible trajectories on the model of the system compatible with the observations sent by the system during the period  t1 tn .
the diagnosis is defined  see  sampath et al.  1   as resulting from the synchronizationof the automata representing the system model and the observations:  n = mod obsn. using theo. 1  it is possible to compute the diagnosis by slices. the idea is to compute diagnosis slices  corresponding to observations slices. the global diagnosis can then be reconstructed from the diagnosis automata chain which is obtained.
definition 1  diagnosis by slices - diagnosis slice  let
mod be the system model. let eobsn =  obs1 ... obsn   be a correct slicing of obsn  the observations emitted during the period  t1 tn . the synchronization of eobsn with mod  i.e eobsn   mod =  obs1   mod obs1   mod# ... obsn   mod#  is the diagnosis by slices of the system. it can be denoted by the diagnosis automata chain   1 ...  n   where  i is called the ith diagnosis slice of the system.
모it can be proved  using theo. 1  that the diagnosis by slices of a system  here eobsn  mod  correctly represents the diagnosis computed on the global observations since the reconstruction of eobsn  mod equals the global diagnosis:
result 1  n = mod  obsn = sli 1 eobsn  mod 
1 incremental diagnosis
in the diagnosis by slices as presented above  the ith diagnosis slice   i  is computed independently from the others  by synchronizing the ith observation slice from the chain eobsn  obsi  with the system model mod#. in the incremental synchronization  noted  grastien et al.  1  for more details   the set of initial states of an automaton of the chain is restricted by the set of final states of its predecessor.
theorem 1 let ea be an automata chain and m be an automaton. we have. the proof is not given.
모provided that eobsn =  obs1 ... obsn  is a correct slicing of obsn we have: .
모we note  i  eobsi =  obs1 ... obs    the automata chain of the first i observations automata. let i   n  and e i =   1 ...  i  the automata chain resulting from the incremental synchronisation of eobsi with the system model
mod. we can incrementally compute e i+1 = eobs mod as follows:
result  where  i+1 is the automaton  obsi+1   mod#  whose initial states are restricted by the set of final states of  i.
모let obsi be the automaton provided by the reconstruction operation on eobsi  and let  i be the reconstruction of e i.
result 1  i = obsi  mod.
1 conclusion
in this paper  we formalized the computation by slices of diagnosis for discrete-event systems. we introduced and defined the concept of automata chain that enables us to handle slices of observations and slices of diagnosis rather than global observations and global diagnosis. in the diagnosis by slices  the ith diagnosis slice   i  is computed independently from the others. in  grastien et al.  1   we show that this result can be instantiated to the case where the observation automaton is sliced according to time  according to temporal windows.
모our study exhibits the  non trivial  correctness properties that the observation slicing  in an automata chain  has to satisfy in order to guarantee the completeness of the diagnosis computation. this first step is then essential before considering the incrementality of on-line diagnosis computation.
