 faculty of information science and electrical engineering kyushu university
1-1 hakozaki  higashi-ku 
     fukuoka  1 japan yokoo/oota/iwasaki is.kyushu-u.ac.jp computer science department
carnegie mellon university
forbes avenue
pittsburgh  pa 1 usa conitzer/sandholm cs.cmu.edu모모모모모모coalitional games in open anonymous environments makoto yokoo   vincent conitzer   tuomas sandholm   naoki ohta   atsushi iwasaki 

1	introduction
coalition formation is a key capability in automated negotiation among self-interested agents. a coalition of agents can sometimes accomplish things that the individual agents cannot  or can do things more efficiently. to make coalition formation successful  a key question that must be answered is how the gains from cooperation are to be distributed. coalitional game theory provides a number of solution concepts for this. some of these solution concepts have already been adopted in the multi-agent systems literature  zlotkin and rosenschein  1; shehory and kraus  1 .
모however  existing solution concepts have limitations when applied to open anonymous environments such as the internet. in such environments  a single agent can use multiple identifiers  or false names   pretending to be multiple agents  and distribute its ability  skills  among these identifiers. alternatively  multiple agents can collude and pretend to be a single agent that combines all of their skills. furthermore  an agent might try to hide some of its skills.
모these manipulations are virtually impossible to detect in open anonymous environments  and have thus become an issue in such environments specifically. that is also the reason why the gamut of these manipulations has not received much research attention previously. in this paper  we develop a new solution concept for coalitional games called the anonymityproof core  which is robust to the manipulations described above. we show that the anonymity-proof core is characterized by certain axiomatic conditions  including that an agent does not have an incentive to use the basic manipulations mentioned above .
1	model
traditionally  value division in coalition formation is studied in characteristic function games  where each potential coalition  i.e.  each subset x of the agents  has a value w x  that it can obtain. this assumes that utility is transferable  e.g.  utility can be transferred using side payments   and that a coalition's value is independent of what non-members of the coalition do. the characteristic function by itself does not give us sufficient information to assess what manipulations may be performed by agents in an open anonymous environment. thus  instead of defining the characteristic function over agents  we define it over skills that the agents possess.
definition 1  skills and agents  assume the set of all possible skills is t.	each agent i has one or multiple skills si   t. for simplicity  we assume each skill is unique  that is holds.
definition 1  characteristic function defined over skills 
a characteristic function v : 1t 뫸  assigns a value to each set of skills.
모we will denote by w the characteristic function defined over agents  and by v the characteristic function defined over skills. for a given set of agents. then  we have w x  = v sx . the characteristic function over skills is a more fine-grained representation than the characteristic function over agents.
모we assume the following three types of manipulation  or any combination of them  are possible for agents.
hiding skills: if agent i has a set of skills si  forany  it can declare that it has only.
false-name: agent i can use multiple identifiers and declare that each identifier has a subset of si.
collusion multiple agents can collude and pretend to be a single agent  who has the union of their skills.
1	manipulability of traditional solution concepts
in this section  we show that a well-known  perhaps the best known  solution concept called the core  gillies  1; von neumann and morgenstein  1  is vulnerable against these manipulations. this is true for other solution concepts such as shapley value  shapley  1   least-core  or nucleolus.
definition 1  core  given a set of agents w  an outcome  that is  a value division among agents is in the core if the following two conditions hold:
1. 
1.
the first condition is called the non-blocking condition: if this condition does not hold for some set of agents x  then the agents in x have an incentive to collectively deviate from the mechanism and to divide w x  among themselves.
 the second condition is called the feasibility condition: if   this outcome is infeasible.
모due to the space limitation  we only show an example where the core is manipulable by a collusion.
example 1 let there be three skills a b  and c. let the characteristic function over skills be as follows.
  v {a b}  = v {a c}  = v {a b c}  = 1    v {a}  = v {b}  = v {c}  = v {b c}  = 1.
let there be three agents 1  and 1 with skills a b  and c  respectively. then  the characteristic function over agents is as follows.
  w {1}  = w {1}  = w {1 1}  = 1    w {1}  = w {1}  = w {1}  = w {1}  = 1.
모in this example  there is only one outcome in the core  namely outcome  1 1 . this is because if agent 1  or 1  obtains any value  then the non-blocking condition is violated because agent 1 and agent 1  or 1  have an incentive to deviate from the mechanism and form their own coalition. we can see that since the skill b andc are completelysubstitutable  the agents who have these skills have no bargaining power. the least core and the nucleolus also give this outcome.
모now  let us assume that agent 1 and 1 collude and pretend to be a single agent 1  who has b and c.
then  the characteristic function over agents is as follows.
 
now  agent 1 and 1 are symmetric and have the same bargaining power. then  if we use the least core or the nucleolus  each agent receives 1. thus  agent 1 and 1 can increase their value division using a collusion.
1	anonymity-proof core
we develop a new solution concept for our setting which we call anonymity-proof core. as we will show  the anonymityproof core can be characterized by certain axiomatic conditions.
모we require that the outcome function 뷇 is anonymous  that is  the payoff to an agent does not depend on the identifiers of the agents; it depends only on the skills of the agent and the distribution of skills over other agents.
more specifically  given an agent i and a set of other agents
y   let si be the set of skills that agent i has  and let ssy =
{then  the outcome functionsj | j 뫍 y }  where sj is the set of skills that agent뷇 si ssy   takes si andjsshas.y
as arguments  and returns the payoff to agent i  when agent i declares its skills as si and the other agents declare their skills as ssy .
모let the set of agents who joined the mechanism be w  and let the profile of the skills that the agents declared be k =
 k1 k1 ...   where ki is the set of skills that agent i declared.
let  that is  sx is the union of the skills declared by a set of agentsi 뫍 x}. also  let ss몲i x=; let{ s = swi ; and let ssx = {ki | k1 ... k  1 ki+1 ...}  that is  a
set  each of whose elements is the set of skills corresponding to agent
모we now give six axiomatic conditions that the outcome function 뷇 should satisfy.
1. the outcome function 뷇 is anonymous.
1. 뷇 is never blocked by any coalition  that is   k  x    holds.
1. 뷇 is always feasible and always distributes all of the value  that is  holds.
1. 뷇 is robust against hiding skills  that is   where
 holds.
1.
	 	 	i	뷇
	뷇 sx ssy   holds.	뫍x	i	몲i
1. 뷇 is robust against collusions  that is   k  x   w   holds.
모in order to define the anonymity-proof core  we first formally define the core for skills. for a set of skills s = {s1 s1 ...}  we define a set of core outcomes for skills core s  as follows.
definition 1  core for skills  
core s  if it satisfies the following two conditions.
 
now we are ready to define the anonymity-proof core.
definition 1  anonymity-proof core  we say the outcome function 뷇ap is in the anonymity-proof core if 뷇ap satisfies the following two conditions.
1. for any set of skills s   t  there exists a core outcome for s  that is  some  such that for any skill profile k =  k1 k1 ...   with  holds.
1.   where 
 holds.
모the first condition says that for any set of skills reported by the agents  some outcome in the core for that set of skills should be used to distribute the value. the second condition says that an agent has no incentive to hide  some of  its skills. the following theorems show that the anonymity-proof core is characterized by the six axiomatic conditions. we omit the proof due to space constraint.
theorem 1 any outcome function 뷇ap in the anonymityproof core satisfies the six axioms.
theorem 1 any outcome function 뷇 that satisfies the six axioms is in the anonymity-proof core.
