
rotating workforce scheduling is a typical constraint satisfaction problem which appears in a broad range of work places  e.g. industrial plants . solving this problem is of a high practical relevance. in this paper we propose the combination of tabu search with random walk and min conflicts strategy to solve this problem. computational results for benchmark examples in literature and other real life examples show that combination of tabu search with random walk and min conflicts strategy improves the performance of tabu search for this problem. the methods proposed in this paper improve performance of the state of art commercial system for generationof rotating workforce schedules.
1 introduction
workforce scheduling  in general  includes sub-problems which appear in many spheres of life as in industrial plants  hospitals  public transport  airlines companies  universities etc. there are two main variants of workforce schedules: rotating  or cyclic  workforce schedules and non-cyclic workforce schedules. in a rotating workforce schedule all employees have the same basic schedule but start with different offsets. for this problem we have given  for formal definition see  musliu et al.  1  : number of employees: n  set of m shifts  length of schedule  temporal requirements  constraints about the sequences of shifts permitted to be assigned to employees  the complement of inadmissible sequences   maximum and minimum length of periods of consecutive shifts and maximum and minimum length of blocks of work days. the aim is to find a cyclic schedule  assignment of shifts to employees  that satisfies the requirement matrix and fulfill all given hard constraints.
　workforce schedules have a impact on the health and satisfaction of employees as well as on their performance at work. therefore  computerized workforce scheduling has interested researchers for over 1 years. for solving the problem of workforce scheduling  different approaches have been used in the literature. survey of algorithms used for different workforce scheduling problems is given by alfares  alfares  1 . balakrishnan and wong  balakrishnan and wong  1  solved a problem of rotating workforce scheduling by modeling it as a network flow problem. musliu et al  musliu et al.  1  proposed and implemented a new method for the generation of rotating workforce schedules  which is based on pruning of search space  by involving the decision maker during the generation of partial solutions. the algorithms has been included in a commercial product called first class scheduler  which is already being used by several companies in europe since 1. recently  musliu  musliu  1  proposed a simple tabu search approach for this problem. in this paper we propose improvement of tabu search technique proposed in  musliu  1  by combination of this technique with random walk and min conflicts heuristic.
1 combination of local search strategies
in this paper we propose a combination of tabu search with random walk and min conflicts technique. the combination of tabu search with random walk works as follows: for each iteration with probabilityp randomlythe cell  in the schedule  which is in conflict is picked. another cell is picked in the same column randomly and the contents of two selected cells are swapped. with probability1 p  the tabu search algorithm is applied.
　the random walk strategy in our case picks with probability p  first randomly one cell which is appears in some violated constraint  conflict . the content of this cell is swapped with the content of other cell which is selected randomly in the same column. as described later the solutions duringeach iteration fulfill always the workforce requirements. this is the reason why we allow the swap of contents of cells only inside of one column.
　further  we consider also combination of tabu search with min-conflicts strategy. the procedure applies standard min conflicts strategy for each iteration with probability p. with probability 1  p  it follows the tabu search algorithm.
　the min-conflict strategy for this problem works as follows. randomly a cell in schedule  variable  which is in a conflict is picked. further  all solutions are generated which can be obtained by swapping the content of selected cell and other cells in the same column. from the generated neighborhood the solution which minimizes number of conflicts is selected for the next iteration. note that there is a small difference compare to pure min conflicts heuristic   minton et al.  1   due to the specifics of this problem. first  in our case not only one variable in conflict changes the value  but two variables  which represents schedule cells in the same column  exchange their contents. second  with our procedure also a worst solution can be accepted for the next iteration.
　considering generation of neighborhood in tabu search we apply a simple move  which swaps the contents of two elements in the schedule. however  to reduce the neighborhood of the current solution  we only allow those solutions which fulfill workforce requirements  and thus the swapping of elements is done only inside of a particular column  day of schedule . the whole neighborhood of the current solution is obtained by swapping all possible elements  not identical  in all columns of a table. the applied move is denoted as swap j i k   where j represents the column in which the swap of elements should be done  and i  k represent elements in column j that should swap their contents. additionally  the above described move was extended to swap the blocks of neighborhood cells.
　to calculate the fitness of the solution  for each violation of constraint a determined number of points  penalty  is given  based on the constraint and the degree of the constraint violation. the fitness represents the sum of all penalties caused from the violation of constraints. since the problem we want to solve only has hard constraints  the solution will be found when the fitness of the solution reaches the value 1.
1 computational results
in this section we report on computational results obtained with the current implementation of local search strategies. for comparison we collected a set of real life problems which can be used further by other researchers to compare their results with ours. the collection of these problems can be found on http://www.dbai.tuwien.ac.at/staff/musliu/benchmarks/. the problems for which we give the results in this paper contains from 1 to 1 groups. each group can contain one or more employees. the first three examples are benchmark examples we could find in literature with some modification according the definition of problems we solve in this paper. other 1 examples are real life examples of different size which appeared in different areas in practice. the experiments were performed in a machine pentum 1  1ghz  1 mb ram. for each problem 1 independent runs were executed. maximal number of evaluations for each run is 1. note that we experimented with different parameters considering the probability for random walk  length of tabu list and type of tabu. in this paper the best results we could obtain for each strategy are presented.
　in the table 1 a summary of results fo tabu search  tabu search with random walk  and tabu search with min conflicts heuristics is presented. for each problem the average time needed  in seconds  for generation of solution is presented. the column named sol.  solutions  represents number of solutions found in 1 runs.
1 discussion of results
from the table 1 we can conclude that tabu search approach is improved with combination of tabu search with random walk considering both the average time needed to find the table 1: results for three techniques
tsts and rwts and mcex.t sec solt sec solt sec sol1.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11.111.11-1-1.11.111.11.111.11.111.1solutions and also the number of runs in which the solution is found. combination of tabu search with min conflicts heuristic further improves tabu search considering the the time for which the solution are generatedand the numberof successful runs. the combination of tabu search with min conflicts strategy proposed in this paper improves the results obtained by fcs  which to our best knowledge is the state of art commercial systems for generation of rotating workforce schedules.
