
syntactic configurations used in collocation extraction are highly divergent from one system to another  this questioning the validity of results and making comparative evaluation difficult. we describe a corpus-driven approach for inferring an exhaustive set of configurations from actual data by finding  with a parser  all the productive syntactic associations  then by appealing to human expertise for relevance judgements.
1 introduction
the term collocation  often used in different senses in the literature  is understood here as in the following statement:  the term collocation refers to the idiosyncratic syntagmatic combination of lexical items and is independent of word class or syntactic structure.   fontenelle  1  1 . crosslingual examples  such as  heavy smoker  and  pay attention   equivalent to  grand fumeur  and  faire attention  in french  show why collocations are crucial from the text encoding perspective: the lexical choice of the modifier and support verb is restricted by the conventional usage  while the alternatives are generally perceived as unnatural or  weird 1.
　typically  collocation acquisition from corpora relies on statistical significance tests for pairs of words occurring close to each other. the recent developments in syntactic parsing allowed the move towards more linguistically-informed methods of extraction. current systems rely increasingly on the syntactic pre-processing of source text  such as pos tagging  chunking  shallow or deep parsing  intended to support the identification of collocation candidates  prior to the statistical analysis.
　despite the advantages brought by syntax  wellformedness of results; drastic reduction of combinatorial complexity; partitioning of candidates into syntactically homogeneous classes   a serious problem arises: the arbitrariness in the choice of syntactic configurations  patterns  for collocation candidates. the rest of the paper discusses the implications of this problem and presents the solution we proposed in order to cope with it.
1 syntactic patterns for collocations
in the most permissive case  when no extraction patterns are defined   any pair of words is regarded as a valid collocation candidate. this results in much noise  since the most frequent word combinations are also the least interesting  e.g.   of the    in the  . therefore  many extraction systems perform the linguistic analysis of text and apply a linguistic filter on collocation candidates  very often  they perform pos tagging in order to filter out the pairs involving function words1 .
　there is unfortunately much disagreement with respect to the accepted syntactic configurations for collocations  often as a consequence of the lack of consensus in the understanding of the notion of collocation . there is much divergence  first  with respect to the pos of participating words. some authors consider open-class words only   justeson and katz  1; hausmann  1    while most of them allow for function words too  as in  agree on  . second  the syntactic relations proposed are almost always different. the following list shows the diversity of the syntactic patterns used  for english  in various works:
1. lexical collocations1 in bbi dictionary  benson et al.  1 : v-n  n-a  n-v  n-p-n  a-adv  v-adv;
1. hausmann's collocation definition : n-a  n-v  v-n  v-adv  a-adv  n- p -n;
1. xtract collocation extraction system  smadja  1 : n-a  n-v  v-n  v-p  v-adv  v-v  n-p  n-d;
1. wordsketch concordance system  kilgarriff et al.  1 : n-a  n-n  n-p-n  n-v  v-n  v-p  v-a  n-conj-n  a-p;
1. fipsco system  goldman et al.  1 :
n-a  n-n  n-p-n  n-v  v-n  v-p  v-p-n.
　these examples show how much the perspectives adopted by various authors differ from the initial view  in which the collocation is seen as independent of the syntactic structure  fontenelle  1  1 .
　the arbitrariness in pattern choice questions the quality of the results and makes comparative evaluation difficult. besides  a set of patterns established for a language may not completely fit another one. it is therefore necessary to finda means to establish  for each language  an exhaustive set of collocation patterns to be used as reference.
1 pattern induction experiments
in order to overcome the problem of arbitrariness in pattern choice  we propose to make a corpus-driven investigation aimed at the discovery of all possible and interesting collocation configurations.
　rather than relying on linguistic prescriptions  we try to induce these configurations from actual data. we do not commit ourselves to pre-defined patterns; instead  we consider any pos combination as a priori possible  and we only require the items of a pair to be syntactically related. we use fips  a gb-based parser  wehrli  1   to extract such generic relations among words. then we analyze the obtained results and infer the syntactic patterns from them.
　more specifically  we consider the following generic relations: head-modifier  head-complement  verb-argument  both subject and objects . we extract the word pairs represented by the combination of a head with the lexical head of its specifier or of its complement  cf. gb theory .
　two experiments have been performed on english and french corpora of newspaper articles. several statistics are shown in table 1: size of corpora; number of word pairs in a generic relation  tokens ; number of distinct pairs  types 1; and the number of pos combinations detected.
experimental dataenglishfrenchsize  words 1 m1 mword pairs  tokens 1 m1 mword pairs  types 1 m1 mpos combinations1table 1: generic relations extracted
　the last row shows that many pos combinations are actually productive  from the total of 1 combinations  with v  n  a  adv  p  d  conj in either specifier and complement position . by manually inspecting the obtained pos associations we discovered new collocation patterns that were commonly ignored - especially the patterns involving non-content words. we here provide some examples:
1. english: n-p  alliance between   p-n  across border   v-conj  judge whether   a-adv  mature enough   adv-adv  much more   adv-p  together with ;
1. french: p-n  sous pression  n-p  debat sur＞    n-conj  temps que   a-p  pret  a`   v-a  rester impassible   p-adv  comme jamais .
　a more in-depth analysis of results is under way  which aims to identify the relevant configurations from the pos combinations found with our method.
1 conclusion and related work
the performance of collocation extraction systems  in terms of accuracy and coverage  is highly dependent on the degree of syntactical permissiveness. too much permissiveness leads to the problems of noise and combinatorial explosion; too strong constraints risk not to capture the whole range of collocational phenomena. we proposed a trade-off between these extremes: we only maintained a minimal syntactic constraint  the presence of a syntactic link between collocation's items   then we induced the collocation patterns in a datadriven fashion. the experiments conducted revealed several new collocation patterns that involve closed-class words  and led us to support the claim made by van der wouden  1  1   that  lexical elements of almost any class may show collocational effect .
　we compare our work with that of dias   which attempts to overcome the pattern pre-definition problem by using combined statistics on sequences of adjacent words and their pos. since this method ignores the sentence structure  it is still affected by combinatorial explosion. in contrast  our method is computationally tractable  and  in addition  allows us to capture long distance collocational pairs1.
