
in this paper we introduce examination dialogues  an addition to the dialogue typology of walton and krabbe. in educational settings the purpose of dialogue is often to elicit the position of a student  e.g. to test understanding. in other settings  a frequently adopted tactic is to attack an opponent's stance by exposing internal inconsistencies in their argument. in real debate such inconsistencies will often be rather more subtle than elementary logical fallacies since they arise from contradictions apparent in the opponent's value system. protagonists will be better positioned to judge the applicability of this tactic as more information is determined concerning the exact nature of their opponent's case  e.g. the arguments favoured and values endorsed. one obstacle  however  is that following a request to state a view  the challenged party may refuse to comment. in this paper we present an approach to modelling the evolution of examination dialogues based on the concept of value-based argument frameworks and outline some algorithmic issues regarding argument selection.
1 introduction
one important class of dialogue not found in the influential typology of  walton and krabbe  1  is the examination dialogue. in such dialogues one party - the questioner q - elicits statements and opinions from another - the responder r - with the aim of discovering r's position on some topic  either to gain insight into r's understanding and knowledge of the topic  or to expose an inconsistency in r's position. examples include education by the socratic method  viva voce examination  cross examination of witnesses  and political interviews. in contrast to information seeking or inquiry dialogues  q may already have beliefs on the topic: unlike persuasion dialogues  q may have no intention of converting r to his position. examination dialogues may  however  be nested within information seeking dialogues: probing for inconsistency increases confidence in the veracity of r's beliefs; similarly  in persuasion dialogues  exposing inconsistency is a useful prelude to persuasion.
¡¡in examination dialogues the dialogue process occurs within an environment of relevant facts  arguments  and related issues that is  at least implicitly  recognised and understood by both parties  e.g. common knowledge of the subject in educational settings  matters of specific policies and legislation in political interviews; issues of evidence and witness testimony in trials; details of incidents under investigation in questioning suspects. in this paper our aim is to describe a generic abstract model within which the evolution of such examination dialogues can be analysed. in addition we outline an approach intended to aid q in selecting questions.
¡¡the foundational element for our model is provided by the value-based argument frameworks  vafs  of  benchcapon  1   a development of the classical argument systems of  dung  1   which offer a richer interpretation of the concept of an argument x  attacking  an argument y. in addition to the computational advantages outlined in  benchcapon  1   further indications that vafs provide a suitable mechanism for our analysis is presented by the methods discussed in  dunne and bench-capon  1b . a brief overview of vafs is given in section 1 and our model of examination dialogue presented in section 1. in section 1 we outline some algorithmic aspects involving argument selection in this scheme. conclusions are presented in section 1.
1 value-based argument frameworks
value-based argumentation frameworks are introduced in  bench-capon  1  as a development of the model of argument systems via directed graphs h = hx ai proposed in  dung  1 . a value-based argumentation framework  vaf  is defined as hx a v ¦Çi  where hx ai is an argument system  v = {v1 v1 ... vk} is a set of k values  and ¦Ç : x ¡ú v associates a value ¦Ç x  ¡Ê v with each argument x ¡Ê x. an audience   for a vaf hx a v ¦Çi is a transitive and irreflexive binary relation on v. a pair hvi vji in   is referred to as 'vi is preferred to vj' with respect to  .
¡¡ideas analogous to those in dung's argument system are now defined relative to some audience: s   x is conflict-free w.r.t.   if   x y ¡Ê s: hx yi ¡Ê a   h¦Ç y  ¦Ç x i ¡Ê  ; x is acceptable to s w.r.t.   if  y ¡Ê x: hy xi ¡Ê a    h¦Ç x  ¦Ç y i ¡Ê   or   z ¡Ê s s.t. hz yi ¡Ê a and h¦Ç y  ¦Ç z i ¡Ê/   ; s is admissible w.r.t   if each x ¡Ê s is acceptable to s w.r.t.  .
1 examination dialogues in vafs
in keeping with the observation that debates of interest take place within some recognised context  we view this context as a vaf g = hx a v ¦Çi. a debate in the context of g is a sequence ¦Ì1¦Ì1 ...¦Ìj of at most 1|x|+1 moves: odd indexed moves being played by q and even indexed moves by r.
¡¡suppose the next move to be made is ¦Ì1i 1  i ¡Ý 1 . the options for the next move s  - ¦Ì1i 1 ¡¤ ¦Ì1i - are 
 a  ¦Ì1i 1 = ask p : q asks r their view on p ¡Ê x; ask p  is legal provided that it has not occurred at an earlier point in the debate  i.e.   j   i ¦Ì1j 1 =1 ask p . the response ¦Ì1i is one of accept p   r agrees with p ; deny p   r does not agree with p ; or no-comment p   r refuses to say anything about p .
 b  ¦Ì1i 1 = found p stat p  : here p is an argument to which r has responded no-comment p  after ask p  earlier. q expresses a claim to know r's view of p as accepted  stat = accept  or otherwise  stat = deny .  c  ¦Ì1i 1 = resolve s : s is a set of arguments all of which have been asked about with none receiving a  nocomment  reply. q asserts that at least one of these replies cannot be correct with respect to the context g.
 d  ¦Ì1i 1 = concede: q can neither determine r's view in respect of no-comment arguments nor expose inconsistencies in the collection of  definite  responses.
¡¡the debate ends once one of the moves  b - d  is played. noting that we assume  b  or  c  can be played only if q may justify the claim made  these result in a  win  for q  whereas  d  results in a  win  for r.
¡¡as a very simple example consider: x = {x y z}; a = {hx yi hy zi hz xi}; v = {a b}; and ¦Ç x  = ¦Ç z  = a; ¦Ç y  = b. if r replies no-comment y  or deny y  to ask y  then q wins  by playing found y accept  or resolve y   since  regardless of whether r's audience includes ha bi or hb ai  r must accept y. on the other hand
- assuming r replies accept y  - the only responses regarding r's view of {x z} that could lead to a win for q are when exactly one no-comment occurs; or it is claimed both are accepted; or both denied. notice that may r report haccept x  deny z i  or vice versa  despite believing otherwise and q will be unable to detect this.
¡¡in general  within such debate contexts  both players have a number of non-trivial strategic issues to resolve. in particular  assuming that r wishes to hide information  and therefore will either respond  no-comment  and/or misreport some views   r may have to form a partition of x determining those queries to which false and true responses will be given. we note that  as indicated in the small example above  refusing to comment on any argument or misreporting the status of every argument may fail to be a successful strategy; moreover it is an easy consequence of  dunne and bench-capon  1a  that the decision problem faced by r determining if classifying p as no-comment loses  is conp-complete.
1 choosing arguments
we conclude the brief technical discussion  by outlining an approach to query selection that is based on a translation to propositional formulae. given hx a v ¦Çi  in order for p ¡Ê x to be accepted w.r.t. at least one audience    it must belong to an admissible w.r.t.   set s   x. consider disjoint sets of propositional variables z and w = {wi j : 1 ¡Ü i 1= j ¡Ü k}. define the function  f z w  via: f ¦Á ¦Â  =   if and only if the subset s of x indicated by ¦Á  i.e. xi ¡Ê s   ¦Ái =    is admissible with the binary relation   encoded in ¦Â  i.e. hvi vji ¡Ê     ¦Âi j =   and this relationship is an audience  i.e. irreflexive and transitive. this function can be described by a  short  propositional formula ¦µf z w  of length o |a| + k1  that with the addition of at most o |a|  auxiliary variables  d  translates to an equivalent cnf formula  ¦·f z w d  with o |a| + k1  clauses  the longest of which contains at most 1 + maxx¡Êx |{y : hy xi ¡Ê a}| literals. using ¦·f the strategy pursued by q will be to obtain responses from r that result in ¦·f evaluating to ¡Í  i.e. r is inconsistent  or to infer the unique instantiation of zi that satisfies ¦·f with the replies already given.
1 conclusions and development
we have introduced a class of question-response dialogues - examination dialogues - and modelled them using vaf schemata as the basis for representing related knowledge. a number of issues - both theoretical and applicative - form the subject of work in progress. in addition to on-going empirical investigations of argument selection strategies employing the propositional translation briefly outlined in section 1 there are several questions of interest regarding properties of the model when the protagonists are  limited  in different ways. thus  to what extent is q at an advantage if an upper bound is placed on the number of  no-comment  and/or false responses r can make  similarly  if q is restricted to some maximum number of questions  rather than being allowed to ask about the status of every argument in x  it is likely that q must adopt a dynamic selection mechanism  rather than choosing a set to query in advance  so as to adapt effectively to r's responses.
references
 bench-capon  1  t. j. m. bench-capon. persuasion in practical argument using value-based argumentation frameworks. journal of logic and computation  1 :1  1.
 dung  1  p. m. dung. on the acceptability of arguments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic reasoning  logic programming and n-person games. artificial intelligence  1-1  1.
 dunne and bench-capon  1a  p. e. dunne and t. j. m. bench-capon. complexity in value-based argument systems. in proc. 1th jelia  volume 1 of lnai  pages 1. springer-verlag  1.
 dunne and bench-capon  1b  p. e. dunne and t. j. m. bench-capon. identifying audience p