
the point algebra is a fundamental formal calculus for spatial and temporal reasoning. we present a new generalization that meets all requirements to describe dependencies on networks. applications range from traffic networks to medical diagnostics. we investigate satisfaction problems  tractable subclassses  embeddings into other relation algebras  and the associated interval algebra.
1 the dependency calculus
reasoning about complex dependencies between events is a crucial task. however  qualitative reasoning has so far concentrated on spatial and temporal issues. in contrast  we present a calculus  ragni and scivos  1   a proper generalization of the nonlinear relation algebra  created for specific questions of reasoning about consequences.
모this algebra  called dependency calculus  dc   meets all requirements to describe dependencies in networks. there are two aspects: dependencies of points are described by the point algebra padc  and of intervals by the associated interval algebra iadc. for these we analyze questions concerning the satisfaction problems  and show the correspondence to other relation algebras. for this  we use an isomorphism preserving the tractability of subclasses. this method promises to structure the field of relation algebras and to transfer algebraic aspects and complexity results from one algebra to another.
모if we observe pollution in an ecosystem of flowing water  we can draw conclusions about pollution at other points  cf. fig. 1 . if pollution is found at d  f is polluted as well. it

figure 1: a pipe network. flow occurs along the  pipes  from left to right. is there a difference between the pairs  a b  and  d e  
might be caused from a source at a  but not b  c  or e. if c is polluted  d probably is also polluted. does the same hold true for b and d  no: they have no common point upstream. dc directly represents such differences. for pairs like  c d  or  d e   we have the new  fork  relation  f . the relations  fork    before    equal   and  after  are called  dependent . the other case  like  a b   is called  independent   a medical problem is given in fig. 1.

figure 1: a virus transmittance scheme. arrows indicate direction of assured  dashed of unassured donorship  dotted lines mean that both persons carry the same virus. no lines means that we do not have prior knowledge. the situation on the left must be incomplete. the existence of a fourth person d accounts for this. padc concludes that indeed there was indirect transmittance from d to a.
모if x  y are points in a partial order ht 뫞i  then we define these relations in terms of the partial order as follows: x  y iff x뫞y and not y뫞x. x=y iff x뫞y and y뫞x. x y iff y뫞x and not x뫞y. xfy iff  z z뫞y뫇z뫞x and neither x뫞y nor y뫞x. xy iff neither  z z뫞y뫇z뫞x nor x뫞y nor y뫞x . all relations between nodes in fig. 1 can be described by these five basic relations.
1 computational complexity
assume that a set of constraints between some points is given. one question is whether this set is consistent. is it possible to construct a network in which all constraints are satisfied  this problem is called padc-sat. what is the computational effort to construct such a network 
definition 1. for two relation algebras 붞 붞1 a homomorphism is a function 붺 from 붞 to 붞1 such that 붺 preserves all operations of the boolean algebra and for all relations r  s:
모   converse :	붺 r 1  = 붺 r  1
모   composition : 붺 r s = 붺 r  붺 s  definition 1. for two relation algebras 붞 붞1 a tractabilitypreserving-homomorphism  tph  is a homomorphism 붺 from 붞 to 붞1 such that each subset 붹   붞 is tractable iff 붺 붹    붞1 is tractable. an isomorphic tph is called tpi.
lemma 1. a tpi 붺 from padc to rcc-1  fig. 1  is given by:
붺 :	 	1뫸 pp	=	1뫸 eq	 pp 1
	f 1뫸 po	 dr

	xdry	xpoy	xeqy	xppy	xpp 1y
figure 1: the rcc-1 relations
table 1: the tractable subclasses of padc.

뫐    {}  {f}    { }    {f  }   {}               the relations including {=} are contained in 뷉1  뷉1  뷉1 iff r {=} is in 뷉1  뷉1 뷉1 . all relations including {=} are in 뷉1.
모with  renz and nebel  1  and lemma 1  we get: theorem 1. padc-sat is np-complete.
theorem 1. the four classes 뷉1 뷉1 뷉1 뷉1  cf. tab. 1  are the only maximal subclasses of padc.
1 the associated interval algebra
there are applications in which it is not sufficient to compare single points in a network. for instance  pollution in a pipe network is not restricted to single points but extends to whole sections  and automated planning and project management deal with tasks that span over time intervals.
definition 1. an interval i = si ei  is a pair of points satisfying si   ei. the interval algebra iadc is the relation algebra generated by quadruples of relations as basic relations
 brresss rreese ss  se  es  ee         closed under 뫌 뫋       1. for i   being in relation i r i1 means srsss1  srse e1  eress1  and eree e1.
iapo is analogically defined  based on.
c
figure 1: reasoning with uncertainty. the dashed line indicates that it is unknown if a is before a1. in contrast to iapo  iadc concludes such knowledge: depending on the iadc relation between a1 and a1  the obstruction b can or cannot be bypassed using a1.
모if rss = rse = res = ree =: r1  we write  r1 . fig. 1 and fig. 1 show advantages of the new  finer interval calculus: more situations can be distinguished and more conclusions are possible. the situation given in fig. 1 is described by: a     a1  a1    c  a1     c  b    c  b
by specifying the latter relation  e.g. to a   new conclusions can be drawn  in this case  a     a1 becomes impossible. this means  if b is an obstacle on the path from a to c via a1  then there is no alternative route via a1.
	a	a	a	a

	c	b	c	b	c b	c b
figure 1: in contrast to iapo  iadc discerns these cases which are specifications of the composition ac.
모for a set of iadc constraints  we define iadc-sat analogically to padc-sat. how hard is it to decide the satisfiability  theorem 1. iadc-sat is np-hard.
definition 1. for a subset s   padc  a relation r is called
s-pointizable if it belongs to the class
ps rresss rreese
a gadget for an iadc relation r is a set of points p1 ...  pm  m 뫟 1  with padc relations that are satisfiable iff  p1  p1 r p1  p1  is satisfiable. for s   padc  an iadc relation r is called s-gadgetable  r 뫍 gs  if all padc relations between the endpoints extended with additional points are relations of s. g is an abbreviationfor gpadc and p for ppadc.
theorem 1. g p are intractable subclasses of iadc.
not all gadgetable relations are pointizable. for instance 
 is gadgetable. hence  b p g  iadc. if s is tractable  in padc   then ps is tractable in iadc. what about the larger class gs  is it still tractable 
theorem 1. if r is a class of s-gadgetable iadc relations and the satisfiability problem over s is tractable  then the satisfiability problem over r is tractable. corollary 1. b g뷉1 g뷉1 g뷉1 g뷉1   iadc are tractable. corollary 1. iadc-sat is np-complete.
1 conclusion
we presented and investigated a new algebra for reasoning about causal relations. both padc and iadc are np-complete  and we identified tractable subclasses. promising ideas for future work are introducing probabilities to this calculus to model reasoning in bayesian networks and the temporalization of dc for modeling dependencies that vary over time.
