
we show how one-class compression neural networks and one-class svm can be applied to fmri data to learn the classification of brain activity associated with a specific motor activity. for comparison purposes  we use two labeled data and see what degree of classification ability is lost compared with the usual two-class svm.
1 introduction
functional magnetic resonance imaging  fmri  allows the carrying out of specific non-invasive studies within a given subject while providing an important insight to the neural basis of brain processes. neurons  which are the basic functional unit of the brain  consume a higher level of oxygen when active  hence blood with a higher level of oxygenation is supplied to those active neurons. fmri makes indirect use of this effect by detecting areas of the brain which have an elevated consumption of oxygen. this effect can be used to identify areas of the brain associated with specific functions.
¡¡the current methodology used to identify such regions is to compare  using various mathematical techniques  the elevation of oxygen consumption during a task with that used during a resting state.  mitchell et al.  1  applied machine learning techniqes to this problem  when considering the classification of the cognitive state of a human subject. thus  in order to determine the elevation of oxygen consumption during a task  images acquired during a resting state are required. in order to keep the alternation between activity  a reference time-course is needed  where the resting and active states are embedded. in this paper we further consider the problem of identifying fmri scans that have only been acquired during the  active  state  i.e. scans acquired during the duration when the human subject has performed the given task. the basic intuitions are that  if available  two-class classification should perform better; although not always. however  as is the case under consideration here  often we have some reasonable sampling of the positive examples; i.e. the distribution of positive examples can be estimated; while the negative examples are either non-existent or episodic; i.e. not necessarily representative.
¡¡obtaining good results under this assumption is known to be quite challenging; nonetheless it is often the most realistic assumption. for the fmri classification described above  this problem is particularly non-trivial as we expect the data to be of very high dimension and extremely noisy  as the brain concurrently works on many given tasks. it is also quite natural to assume that there is only representative data of the task of interest; and not necessarily representative data of the negation of this task thus making the one-class learning techniques appropriate. in this work  we use two major one-class learning techniques -  bottleneck  or compression neural networks  manevitz and yousef  1  and a common version of the one-class support vector machine  svm   scholkopf et al.  1 . we point out that we use the entire brain slice  with no pre-filtering - i.e. the data is the entire slice  labeled with the task.
1 experiments
the frmi scans are of a volunteer1 flexing their index finger on the right hand inside a mr-scanner while 1 image slices of the brain were obtained from a t1 -weighted mr scanner. the time-course reference of the flexing is built from the subject performing a sequence of 1 total actions and rests consisting of rest  flex  rest  ... flex. two hundred fmri scans are taken over this sequence; ten for each action and rest. the individual fmri images are dicom1 format of size 1¡Á1. each image is labelled as either 1  active  or  1  inactive .
¡¡thus  in our data we have 1 positive and 1 negative images for each of the 1 slices. for the bottleneck neural network 1 positive samples were chosen randomly and presented for training and 1 samples  consisting of the remaining 1 positive and 1 random negative samples  were used for testing. this experiment was redone with ten independent random runs. the limitation to 1 negative samples out of a possible 1 was chosen to keep the testing fair between the positive and negative classes. we manually cropped the nonbrain background from the scans; resulting in a slightly different input/output size for each slice of about 1 inputs and outputs. the compression percentage arising from the bottleneck was chosen by experimenting with different possible values. a uniform compression of about 1% gave the best results for the hidden layer. the irrelevant  non-brain  image data was cropped for each slice resulting in a slightly different input/output size for the network for each slice. the network was trained to the identity using 1 epochs on the above chosen data. following training the network was used as a classification filter  with an input value being classified as positive if the error level was lower or equal to a threshold chosen heuristically from training and classified as negative. we used the same protocol in a one-class svm. additionally  we used the two-class svm where we randomly selected 1 training images and the remaining 1 for testing. this was also repeated 1 times.
1 first experimental results
the obtained results are an average over all the slices. each slice was averaged over 1 repeats where in each repeat a random split of training testing was selected. both svm classifiers were used in their default setting as set by the osusvm 1 package1. in addition  the two-class svm was used with the unnormalised data as we have experimentally found that with normalised data the overall results were significantly worse. in table 1 we are able to observe that while the one-class svm performs better with the rbf kernel  the two-class svm is better with the linear kernel. in table 1
table 1: svm results  success .
methodlinear kernelrbf kernelone-class svm1%¡À1%1%¡À1%two-class svm1%¡À1%1%¡À1%we compare the one-class to two-class techniques. as initially expected we are able to observe that the two-class approaches outperform those of the one-class. the one-class svm is slightly better then the bottleneck compression nn.
we further analyse the statistics of the methods i.e. the sepa-
table 1: methods success results.
methodresult on slicesbn - nn1%¡À1%one-class svm1%¡À1%two-class svm1%¡À1%ration of the classified samples to their true classes. in table 1 we compute and show the statistics of the fmri images of the positive samples that were classified as positive  denoted as true-positive  and the positive samples that were classified as negative  denoted as false-negative and the statistics of the negative fmri images samples that were classified as negative  denoted as true-negative  and those that were classified as positive  denoted as false-positive. we are able to observe in that the compression nn is able to find a higher rate of true-positive fmri images then the one-class svm and the two-class methods even though they have obtained an higher overall success rate. also we observe with regard to the negative samples that the two-class methods perform better then the one-class. this is expected as the one-class methods make no use of the negative samples and eminently will have a lower ability in classifying it. additional experiments have
methodtrue-positivefalse-negativestdbn - nn1%1%¡À1%one-class svm1%1%¡À1%two-class svm1%1%¡À1%true-negativefalse-positivebn - nn1%1%¡À1%one-class svm1%1%¡À1%two-class svm1%1%¡À1%table 1: methods statistics
been performed on visual instead of motor tasks with very similar results.
1 conclusions
we have found that one class classification can be done  even with the  noisy  data and with the full slices of the brain scan. comparable results  about 1% accuracy  were obtained under both one-class svm and compression-based nn techniques. for future work we would further investigate automated feature reduction as it might be fruitful  compare scans of the same individual across different fmri sessions. the work presented here was for one individual. we intend to compare training and classification across individuals.
acknowledgments
this collaboration was supported by the caesarea rothschild foundation  and by the hiacs reseach center  the university of haifa. the first author is funded by the european project lava num. ist-1 and pascal network of excellent num. ist-1. we also thank ola friman of harvard medical school for his generous sharing of his data.
