
in mobile computing  communicative acts are not free. costs such as power and bandwidth consumption are prominent issues. in addition  resources vary widely across hardware and operating context. agents in these settings must account for these costs and adapt to available capabilities. this poster presents a planning optimization formalization of this problem  enabling service-based agents to reason about and conduct communication using local and network accessible resources.
1 introduction
mobile computing is increasingly common in urban settings. laptops  pdas  and other small  network-capable computing devices pervade society. these devices along with the many and varied applications of mobile computing highlight an important observation: communicative actions are not free. in fact  there are a variety of associated costs  including:
  power. on many devices  networking hardware consumes more power than all other systems combined  vahdat et al.  1 . transmissions consume substantial amounts of limited battery supplies. frequent communication significantly reduces operational lifespan  a critical obstacle against many applications.
  bandwidth. wireless link capacities are typically much lower. throughput in 1b manets is often less than 1% the theoretical maximum of 1 mbps  xylomenos et al.  1 . in contrast  traditional wired networks can reach upward of 1 mbps. communication must be sparing to conserve such limited bandwidth.
¡¡communication resources also vary between hosts and operating context. hardware such as 1 cards  bluetooth chips  and cdma modules possess different properties and capabilities. routing algorithms and other software present dissimilar interfaces and sensing abilities an agent may utilize  kopena et al.  1 . however  it cannot necessarily know a priori which communication services will be available on its host  and must instead autonomously discover and utilize them. in addition  this set may change over time  through user actions such as undocking the host or natural events  e.g. network cards failing as power dwindles.
1 example: calendar agent
consider a calendar on a pda with cellular and wireless capabilities. as events are posted it synchronizes with a base computer  which in turn notifies family and friends. wireless ethernet can only connect to the base computer when in range of an access point. the cellular module can always make an internet connection to the base computer via a satellite  but consumes substantial amounts of power and charges a fee.
¡¡to post updates in all situations  the calendar must discover and utilize both interfaces. however  cellular connections should be minimized: they should not be used if wireless is available  or to post minor or far-off events. these should be collected until several may be transmitted or ethernet can be used. however  cellular connections should be used to post imminent changes so that the base computer may begin synchronizing affected friends  family  or co-workers.
1 formalization
utilizing available network services and intelligently  effectively conducting communications may be achieved by releasing agents and applications from fixed application-layer protocols and messages. communicative actions are not static. an agent may plan  schedule  alter  and parameterize them  adapting and responding to conditions and events.
¡¡even a simple agent may deliberate on when to deliver a fixed message in order to minimize communication costs. it may also plan on which network services to use based on advertised descriptions. more sophisticated agents may alter and plan on the propositional content of messages to maximize their utility: power-conscious agents may aggregate low priority messages into one burst  economizing fixed costs.
¡¡in this work  such reasoning is accomplished through utility-based planning. services such as network interfaces are advertised and treated as plan actions with attached costs. communication goals are modeled as utilities of doxastic states. these elements are represented within a formal situation calculus  enabling exchange of well-defined service descriptions and limited commitment to reasoning mechanisms.
planning framework. this work defines the above planning problem using the process specification language  psl   gruninger and menzel  1¡§    an iso standard  iso 1  for process modeling. at its core  psl is an extensive first-order situation calculus axiomatization. a deductive planning problem  a i ¦× c  ¡ú ¦Ñ is defined on top of the psl core  occurrence trees  and discrete states theories:
 	a are the activity axioms  preconditions and effects.
 	i defines initial fluent state:  ¦Äi ¡¤initial ¦Äi    ¦Äi |= i.
  a chain ¦Ä is a sequence of successive legal occurrences such that initial ¦Ä1 ¡Ä¦Än |= the episode delimiter ¦×.
  c defines utility summands ¦Ì over occurrences  related by occ-util-summ ¦Äi ¦Ì .
 	occurrence utility  occ-util ¦Äi   is defined as ¡Æ¦Ì over
{¦Ì|occ-util-summ ¦Äi ¦Ì }.
 	utility of a chain  utility ¦Ä   equals ¡Æocc-util ¦Äi .
  a rational chain ¦Ä is a chain such that there does not exist a ¦Ä1 such that utility ¦Ä1    utility ¦Ä .
 	a rational plan ¦Ñ is then the sequence of activities associated with the occurrences in a rational chain.
agents  hosts  and message actions. a small theory weakly defining agents  hosts  messages  and message activities is also incorporated on top of psl. this provides a shared ontology defining a base by which an agent may communicate about  recognize  and utilize communication resources.
agent beliefs. a first order theory of belief based on kaccessibility between occurrences is also included in the theory. it defines kd  see e.g.  fagin et al.  1    the logic of consistent belief  within the fluent space of psl. this enables the expression of agent interfaces in the form of doxastic activity effects  as well as an agent's communication goals. belief  and specifically kd  was chosen due to its relatively weak commitments on agent reasoning abilities and trust.
1 example: calendar agent axiomatized
agents and communication resources may then describe their interfaces and abilities  e.g. the base computer of section 1:
 o a s m¡¤occurrence of o a ¡Älegal o 
¡Ämessage-activity a s sync m   
  c¡¤holds contents m c  o    holds believes sync c  o  .
the cellular and wireless interfaces may be described as:
 o a s d m¡¤occurrence of o a ¡Älegal o ¡Ä sat-msg a s d m    message-activity a s d m ¡Ä
occ-util-summ o  1 .
 o a s d m¡¤occurrence of o a ¡Älegal o ¡Ä radio-msg a s d m    prior in-range s d  o ¡Ä message-activity a s d m ¡Äocc-util-summ o  1 .
the agent's internal communication activities would be: activity defer .
 o m d n¡¤occurrence of o attach m update d n   ¡Ä legal o    ¡Äholds contents m update d n   o .
the agent's behavior may then be captured as the timedependent utility of delivering updates to the base computer:
 o c d n¡¤holds current-day c  o ¡Ä holds believes sync update d n   o    occ-util-summ o 1   d c /1  .
¡¡with the addition of an episode delimiter defined as occurrences of defer or message-activity  supporting axioms not listed above such as the definition of update  and closure axioms  a plan based on these definitions will:
 deliver any update if a wireless connection exists. use the satellite interface if warranted by an update or some collection of updates. for example  any update concerning the next 1 days will be posted immediately. otherwise defer until new updates are posted or conditions change  e.g. wireless contact is made.1summary and future workthis poster presents an approach to efficiently performing communication tasks by planning on the costs and capabilities of advertised resources. in contrast with power-aware networking  this work supports application-layer preferences and mixed-infrastructure settings. although similar to research on communication planning via epistemic goals  this work acknowledges that communicative acts have costs. in addition  this framework is oriented toward a service-based system  enabling agents to reason on internal as well as external capabilities. this work also introduces an application area of web services  along with a formalization in the situation calculus and a principled  practical representational differentiation between mental and world activity effects.
¡¡future work includes algorithms and protocols for exchanging descriptions; accounting for the unpredictable nature of mobile networks in composing a plan; defining subclasses of the planning problem amenable to pragmatically feasible computation; techniques for integrating heterogenous and untrusted costs; and the knowledge acquisition task of evaluating preconditions involving unknown terminology.
¡¡more information  details  and citations to related work are available at http://edge.cs.drexel.edu/services/.
