
diagnosticity operates as an important selection criterion for several computational models of concept combination. unfortunately  it has not been clear how the diagnosticity of property and relational predicates of the concepts combined can be formalized and quantified. using an information retrieval method we compute  in a uniform manner  diagnosticity values of concepts predicates. we go on to present a reasoning system that attempts to create meaningful interpretations of novel nounnoun combinations. the system is based solely on diagnostic predicates values and a set of constraint satisfaction rules. we show the effectiveness and
plausibility of our methods and discuss their potential.
1 introduction
noun-noun combinations play a central role in language and cognition. people produce two main types of interpretation to noun-noun composite concepts: relational interpretations that hinge on a relation being found to connect the two concepts  e.g.  finger cup:  a cup to clean fingers in   and property interpretations that hinge on transferring a property from one concept to the other  e.g.  finger cup:  a thin cup    see  levi  1  . in this process  the diagnostic predicates of the concepts combined have been found to play a key role. furthermore  several computational models use the diagnosticity constraint as an important selection criterion  e.g.   costello and keane  1  . however  the diagnosticity mechanisms have so far only been formalized for property predicates  partly because it has not been clear how one can operationally define diagnosticity for relational predicates. property predicates typically represent perceptual or physical aspects of objects. relational predicates usually put the concept in connection with other concepts or refer to functions.
모in this study  we use a new method for characterizing the diagnosticity of property and relational predicates  which is based on van rijsbergen's  tf-idf information retrieval schema. we applied this method to compute the diagnosticity values of the predicates of a set of concepts. the data are input to a reasoning system that attempts to provide meaningful interpretation s  for a given noun-noun combination based on its interpretation type  the diagnosticity values of the predicates of its constituent concepts and a small set of rules.
1 formalizing diagnosticity
the idea underlying the formalization of diagnosticity is that a feature predicate f is important for a concept c within a set of concepts  if it occurs often in descriptions of concept c  and rarely in descriptions of the rest of the concepts in the set  ferarri and keane  1 . given a set of descriptions of concepts  we can thus compute diagnosticity values for each feature relative to a concept dc f by adapting the information retrieval tf-idf formula  van rijsbergen  1  as:
dc f = f fc f 뫄 log1ncs	 1  nf
where f fc f is the frequency of the feature in a certain concept  and log1ncs/nf is a non-linear measure derived from the ratio between the number of concepts ncs in the set and the number of concepts nf described by the feature at issue.
모once the diagnosticity values for concept predicates are derived  we can class every concept as property or relational depending on whether its total diagnosticity is given mainly by relations or properties. when we make a combination from two single concepts each of them bears diagnosticity of property features  dpf  and diagnosticity of relational features  drf . these values can in turn be summed as to characterize the combination with a total property diagnosticity  tpd  and a total relational diagnosticity  trd .
모a list of predicates was formed by asking subjects to describe a set of concepts and any associated knowledge. formula 1 was used to compute diagnosticity values for their diagnostic predicates. predicates with one standard deviation or more above the mean score were defined as highly diagnostic  hd . a combination was classified as relational  when trd   tpd or property  when tpd   trd.
1 diagnosticity-driven interpretation generation
to test the potential of diagnosticity as a driving force in concept combination  we developed a reasoning system  in prolog  using constraint programming techniques. the techniques were developed after analysis of the data of a previous algorithm 1 diagnosticity-driven combination rules for
relational noun-noun composite concepts
get all mn and hn's property and relational diagnostic features  dpfmn  drfmn  dpfhn  drfhn  if 1 or more dpfmn 뫟 hd then
if all drfmn   hd then
hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn 뫟 hd hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn = drfmaxmn mn  drfhn   hn   s.t. drfhn = drfmaxhn
else
hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn 뫟 hd
mn  drfhn   hn   s.t. drfhn = drfmaxhn
모모hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn 뫟 hd end if else
if all drfmn   hd then hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn = drfmaxmn mn  drfhn   hn   s.t. drfhn = drfmaxhn
else
모hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn = drf 뫟 hd mn  drfhn   hn   s.t. drfhn = drfmaxhn end if
end if

empirical study  where 1 people were asked to provide interpretations to 1 novel noun-noun combinations with predicates of varied diagnosticity scores and distributions.
1	architecture and implementation
the system has an interface that asks the user to enter the modifier noun  mn  and the head noun  hn  of a composite concept. this input is parsed and checked against its knowledge base. the knowledge base is in clausal form and consists of a declarative definition of concepts with their predicates and their corresponding diagnostic values as computed above. if both nouns are known to the system  it proceeds to apply the reasoning procedures. the core procedure for the interpretation of relational combinations is sketched in algorithm 1 and that of the property ones in algorithm 1. action constraints are represented as binary functions and enforce valid transitions between states.
1	evaluation
evaluation of the interpretations produced was conducted with 1 noun-noun concepts  half of which were property and half relational  with constituent concepts  n = 1  of varying diagnosticity scores. all reasoning sub-mechanisms were tested. the results were compared with existing people's data. sixty two interpretations were produced. 1%  n = 1  of the interpretations were deemed to be sensible by two judges. half of the meanings generated were among those people had produced. for the property combinations in particular  it was found that the interpretations generated were those people produced more often.
1 discussion
currently  the application of the new method for computing diagnosticity to  diagnostically mark  concept predicates of algorithm 1 diagnosticity-driven combination rules for
property noun-noun composite concepts
get all mn and hn's property and relational diagnostic features  dpfmn  drfmn  dpfhn  drfhn  if 1 or more dpfmn 뫟 hd then
if all drfmn   hd then
hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn 뫟 hd
else
hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn 뫟 hd
hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn 뫟 hd
모end if else
if all drfmn   hd then hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn = dpfmaxmn
hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn = drfmaxmn
else
hn  drfmn   mn   s.t. drfmn 뫟 hd
모hn that  dpfmn   s.t. dpfmn = dpfmaxmn end if
end if

concept glosses of large  standardized knowledge bases  e.g.  wordnet  is being examined. the benefits of exploiting such a rich information for concept combination has been demonstrated in  tagalakis and keane  1 . diagnosticity marking can be an important enhancement to the knowledge representation of ontology systems in general.
모as regards the reasoning model  the percentage of correct interpretations it produces based on diagnostic values is very encouraging; especially when one considers that the system is self-contained and does not take into account other key aspects of concept understanding  e.g.  plausibility  informativeness  previous knowledge . future work will provide additional model validation and programming methodology details.
