the evolution of artificial social systems
guido boella
dipartimento di informatica
universita` di torino
     italy guido di.unito.itleendert van der torre
cwi amsterdam
and delft university of technology
the netherlands torre cwi.nl
1 introduction
the basic idea of the artificial social systems approach of shoham and tennenholtz  1; 1  is to add a mechanism  called a social law  that will minimize the need for both centralized control and on-line resolution of conflicts. a social law is defined as a set of restrictions on the agents' activities which allow them enough freedom on the one hand  but at the same time constrain them so that they will not interfere with each other. several variants have been introduced to reason about the design and emergence of social laws. however  existing models of artificial social systems cannot be used for the evolution of such systems  because these models do not contain an explicit representation of the social laws in force. in this paper we use enforceable social laws  boella and van der torre  1  to address the question how artificial social systems can be extended to reason about the evolution of artificial social systems.
1 artificial social systems and social laws
shoham and tennenholtz  introduce social laws in a setting without utilities. they define also rational social laws  shoham and tennenholtz  1  as social laws that improve a social game variable. a game or multi-agent encounter is a
set of agents with for each agent a set of strategies and a utility function defined on each possible combination of strategies. we extend artificial social systems with a control system  called a normative system  to model enforceable social laws. following boella and lesmo   the normative system is represented by a socially constructed agent called the normative agent or agent 1. in  boella and van der torre  1   the normative system is represented by the set of control strategies of agent 1  but not by a utility function.
definition 1 a normative game  or a normative multi-agent encounter  is a tuple   where
　　　　is a set of agents 	 	and	are the sets of strategies available to agents 1  1 and 1 respectively  and and	are
real-valued utility functions for agents 1 and 1  respectively.
　we use here as game variable the maximin value  following tennenholtz . this represents safety level decisions  see tennenholtz' paper for a motivation.
definition 1 let   and be the sets of strategies available to agent 1  1 and 1  respectively  and let
be the utility function of agent	.	define for	  and
                   for . the maximin value for agent 1  respectively 1  is defined by  respectively  . a strategy of agent leading to the corresponding maximin value is called a maximin strategy for agent .
　a social law is useful with respect to an efficiency parameter if each agent can choose a strategy that guarantees it a payoff of at least .
definition 1 given	a	normative	game and an efficiency parameter	  we

define a social law to be a restriction of to   and of. the social law is useful if the following holds:

there exists such that   and there exists such that	.
　a social law is quasi-stable if an agent does not profit from violating the law  as long as the other agent conforms to the social law  i.e.  selects strategies allowed by the law .
definition 1 given	a	normative	game
　　　　　　　　  and an efficiency parameter   a quasi-stable social law is a useful social law  with respect

to   which restricts to and to   and satisfies the following: there is no which satisfies 
       and there is no	which satisfies	.
　when the set of strategies of agent 1 is a singleton  then our definitions reduce to those of tennenholtz . with the extension of agent 1 representing the control system we define enforceable social laws as quasi-stable social laws in normative games where the strategies of agent 1 may have been restricted  boella and van der torre  1 .
definition 1 given	a	normative	game
	 	and an efficiency parameter	 	a

social law  i.e.  a restriction of to   and of   is enforceable if there is a restriction of to such that is quasi-stable in the normative game
.
　computational problems can be defined to find enforceable social laws  with respect to an efficiency parameter .
1 representing social laws
we extend normative games with a utility function of agent 1  to represent the norms which are enforced. since agent 1 is a socially constructed agent  in the sense of searle   its utility function can be updated. in particular  the enforcement

of a social law by	is represented by giving	strate-

gies a high utility  and strategies a low utility. moreover  we go beyond the framework of enforceable social laws by varying the utility of agent 1 depending on the strategies played by the other agents  and by considering incremental updates of the utility function to represent the evolution of artificial social systems. formally  we extend a normative game with a utility function   we define	for   and we define useful and quasi-stable social laws in the obvious way. enforced social laws are defined as follows.
definition 1 given	a	normative	game
	 	and an efficiency parameter	 	a

social law  i.e.  a restriction of to   and of   is enforced if there is a unique restriction of to such

that	is quasi-stable.
1 identification of enforced social laws
the game in table 1 illustrates that the computational problem to find quasi-stable laws corresponds in extended normative games to the identification of enforced social laws. the table should be read as follows. strategies are represented by literals  i.e.  atomic propositions or their negations. each table represents the sub-game given a strategy of agent   represented by and   respectively. agent 1 is playing columns and agent 1 is playing rows. the values in the tables represent the utilities of agent 1  in italics   1 and 1.
	1 1 1	1 1 1
	1 1 1	1 1 1
table 1: what is the enforced social law 
　agent 1  the normative system  can play strategy or   agent 1 can play strategy or   agent 1 can play strategy or . when the normative system plays   the sub-game of agent 1 and 1 is a classical prisoner's dilemma. intuitively  the strategy corresponds to the state before the social law is introduced  and corresponds to the introduction of a control system that sanctions an agent for deviating from . for example  the utility of agent 1 in  1  is lower than its utility in  1  due to this sanction.
　when the normative system plays   the agents are always worse off compared to the normative agent playing   all else being equal. nevertheless  due to the dynamics of the game  the overall outcome is better for both agents. for example  in the sub-game defined by strategy   the only nash equilibrium is . now suppose we set the efficiency parameter to   which means that all agents will be better off. if the normative system plays   then the sub-game has a nash equilibrium which is the  pareto optimal  . this explains why the agents accept the possibility to be sanctioned.
1 iterated design of enforced social laws
the social law design problem is  given a normative game  to define a new utility function for the normative system. the principle that we like to maintain as much as possible from the existing social laws can be represented by the use of the principle of minimal change. table 1 represents the evolution of an artificial social system by an incremental increase of the utility of agent 1 to the efficiency parameter of the new social law.
1 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1 11 1table 1: iterated design
　the first table represents that the normative system does not impose a control system  the second table represents that there is a sanction for playing or   and the third table represents that there is an additional sanction for playing something else than and . the first social law

is	based on control system

  and the second social law is

based on control system	.
