 
resources co-funded by several agents must be exploited in such a way that three kinds of constraints are met:  1  physical problem  hard  constraints;  1  efficiency constraints  aiming at maximizing the satisfaction of each agent;  1  a fairness constraint  which is ideally satisfied when each agent receives an amount of the resource exactly proportional to its financial contribution. this paper investigates a decision problem for which the common property resource is an earth observation satellite. the problem is to decide on the daily selection of a subset of pictures  among a set of candidate pictures which could be taken the next day considering the satellite trajectory. this subset must satisfy the three kinds of constraints stated above. although fair division problems have received considerable attention for a long time  especially from microeconomists  this specific problem does not fall entirely within a classical approach. this is because the candidate pictures may be incompatible  and because a picture is only of value to the agent requesting it. as in the general case  efficiency and fairness constraints are antagonistic. we propose three ways for solving this share problem. the first one gives priority to fairness  the second one to efficiency  and the third one computes a set of compromises. 
1 	introduction 
due to their cost  large research or industrial projects are often co-funded by several agents  countries  companies  entities ... . space projects such as earth observation satellites  space stations or space probes are good examples. once constructed and made operational  the common property resource must be exploited and shared in a way which satisfies three kinds of constraints : 
  physical constraints: the exploitation of the resource must obey hard constraints; 
  efficiency constraints: each agent wants to get the highest possible satisfaction in return; 
1 	automated reasoning   a fairness constraint: each agent must get a return on investments proportional to its financial contribution to the project; the better the proportionality of returns is achieved  the more the share quality improves. 
¡¡the first kind of constraints must absolutely be met  hard constraints  whereas the two others are preference constraints  soft constraints . as it can be easily guessed  the efficiency and fairness constraints are antagonistic: the search for a perfect share may lead to poorly efficient decisions  and conversely  decisions which maximize the global satisfaction of agents are often unfair. so  a compromise between the best satisfaction of both constraints must be found. 
¡¡the usual case involving only one agent  in which case there is no share problem  is a difficult combinatorial discrete optimization problem  np-hard . nevertheless  it is a perfectly well stated problem. the multiagent case is also a discrete combinatorial problem  but is actually a multi-objective optimization problem  keeney and raiffa  1 ; the first difficulty arises when searching for a meaningful and principled definition of a good compromise between efficiency and fairness. 
¡¡this article sums up a study  the aim of which was to propose methods to solve a specific share problem  namely the fair and efficient exploitation of an earth observation satellite owned in common by several agents. it is organized as follows. the next section sets the problem more formally. then we present three quite different methods devoted to the resolution of this share problem. these methods have been simulated on the basis of the expected data for the future spot1 satellite. the section after reports these simulations. lastly  we state our conclusions. 
1 	an earth observation satellite scheduling and sharing problem 
the studied problem is the following: an earth observation satellite  co-funded by several agents  is exploited in common. these agents make daily requests for pictures they would like to be taken by the satellite. roughly speaking  the problem consists in selecting each day  among the set of candidate pictures which could be taken 

the next day considering the satellite trajectory  a subset of pictures which satisfies all the physical constraints  maximizes the satisfaction of the agents  and respects as far as possible a fairness constraint. such a selection will be called a decision. the satisfaction and fairness constraints will be taken into account over a fixed interval of several days. 
¡¡let us describe more formally the problem. first  the data: 
  there are n agents; in our real-world problem  n is typically in the range 1 to 1; 
  dik is the set of pictures requested by the agent i for the day k; let 
		 i  
the size of a d.k is averaging 1; 
number of agents. agent index.  day index. interval of days on which satisfactions and costs are taken into account  
pictures requested by agent % day k. pictures obtained by agent i day k. quota vector  q =  q1  q1 ...  qn . weight of picture x. 
satisfaction for an agent receiving the set x' of pictures. see eq. 1. cumulative satisfaction. see eq. 1. cumulative maximal satisfaction. see eq. 1. cost of picture x. cumulative cost. see eq. 1. vector of cumulative costs. see eq. 1 quality of share criterion. see eq. 1 global cumulative satisfaction. see eq. 1 

  the sets 	are pairwise disjoint : 
  each picture in d.k could be taken the day a:  but all pictures cannot be taken because there are incompatibilities between them: some physical hard constraints must be met  for example no more than m pictures can be taken at once  provided there are only m instruments on board; a transition time between two pictures taken by the same instrument must be respected; on board memory is limited ... ; a subset is said admissible if all pictures in x satisfy 
hard constraints  pictures are compatible  and hence can all be taken the considered day; 
  w{x  is the weight of the picture x; it is freely set by the agent requesting the picture  and reflects its importance for the agent; 
  q =  q1         qn   with  = 1 is the quota vector: qi is proportional to the financial investment of the agent i. 
¡¡¡¡we characterize now the decisions that we are looking for. each day a: - 1  the demands dik  with corresponding weights  are collected and we must compute the sets of pictures which will be shot for the agent i the day k. these are such that: 
   note that  are disjoint ; 
  let 
		 1  
a.k must be admissible; 
  the cumulative satisfaction of each agent  measured over a given interval of days / ending on the day a: must be as high as possible  efficiency constraints ; the satisfaction of the agent i the day a: is measured by the quantity 
 1  
table 1: main symbols used in this paper. 
hence  the cumulative satisfaction over / for the agent i is 
		 1  
these satisfactions need to be normalized over agents  if we compare or aggregate them. 
  the  quality of the share  over /  to be formalized later  must be as high as possible  fairness constraint . 
¡¡the problem above is stated as a sequence of multiobjective optimization problem instances. however  the fairness constraint is not yet formally stated. we have investigated three quite different methods devoted to the resolution of this share problem  that is general schemes for computing the aik - each one is based on a particular way of taking into account the fairness constraint and the necessary compromise with the efficiency constraints. the first two methods reduce the problem to a sequence of mono-objective optimization problem instances  whereas the third one keeps the multi-objective aspect. 
1 	fairness first 
the first method searches for fairness first  and then for efficiency. the entitlement to use the resource is shared by allocating observation windows to each agent in turn. observation windows are merely sequences of successive orbits of the satellite. each day  the agent i is given the right to freely exploit about qi   tv orbits  where n is the number of orbits daily covered by the satellite. observation windows can be assigned to agents on the basis of a fixed repetitive procedure. this procedure and the trajectory of the satellite are such that each agent gets opportunity to shoot any place in the world within a bounded number of days. 
	lemaitre  verfaillie  and bataille 	1 

¡¡following this method  the whole problem can be cast into a set of optimization problem instances  one for each agent each day  because each agent knows in advance his time windows. assuming that each x € dik belongs to the window assigned to agent i the day a;  the successive optimization problem instances consist in maximizing the satisfaction of agents by finding 
		 1  
¡¡this problem can be seen as a combination of discrete constraint and optimization problems. general frameworks such as the semiring and valued constraint satisfaction problems frameworks  bistarelli et a/.  1; schiex et a/.  1  have been recently designed to capture such mixed problems. powerful complete and incomplete algorithms  associated to these frameworks  are now available  and research in this area is very active  freuder and wallace  1; wallace  1; verfaillie et a/.  1; larrosa et a/.  1 . 
¡¡our simulations are based on the valued csp framework. almost all windows can be solved to optimality  using a sophisticated algorithm. these simulations show for this method a very good quality share: the number of pictures effectively selected and assigned to each agent is very close to a number proportional to its quota. but the decisions are clearly inefficient  when compared with those resulting from the two following methods  as reported in section 1. 
1 	efficiency first 
the second method considers the opposite view: first efficiency  fairness if possible. it is based on three main ideas: 
1. for efficiency  maximize each day a linear combination of individual satisfactions of the agents; 
1. for fairness  choose this combination in a way favoring the fairness constraint; 
1. check that each agent has obtained a fair share. 
¡¡the last point is borrowed from the literature on fair division  young  1; moulin  1; brams and taylor  1 : in this method  we postulate that a decision is fair when each agent receives at least a minimal fair share  defined for the agent i as qi times the satisfaction it would get if it were the only user of the resource. more 
formally  the fairness constraint is considered to be satisfied if 

¡¡we now turn to the determination of the linear combination of individual satisfactions to be maximized  points 1 and 1 . for the moment  assume that the quotas are equal  all agents have equal rights over the common resource . the clue is to consider the weights 
1 	automated reasoning 
of pictures as monetary bids. as a first approach  we could select pictures in such a way that the sum of bids for selected pictures  namely 
		 1  
is maximum  under admissibility constraints . in this way  the higher the bid for a picture is  the more this picture gets some chance of being selected. but recall that weights are freely fixed by agents. the above function to be maximized must be corrected  in order to take this fact into account. in other words  we must make satisfactions comparable by normalizing them. so instead  the function to be maximized will be: 
		 1  
where the coefficients aik have to be determined. the principle of the normalization is the following : the maximum of normalized individual satisfaction that an agent would get if it were the only user of the resource is equal 
for all agents. formally stated : 

¡¡we must now adapt this normalization to the situation where the agents are entitled to different fractions of the resource  non uniform quotas . the way to do this is simple  see for example  brams and taylor  1  section 1  : suppose that we have three agents  with quotas q =  1 1 1 . this is equivalent to an equal division between a society of 1 fictitious agents  followed by two groupings of 1 and 1 shares for our last two real agents. this argument leads to an adaptation of the previous normalized individual satisfaction: let state 
 1  
instead of 1 as in equation 1  hence 
to sum up  the set of daily selected pictures with this method maximizes the function 
		 1  
under admissibility constraints. 
¡¡with this choice for the coefficients   it is not difficult to see that the selected decisions are independent of the scale of weights used by each agent  in other words  the preference order induced by s' over potential decisions is not changed if some agents multiply their weights by a constant factor . however  the method does not guarantee the satisfaction of the fairness constraint  counter-examples can be easily built . this constraint will have to be checked a posteriori. hopefully  it has a lot of chance to be satisfied  for two reasons : 

1. a structural reason : the normalization of the weights tends to favor agents with upper quotas  in a direction favorable to the satisfaction of the fairness constraint; moreover  the fairness constraint is rather soft; 
1. a statistical reason : when there is a large number of candidate pictures  not too tightly incompatible  the structural reason can exert its influence; this is the case with our  realistic  simulation data: the simulations show that the fairness constraint is always widely satisfied  see results in section 1 . 
¡¡the function maximized being a linear combination of individual satisfactions of the agents  decisions selected by this method are pareto-optimal decisions1 in the n-dirnensional space of individual satisfactions. such decisions are also called efficient decisions. it is impossible to improve a decision selected by this method for one agent without reducing the satisfaction of at least another agent. this property explains the good satisfaction levels obtained with this method in our simulations and justifies the name  efficiency first . 
¡¡we have designed a variant of this method  for the case where the fairness constraint would not be satisfied  when requests are poorly distributed and highly incompatible. this variant is inspired by the classical knaster's procedure of sealed bids  brarns and taylor  1  section 1    young  1  section 1 . we compute each day fictitious monetary compensations between agents  reflecting the gap between the actual and ideal shares. an agent having a positive credit is  late  on its quota 
 it received not enough pictures selected  and conversely  an agent with a negative credit is  ahead  on its quota. these compensations are used to modify the above normalization procedure for the next days in a direction favorable to a fairest share. 
¡¡this method and its variant can be implemented successfully using the same valued csp framework as before. however  the number of instances to be solved is large  all the sm dik  must be computed  and the size of the whole instance  for the maximization of s' a*k   may be very important. our simulations show that an optimal decision can be computed almost all days in a reasonable amount of time. for very large instances  we have to turn to local search procedures  descent search or simulated annealing . 
1 compromises between fairness and efficiency : a multi-criteria approach 
the third approach does not focus on fairness or efficiency  but computes a set of good compromise decisions. the aim is to help a human decision-maker to take decisions  by providing this decision-maker with interesting compromises. 
¡¡the most precise way to set the whole problem is to formulate it as a sequence of multi-criteria discrete 
l
   a pareto-optimal decision always heats any other decision on at least one criterion. 
optimization problems. the criteria to be maximized would be: 
  the n agent's satisfaction criteria 
  a criterion j measuring the quality of share  to be defined. 
¡¡only the set of pareto-optimal decisions in this n + 1 dimensional space are worth considering. the approach which would consist of collecting this set of decisions is unworkable  because it is very large  in our application . a straightforward idea is to select the fairest decision within the set of efficient decisions  see for example  moulin  1  page 1  . it is as well unworkable because the number of potential decisions is too large to allow exhaustive search. 
¡¡so  we have to resign ourselves to aggregate some criteria. a sensible solution is to aggregate individual satisfactions into a global cumulative satisfaction ges  and to keep apart the quality of share criterion j. eventually  potentially interesting decisions will be presented in the two-dimensional space j x yes. 
1 	measuring the quality of share 
it is questionable to base the quality of share upon the individual satisfactions obtained by agents  because these satisfactions are not expressed in a common scale  and hence are difficult to compare. a better idea is to base our measure upon some function of the real cost of pictures  such as time  memory or power consumption on board. let c x  be the cost of the picture x. the cost function is supposed to be independent of the agent requesting the picture  and to have been fixed by mutual agreement between agents. let 
 1  
 1  
 1  
the last quantity is just the vector of cumulative costs of pictures selected for the agents over the interval /. we propose to measure the quality of share over / by a  distance  between cc and q  the quota vector. 
¡¡microeconomists have developed a rich set of inequality indices  see for example  moulin  1  section 1    that we can use to base our function j measuring the quality of share. the popular gini indiee 
		 1  
measures the inequality resulting from a vector of utilities u =  u1 ...  un . u is the average value of the ui. it can be generalized to the non-uniform case to fit our needs  using an argument similar to the one given in section 1  in the following way: 
		 1  
	lemaitre  verfaillie  and bataille 	1 

		 1  
taking 
		 1  
finishes the job. we have 1   j   1  and j = 1 when the share is perfect  costs of obtained pictures exactly proportional to quotas . 
1 	aggregating individual satisfactions 
as a measure of the global cumulative satisfaction of agents over the interval j  we choose a linear combination of normalized cumulative individual satisfactions : 
		 1  
it has the following properties : 1   gcs   1  the maximum 1 is reached when each agent is satisfied as much as it can be if it were the only owner of the resource ; gcs is independent of the individual scales of weights; it is independent of quotas1. 
1 	computing decisions 
this method is very costly in term of computational resource. the set of pareto-optimal decisions in the j x gcs space can be computed exactly by a branch-and-bound search  or approached by an adapted local search method when the search space is too large. 
1 	simulations 
we have used data from the simulated demand concerning the future spot1 satellite  which will carry three cameras on board. this data  provided originally for the mono-agent case  has been adapted to simulate a demand from n = 1 agents. simulated agents request each day about the same number of pictures. the quota vector for the simulation is  1 1 1 . weights are in the range 1 to 1. we dispose of data for 1 days. the most loaded day comprises 1 requested pictures and 1 binary and ternary admissibility constraints. the cost function is simply c x  - 1  vx  that is  we only count the number of selected pictures . the interval of days / on which cumulative satisfaction and cost functions are based is always / =  1... k   where k is the present day. 
¡¡the table 1 sums up the numerical results obtained from the simulation. it gives the cumulative satisfaction and cost of pictures obtained by agents with each method over the whole simulation interval / =  1...1 . cumulative satisfactions csi should be compared with the maximal possible cumulative satisfactions cs for each agent  given on the second line. 
¡¡¡¡1 this option is questionable but seems rather sensible  because we consider that the satisfactions of agents are of equal importance  even if they are entitled with different rights. note that the quota vector is taken into account by the quality of share. 
1 	automated reasoning 

table 1: simulation results for the three methods. 
¡¡for the efficiency first method  we give the minimal fair shares . as it can be seen  the fairness constraint  equation 1  is widely satisfied. 
¡¡for these results  we have simulated a restricted form of the multi-criteria method : instead of building a complete set of non-dominated decisions in the j x gcs plane  we only look for a decision close to the line of slope a = 1 from the  1  point  see figure 1 . 

figure 1: comparison of methods in the j x gcs plane. 
¡¡finally  the figure 1 sets our three methods in the 1dimensional plane  quality of share  global cumulative satisfaction . on these two criteria  no method dominates over another. fairness first provides a quite perfect share  but a poor satisfaction. efficiency first gives the best satisfaction  but a price in quality of share must be paid for it  this is quite acceptable  since the fairness constraint is satisfied . lastly  multi-criteria  gives a compromise solution between the two others. other 

values for  would allow to get other compromises : this is also of interest in this method. 
1 	summary and conclusions 
we have described a specific share decision problem involving multiple agents  in which the satisfaction of two kinds of constraints poses a dilemma: efficiency constraints aim at satisfying the agents the most  whereas a fairness constraint watches over equity among agents. 
¡¡we proposed three different methods to solve this problem. the first method searches for fairness first  and then for efficiency. it is a simple a priori sharing method  allocating observation windows to each agent in turn. 
¡¡the second method is based on the opposite view : first efficiency  fairness if possible. a global satisfaction criterion is defined and maximized. a  minimal fair share  for each agent is defined a priori but only checked a posteriori. 
¡¡the third approach does not favor one constraint or the other  but computes a set of good compromise decisions. this is a multi-criteria approach  based on the computation of the set of pareto-optimal decisions in the two-dimensional space  global-satisfaction  qualityof-share . this set is computed exactly by a branchand-bound search  or approached by an adapted local search method when the search space is too large. 
¡¡these three methods have been simulated on the basis of the expected data for the future spot1 satellite. in short: 
  the first method results in very good shares  but inef-ficient decisions  
  the second one delivers quite good decisions  minimal fair shares are always achieved and the global satisfaction is high   and uses a tolerable amount of computational resources  
  the last one is very costly in computational resources  but allows a human decision-maker to preview a set of interesting non-dominated compromise decisions. 
the overall conclusions of this work are: 
  no method can be indisputably put forward; the prob-lem is not to choose a method against another one  it is to present to the agents a set of methods and their properties and to let them decide according to the properties they consider the most important1; 
  whereas general methods of sharing can be stated  each share problem is specific and must be studied carefully; 
  discrete share problems like this one are computation-ally very consuming; more specialized combinatorial optimization algorithms are needed to solve them. 
¡¡¡¡1 see  rosenschein and zlotkin  1  for a discussion about this point. what we call a method is called by them a 
acknowledgments 
the authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments  as well as lionel lobjois and loi'c tregan for their help in the simulation work. 
references 
 bistarelli et a/.  1  s. bistarelli  u. montanari  and f. rossi. constraint solving over semirings. in proceedings of the fourteenth international joint conference on artificial intelligence  pages 1  mon-
treal  quebec  canada  august 1. international joint commitee on artificial intelligence. 
 brams and taylor  1  s. j. brams and a. d. taylor. fair division - from cake-cutting to dispute resolution. cambridge university press  1. 
 freuder and wallace  1  e. freuder and r. wallace. partial constraint satisfaction. artificial intelligence  1-1 :1  december 1. 
 keeney and raiffa  1  r. l. keeney and h. raiffa. decisions with multiple objectives: p