 
let us consider the following problem: 
given a  probably huge  set of sets s and a query set g  is there some set s s such that  this problem occurs in at 
least four application areas: the matching of a large number  usually several 1s  of production rules  the processing of queries in data bases supporting set-valued attributes  the identification of inconsistent subgoals during artificial intelligence planning and the detection of potential periodic chains in labeled tableau systems for modal logics. in this paper  we introduce a data structure and algorithm that allow a compact representation of such a huge set of sets and an efficient answering of subset and superset queries. the algorithm has been used successfully in the ipp system and enabled this planner to win the adl track of the first planning competition. 
1 	introduction 
the problem of how to effectively index and query sets occurs in various computer applications: 
¡¡researchers in object oriented databases have among others stressed the need for richer data types  in particular set-valued attributes such as for example the set of keywords in a document  the set of classes a student is enrolled in  etc. typical queries to such an enriched database require to determine all supersets or subsets of a given query. for example  given a set of classes c  to find all students taking at least these classes the supersets of c need to be determined. or as another example  given that a student has passed some basic courses c  which advanced courses become possible  the answer is found by retrieving all advanced courses whose prerequisite course set is a subset of c. 
¡¡machine learning is highly concerned with the utility problem  i.e.  the problem of learning new knowledge in such a way that the learning costs do 
1 	constraint satisfaction 
not exceed the savings in the system's performance that are achieved through learning. a key factor in a good learning algorithm is to effectively match sets of attributes against each other  for example in the form of preconditions of large sets of production rules. in order to decide which rules apply to a particular situation  all precondition sets have to be determined that are subsets of the query set describing the situation. 
¡¡artificial intelligence planning is concerned with the problem of constructing a sequence of actions that achieves a set of goals given a particular initial state in which the plan is scheduled for execution. even in its simplest form  the problem is known to be pspace-complete  bylander  1   i.e.  planning algorithms are worst-case exponential and techniques to effectively prune the search space are mandatory. since millions of goal sets are constructed when searching larger state spaces for a plan  it is important to know in advance when a goal set can never be satisfied. this is the case when at least one subset of the current goal set has previously been shown to be unsatisfiable. 
¡¡modal logics are often formalized using labeled tableau methods  where one is sometimes confronted with infinite branches in the tableau. to guarantee termination  one needs to identify potential periodic chains of labels  gore  1 . 
¡¡in its abstract form  these and other applications have to deal with the following problem: given a set of sets s stored in some data structure and a query set q  does there exist a set s  s such that q  s  or sometimes q  s depending on the application . though this seems to be a trivial problem to handle  its difficulty comes from the dimensions in which it occurs: 1 will quite often contain millions of sets and some applications require to handle a huge sequence of queries qi over a dynamically changing s. 
1 	the ubtree algorithm 
the key to a fast set query answering algorithm lies in an appropriate data structure to index a large number of sets of varying cardinality. 

1 	the ubtree data structure 
a node  see figure 1  n in ubtree consists of three components: 
  n.e : the element it represents 
  n.t : the sons  a set of other tree nodes 
  : the end-of-path marker. 
figure 1: representation of a single node. 
¡¡the ubtree is now simply represented by a set t of such nodes and can be seen as a forest. note that we are speaking about sets of tree nodes  i.e.  neither the number of trees nor the number of sons any node can have is limited. that is where the ubtree got its name from: unlimited branching tree. 
based on this data structure  the following functions will be defined below: 
  insert  set s  tree t  inserts a set s into the tree t. 
  lookup first set q  tree t  tells us whether any subset s q is stored in t. 
  lookup subs set q  tree t  determines all subsets for a given query set q from t. 
  lookup sups set r/  tree t  determines all supersets for a given query set q from t. 
the only assumption on which our algorithm relies is the existence of a total ordering over all elements that can possibly occur in the sets. 
1 	the insert function 
to insert a set s into a forest t  the insert function  figure 1  creates a path starting in t corresponding to that set. in principle  this path is just a series of connected tree nodes corresponding to the ordered elements of s. 
definition 1 let  be an ordered set  t be a forest. 
in t corresponding to s is a non-empty 
¡¡when the insert function is called  t is initialized with the root nodes of the forest. the function then tries to look up the elements of s one after the other  remember that the sets get ordered before they are inserted  and  doing this  follows paths that have been created by other  previously inserted sets. if there is no corresponding node for 
some element ei in the set t of nodes  implying that no set starting with  has been in-
serted before   it creates a new path at that point  i.e.  a new son is added to the current node n. finally  the last node  the one that represents   is marked as the end of a path. note that we assume s to be non-empty  i.e.  1  otherwise there would be no element and  consequently  no node n to represent it.1 

figure 1: insert .s t  
¡¡figure 1 shows how a forest t with two trees evolves when the 1  already ordered  sets s1 = 

figure 1: iterative insertion of 1 sets 
1 	the lookup functions 
we now show how the set of sets s stored in a forest t can be used to answer questions about the query set q. 
¡¡let us begin with the lookup-first function  which decides if there is any set s  s in t with s  q. 
the function simply tries to reach a node tv in the 
   'we make this assumption just for simplification  the ubtree algorithm can easily be extended to deal with possibly empty sets. 
	hoffmann and koehler 	1 

tree that is marked as the end of a path  using the elements in q as  money  to pay its travel costs. this is to say  given a set of tree nodes t and a set q =  it finds all nodes n  t corresponding to an element  if any such 
tv is marked as the end of a path  lookup-first succeeds in finding a subset to the query set. otherwise  the ongoing search is a recursive instance 
with the set of sons  n.t  and the remaining elements  as parameters.1 see figure 1 for a formal description of the lookup-first function. 
m  all nodes n  t that match an element while m is non-empty do choose a node n  m 
if n is the end of a path then succeed endif  else: call search on next tree 
and remaining elements   / 
lookup.first  v.t  
endwhile  all elements have failed * / 
fail figure 1: lookup  first c/ t  
¡¡the function is initially called on the  previously ordered  query set q and the forest t. it is important to notice and crucial to the performance of ubtree that  in using the  money  method  large fractions of the search space can be excluded: for a query set  of length  possible subsets need to be considered. half of them  those that contain  lie in the tree rooted in the node corresponding to qo- if there is no such node  the search space is immediately reduced to  
¡¡note that the function is non-deterministic with respect to which matching node n  m is chosen first. a possible heuristic could store in each node the distance to the next end-of-path node. the node with the least distance could then be tried first. this distance information can also be used  and in fact is used in our implementation to cut unnecessary branches out of the search tree. if the distance stored in a search node n is greater than the number of elements we have left at that stage of search  we can back up  i.e.  fail  right away. in this case the query set does not contain enough elements to reach an end-of-path marker. 
¡¡the lookup-subs function  as given in figure 1  works in a very similar way. instead of terminating after identifying one end-of-path marker  i.e.  the first matching subset  it has to work its way through all nodes it can reach. again  the function uses the  money  method  i.e.  passes only those 
¡¡¡¡1  no nodes representing any of the elements in  can exist in a subtree starting in ei due 
to the total ordering of the elements. 
constraint satisfaction 
nodes for which it has matching elements in the query. every time it finds a node that is the end of a path  it adds the path ending in this node to a global answer set q. the function is initially called with the ordered query set q and the forest t as parameters  the answer set is initialized with the empty set q  upon termination of lookup-subs  q contains all sets s  s with s q. 

figure 1: lookup-subs g t  
¡¡finally  we show how to retrieve all supersets s  from t. this can be done by finding all paths in t that comprise the path corresponding to q as a  possibly disconnected  subpath. the lookup-sups algorithm is shown in figure 1. again  the answer set is initialized with  and the function is called with the ordered query set q and the forest t as input parameters. 
figure 1: lookup-sups g t  
¡¡at each stage of the search  lookup-sups does the following: first  it searches all trees that start with an element preceding the first element in the query set; these are trees that can possibly contain nodes for the whole set. if there is a node  that directly corresponds to the first element in the  possibly already reduced  query set  the query set gets further reduced by this element. now the function only needs to find matching nodes for the remaining elements. if there are no such elements left  the search has succeeded  i.e.  every end-of-path node that can be reached from n will yield a superset to the query. otherwise  search needs to be continued with the reduced query set and the appropriate set of nodes. 

1 	theoretical properties of ubtree 
we state the soundness and completeness of the lookup -first function in the following theorem. 
theorem 1 let t be a forest ubtree that has been constructed by iteratively inserting all sets s  s. the lookup -first function  as defined in section 1  succeeds on a query set q and t if and only if there exists a set s  s with s q. 
¡¡a similar theorem stating the soundness and completeness of the lookup-subs and lookup sups functions can be proven. 
¡¡to analyze the runtime behavior of the lookup-subs and lookup-first functions  let us reexamine the algorithm in figure 1 from a different perspective. at each stage  the function tries to find a node tv in t that matches the first element e1 of q. if this node is found  there is a new recursive instance  with n.t and  as parameters; afterwards  the function works on t and  if on the other hand  no node in t matches eo  the function simply skips  and continues with  prom these observations  we get the following recursive formula for the number of search nodes that are visited by lookup subs  which is an upper limit to the number of nodes visited by lookup-first : 

¡¡here   denotes the probability that the node n matching e1 is in t  and e{i   consequently  denotes the expected number of visited search nodes with i elements to go. obviously   = pn. it is easily proven that the recursion results in: 
		 1  
¡¡the probability  at each stage of the search is equal to the probability that there is a set s € s which starts with the elements that would be represented on a path to tv. it is an open question  how an upper limit for  can be determined. in the worst-case  when all nodes tv are present in the tree  we get  = 1 and e n  =  search 
nodes for a query set of size n.1 
¡¡¡¡1 it should be noticed  that  when matching rules or determining unsatisfiable goals in planning  the query sets are small while is very large. thus  searching  nodes is still much better than checking  sets for inclusion. 
¡¡¡¡the number of nodes visited by the lookup-sups function is only dominated by the total number of nodes that are in the forest. let  denote the maximal element with respect to the total ordering  i.e.   for all tvymg to find all supersets of the query set lookup-sups has to search the whole structure. consequently  we determine an upper bound for the total number of nodes in the tree. 
theorem 1 let t be a forest in which exactly the sets  have been iteratively inserted. if the total number of distinct elements in all of the sets is p  then the total number of nodes in t is 
at most  
¡¡the worst case occurs if and only if all sets containing  are contained in s. 
1 	empirical evaluation 
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach  we discuss examples taken from the use of ubtree in the ipp planning system  koehler et al.  1 . following  hellerstein et al.  1   the workload for ubtree is determined by the following factors: 
  the domain  which is the set of all possible sets  i.e.  given p logical atoms to characterize states  the domain comprises  sets  
  an instance of the domain is the finite subset  that is currently stored in j1  
  the set of queries  which is the set of goals that are constructed during planning. 
¡¡note that the workload is dynamic. starting with an empty ubtree structure t  a generated goal set is added if no plan was found by the planning system  i.e.  t is monotonically growing containing sets at the end. 
¡¡since it is extremely difficult to make distribution assumptions for instances and query sets in a planning system  we use the following parameters to characterize the size of a ubtree: 
  p : the total number of distinct logical atoms in s. 
   the number of all stored sets. 
  the total number of nodes in the forest 
  e storage cost  which would be equal to 1 in a trivial data structure simply representing all sets separately. 
   the total number of queries that have been answered during the process. 
¡¡figure 1 shows the parameters for forests of increasing size in two different planning domains  the blocksworld shown in the upper part and the briefcase world shown in the lower part of the table . 
	hoffmann and koehler 	1 

the larger ubtree grows  reflected by increasing  and  and the smaller p is  the better values are obtained for the storage cost. 
p s t c q 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 linear; sometimes  as in the case of figure 1  possibly exponential  but to a small degree as indicated by equation 1 . 

figure 1: typical sizes of ubtree. 
¡¡figures 1  1  and 1 illustrate the runtime behavior of the query functions reflected in the number of searched nodes for a given query-set size |g| and  s . note that  s  is shown on a logarithmic scale in all figures. 

figure 1: the average number of visited search nodes as a function of query-set size |q| and instance size  s   shown on a logarithmic scale  for the lookup-first function averaged over all  i.e.  succeeding and failing  queries. 


figure 1: the average number of visited search nodes as a function of query-set size  q  and instance size   shown on a logarithmic scale  for the lookup first function in the positive case where the query succeeds. 
¡¡figure 1 indicates that the lookup-first function needs significantly less search time on queries where it can retrieve a subset than on those where it must fail. in fact  the average runtime behavior in the positive case was linear in the size of the query set and completely independent of the instance size throughout all our experiments. the function never visited more than an average of  q  * 1 search nodes on positive queries. in the general case  the behavior tends to be logarithmic in the instance size. the behavior with respect to the query-set size varied in different domains: sometimes clearly polynomial  even sub-
constraint satisfaction 
¡¡a behavior as shown in figure 1 is typical for the lookup-subs function: clearly logarithmic in  s  and probably exponential  to a small degree  in the query set size. 

figure 1: number of search nodes for lookup subs  averaged over all queries. 
¡¡figure 1 shows a typical picture for looku sups that we found in all investigated domains. it turns out that the performance of this function decreases for small query sets. this happens because small sets are likely to have more supersets than big ones. the behavior with respect to the instance size tends to be linear. note that again  s is shown on a logarithmic scale and that the scale is different here. 


figure 1: number of search nodes for lookup jsups  averaged over all queries. 
1 	related work 
in order to deal with set queries in planning  a partial subset test that only considers sets of size |q| - 1 to a given query set of size  q  has been developed in  blum and furst  1 . obviously  this can be done in linear time  but such a test must be inherently incomplete. with ubtree  a complete test is available that runs in almost linear time in practice despite its exponential worst-case behavior. 
for databases  rd trees  hellerstein and pfeffer  
1  have been proposed as an effective means in answering superset queries  but they are very limited in handling subset queries. in contrast to ubtree where a set is spread over several nodes  an rd tree is organized such that the leaf nodes contain the sets and non-leaf nodes contain supersets  of different size  of their children nodes to effectively guide search. to handle subset queries  inverted rd trees are used which are equivalent to rd trees on the complements of the base sets. two serious problems occur in this approach. first  a non-leaf node needs to be recomputed if a new set is inserted into one of its leaf-children. second  even if only small sets are stored in the leaves  their complements and their supersets in the corresponding parent nodes grow impractically large. ubtree avoids both problems. 
¡¡an optimized implementation of the rete pattern matching algorithm  forgy  1  to handle large numbers of production rules is described in  doorenbos  1 . the indexing structure for preconditions of rules is similar to ubtree  but the way how the elements of the query set match the stored sets in the indexing structure is quite different because the preconditions can contain variables  while ubtree deals with sets of ground atoms only. thus  the problem of null activations  where rule nodes are activated though not all of their preconditions are satisfied by the current input  can occur in rete  but not in ubtree  which would index all ground instances of pattern matching rules instead. 
1 	conclusion 
depending on the particular requirements of an application  ubtree can be further optimized. for example  if one is only interested in keeping minimal sets  all non-minimal sets can be pruned from the tree. furthermore  if all sets s s are constructed from a finite and fixed domain of elements  an implicit bitmap representation of the sets can further reduce memory consumption and query times. 
¡¡as we saw in section 1  the worst-case behavior of the algorithms  especially of the lookupjsups function  depends on the ordering of the elements. in application areas where one has information about the likelihood of appearance of the elements in any set s  it should be possible to generate a total ordering that minimizes the number of tree nodes. one simply orders elements with high likelihood of appearance before those with low values. thereby  both storage and search costs can be reduced. 
