 
market-based mechanisms such as auctions are being studied as an appropriate means for resource allocation in distributed and inultiagcnl decision problems. when agents value resources in combination rather than in isolation  one generally relies on combinatorial auctions where agents bid tor resource bundles. or simultaneous auctions for all resources. we develop a different model  where agents bid for required resources sequentially. this model has the advantage that it can be applied in settings where combinatorial and simultaneous models are infeasible  e.g.. when resources are made available at different points in time by different parties   as well as certain benefits in settings where combinatorial models are applicable. we develop a dynamic programming model tor agents to compute bidding policies based on estimated distributions over prices. we also describe how these distributions are updated to provide a learning model for bidding behavior. 
	1 	introduction 
a great deal of attention has been paid to the development of appropriate models and protocols for the interaction of agents in distributed and multiagent systems  mass . often agents need access to specific resources to pursue their objectives  but the needs of one agent may conflict with those of another. a number of market-based approaches have been proposed as a means to deal with the resource allocation and related problems in mass  1. 1. 
   of particular interest are auction mechanisms where each agent bids ior a resource according to some protocol  and the allocation and price for the resource are determined by specific rules |1|. auctions have a number of desirable properties as a means for coordinating activities  including minimizing the communication between agents and. in some cases  guaranteeing pareto efficient outcomes | 1  1. 
   an agent often requires several resources before pursuing a particular course of action. obtaining one resource without another-for example  being allocated trucks without fuel or drivers  or processing  time on a machine without skilled labor to operate it-makes that resource worthless. when resources exhibit such complementarities  it is unknown whether simple selling mechanisms can lead to efficient outcomes  1  1 . moreover  groups of resources are often substitutable: obtaining the bundle needed to pursue one course of action can lower the value of obtaining another  or render it worthless. for instance  once trucks and drivers are 
moises goldszmidt and bikash sabata 
sri international 
1 kavenswood ave. 
menlo park  ca 1 
{moises sabata} erg.sri.com 
obtained for transporting material in an optimal fashion  helicopters and pilots lose any value they may have had. 
　two methods for dealing with complementarities have been studied: simultaneous auctions for multiple goods  1  1|; and combinatorial auctions in which agents submit bids for resource bundles  1  1  1  1  1 . specific models sometimes deal  possibly implicitly  with substitution effects  and sometimes not. in this paper  we explore a model that combines features of both simultaneous and combinatorial auctions. our sequential auctions model supposes that the set of resources of interest are auctioned in sequence. agents bid for resources in a specific  known order  and can choose how much  and whether  to bid for a resource depending on past successes  fail tires  prices  and so on. 
　our model has several advantaues over standard combinatorial and simultaneous models. the chief benefit of such a model is that is can be applied in situations where combinatorial and simultaneous models cannot. specifically  when multiple sellers offer various resources of interest  or when the resources are sold at different points in time  one does not have the luxury of setting up either combinatorial or simultaneous auctions. as such  our model is suitable for auenls who are required to interact with multiple suppliers over time. even in settings where combinatorial models can be applied  there may be some advantages to using a sequential model. unlike combinatorial models  our model relieves the  computational  burden of determining a final allocation from the seller  effectively distributing computation among the buyers  as in the simultaneous case ; note that determining an optimal allocation that maximizes the seller's revenue is np-hard |1|. out sequential model also has the advantage that buyers are not required to reveal information about their valuations for specific resource bundles that they do not obtain. i'iirthermore  it has greater flexibility in that agents can enter and leave the market without forcing recomputation of entire allocations. in contrast to simultaneous models  agents in the sequential model may lessen their exposure. if an agent does not obtain a certain resource early in the sequence  it need not expose itself by bidding on complementary resources occurring later in the sequence. agents are typically bidding in a state of greater knowledge in the sequential model  at least in later stages; however  in earlier stages agents may have lesser information than they would in a simultaneous model. 
one difficulty that arises in the sequential model is how an 
	boutilier  goldszmidt. and sabata 	1 

agent computes bids for individual resources  the same difficulty arises in simultaneous models . an agent has a valuation for a particular resource bundle b = but has no independent assignment of value to the individual resources.1 while auction theory can tell us how an agent should bid as a function of its valuation of resource ri for specific auction mechanisms  in our setting no such valuation exists. if b is worth how is an agent to  distribute the value  among the resources in order to compute bids  
　in this paper  we develop a dynamic programming algorithm for doing just this. we assume that each agent has a probabilistic estimate of the size of the maximum bids for each resource  excluding its own . it can then compute a 
　bidding policy that maximizes its expected utility  and apply this policy as dictated by its initial endowment. bids for resources early in the sequence are computed as a function of the odds of being able to obtain their complements and substitutes  while bids for later resources are conditioned on the resources obtained early in the sequence. 
   we also interested in adaptive bidding behavior  and to this end investigate a repeated sequential auction model in which agents repeatedly bid for the same resources over time. we consider the problem of estimating the probability distributions over maximal bids in this repeated scenario. if agents persistently find themselves requiring resources to pursue their aims  we want them to learn which resources they will be able to obtain and which they will not. this is related to recently proposed learning models for auctions  1   though our focus is on learning prices and its effect on the valuation of individual resources in bundles. 
　the problem we study is part of a more general research program designed to study the impact of specific resource allocation schemes on the solution of sequential multiagent decision problems. we motivate the problem studied here as follows. we suppose that a number of agents have certain tasks and objectives to pursue  and for any objective there may exist a number of potential courses of action that are more or less suitable. for instance  an agent may construct a policy for a markov decision process  1  1   from which it can determine the value of various courses of action  their likelihood of success  and so on. any specific course of action will require certain resources  say  bundle  whose value can be determined as a function of the expected value of that course of action  and the expected value of alternative courses of action . as such  we suppose each bundle has an associated value  and that the agent will use only one bundle  the one associated with the highest-valued course of action among those bundles it possesses . it is from these valuations that the agent must determine its bidding policy for individual resources. this is the problem considered here. 
　ultimately  the decision problem we hope to study is far more complex. determining appropriate courses of action will depend on perceived probability of obtaining requisite resources  uncertainty in that course of action  alternatives available and so on. we envision very sophisticated reasoning emerging regarding the interaction bidding behavior and 
　　in fact  we will assume that several bundles can be valued  with possible overlap. this accounts for possible substitution effects. 
1 	distributed al 
 base-lever' action choice  in the mdp   such as taking a few critical steps along a specific course of action before deciding to enter the market for the corresponding resources  e.g.  perhaps because this policy is fraught with uncertainty . we also foresee interesting interactions with other coordination and communication protocols. 
　in section 1 we describe the basic sequential bidding model. we note a number of dimensions along which our basic model can vary  though we will focus only on specific instantiations of the model for expository reasons. we describe our dynamic programming model for constructing bidding policies in section 1. we also describe the motivation for using the specific model proposed here instead of using explicit equilibrium computation. we discuss repeated sequential auctions in section 1  focusing on the problem of highest-bid estimation. in section 1 we describe some preliminary experimental results  and conclude in section 1 with discussion of future research directions. 
　while bidding strategies for sequential auctions would seem to be an issue worthy of study  there appears to have been little research focussed on this issue. what work exists  see  e.g.  |1  1   tends to focus the seller's point of view- for example  will simultaneous or sequential sales maximize revenue-and does not address the types of complementarities we consider here. generally  existing work assumes that single items are of interest to the buyer. 
	1 	basic model 
we assume wc have a finite collection of agents  all of whom require resources from a pool of 
we denote by  the subset by convention. we describe the quanti-
ties relevant to a specific agent a. below  assuming that these quantities are defined for each agent. agent a can use exactly one bundle  - of resources from a set of a: possible bundles: we denote by  the set of useful resources for our agent. 
　agent a has a positive valuation v bl  for each resource bundle  suppose the holdings of a   
are those resources it is able to obtain. the value of these holdings is given by that is  the agent will be able to use the resource bundle with maximal value from among those it holds in entirety  with the others going unused. this is consistent with our interpretation given in section 1 where resource bundles correspond to alternative plans for achieving some objective  though other value combinators can be accommodated . 
　　the resources will be auctioned sequentially in a commonly known order: without loss of generality  we assume that this ordering is we use  to denote the auction for we refer to the sequence of auctions as a round of auctions. there may be a single round  some  definite or indefinite  finite numbers of rounds  or an infinite number of rounds. 
　　supposing for the moment only one round  we assume that agent a is given an initial endowment which it can use to obtain resources. at the end of the round  has holdings  

and d dollars remaining from its endowment.1 we assume that the utility of being in such a state at the end of the round is given by  where / is some function attaching utility to the unused portion of the endowment. other utility functions could be considered within this framework. 
　there are a wide range of options one could consider when instantiating this framework. we define a specific model here  but list the options that could be explored. we develop the algorithms in this paper for the specific model  but where appropriate  indicate how they should be modified for other design choices. the main design choices are: 
  what auction mechanism is used for the auctions ai  
  what rules are instituted for reselling or speculation  
  what information is revealed to the agents  when  
  what information do agents have when a round begins  
　　we assume that the individual auctions will be first-price  sealed-bid-each agent will provide a single bid and the highest bidder will be awarded the resource for the price bid. we adopt this model because of the ease with which it fits with our approach to bid computation; however  we believe our model could be adapted for other auction protocols. we also assume that bids are discrete  integer-valued ; but we do describe the appropriate amendments to deal with continuous bids. agents  once obtaining a resource  cannot resell that resource to another agent. this  of course  means that an agent may obtain one resource but later be unable to obtain a complementary resource essentially being  stuck  with a useless resource we do this primarily for simplicity  though in certain settings this assumption may be realistic. we are currently exploring more sophisticated models where agents can  put back  resources for re-auctioning  or possibly resell resources directly to other agents. 
　each agent is told the winning price at the end of the each auction  and whether it was the winner . we could suppose that no information  other than winning or losing  is provided  that the distribution over bids is announced  or that the bids of specific individuals arc made public; our assumption seems compatible with the first-price  sealed-bid model. 
　　finally  agent a believes that the highest bid that will be made for resource r   excluding any bid a might make  is drawn from some unknown distribution  because bids are integer-valued  this unknown distribution is a multinomial over a non-negative  bounded range of integers.1 to represent  uncertainty over the parameters of this distribution  we assume  has a prior probability distribution over the space of bid distributions. agent a models as a dirichlet distribution with parameters   where m  is the  estimated  maximum possible bid for we elaborate on this probability model in sections 1 and 1. 
　we make two remarks on this model. first  if the space of possible bids is continuous  a suitable continuous pdf  e.g.  
     1  if speculation or reselling is allowed  there is the possibility that d  e  depending on the interaction protocols we allow. we will mention this possibility below  but we will examine only protocols that disallow it. 1  we assume that a bound can be placed on the highest bid. 
gaussian  could be used to model bid distributions and the uncertainty about the parameters of this pdf. more questionable is the implicit assumption that bids for different resources are uncorrelated. by having distributions iv rather than a joint distribution over all bids  agent a is reasoning as if the bids for different resources are independent. when resources exhibit complementarities  this is unlikely to be the case. for instance  if someone bids up the price of some resource   e.g.  trucks   they may subsequently bid up the price of complementary resource  e.g.  fuel or drivers . if agent a does not admit a model that can capture such correlations  it may make poor bids for certain resources. again  we make this assumption primarily for ease of exposition. admitting correlations does not fundamentally change the nature of the algorithms to follow  though it does raise interesting modeling and computational issues  see section 1 . 
1 	computing bids by dynamic programming 
in this section we focus on the decisions facing an agent in a single round of auctions. a key decision facing an agent at the start of a round is how much to bid for each resource that makes up part of a useful bundle  in standard single item auctions  e.g.  first/second-price  sealed bid  rational agents with an assessment of the valuations of other agents can compute bids with maximum expected utility 1 . for example  in first-price  sealed bid auctions  an agent should bid a some amount below its true valuation  where this amount is given by its beliefs about the valuations of others. 
   unfortunately  the same reasoning cannot be applied to our sequential setting  since individual resources cannot be assessed a well-defined valuation. for instance  if bundle  =  has valuation  how should agent a apportion 
this value over the two resources  intuitively  if there is a greater demand for  a larger  portion  of the value should be allotted for bidding in the first auction rather than the second. if the agent fails to obtain the value of goes to zero  ignoring other bundles . in contrast  should a obtain it is likely that the agent should offer a substantial bid for approaching the valuation  since the price paid for r1 is essentially a  sunk cost.  of course  if the agent expects this high price to be required  it should probably not have bid for r  in the first place. finally  the interaction with other bundles requires the agent to reason about the relative likelihood of obtaining any specific bundle for an acceptable price  and to focus attention on the most promising bundles. 
1 	the dynamic programming model 
these considerations suggest that the process by which an agent computes bids should not be one of assigning value to individual resources  but rather one of constructing a bidding policy by which its bid for any resource is conditioned on the outcome of events earlier in the round. the sequential nature of the bidding process means that it can be viewed as a standard sequential decision problem under uncertainty. specifically  the problem faced by agent a can be modeled as a fully observable markov decision process  mdp  1  1 . the computation of an optimal bidding policy can be implemented using a standard stochastic dynamic programming al-
	boutilier  goldszmidt  and sabata 	1 

gorithm such as value iteration. 
　we emphasize that agents are computing optimal bids  not true valuations for individual resources. thus issues involving revelation of truthful values for resources are not directly relevant  but see section 1 on multiple rounds . 
　　we assume the decision problem is broken into  1 stages  n stages at which bidding decisions must be made  and a terminal stage at the end of the round. we use a time index 1  n. to refer to stages-time  refers to the point at which auction  is about to begin. the state of the decision problem for a specific agent a at time t is given by two variables: the subset of resources iv held by agent a: and the dollar amount  unspent endowment  available for future bidding. we write  to denote the state of a's decision problem at time /. note that although we could distinguish the state further according to which agents obtained which resources  these distinctions are not relevant to the decision facing a.a 
　　the dynamics of the decision process can be characterized by a's estimated transition distributions. specifically  assuming that prices are drawn independently from the stationary distributions  agent a can predict the effect of any action  bid  a available to it. if agent a is in state at stage t  it can bid for  with any a m o u n t   f o r conve-
nience we use a bid of 1 to denote nonparticipation . letting w denote the highest bid of other agents  if a bids : at time /  it will transition to state 
bility  and to 
　　this does not form an mdp per se  since a may be uncertain about the true distribution having only a dirichlel distribution over the possible parameters 
of however  the expectation that the highest bid is w is given by the relative weight of parameter thus. 
while the observation of the true winning bid can cause this estimated probability to change  properly making this a partially observable mdp   the change cannot impact future transition probability estimates or decisions: we have assumed that the high bid probabilities are independent. thus  treating this as a fully observable mdp with transition probabilities given by expected transition probabilities is sound. 
   the final piece of the mdp is a reward function q. we simply associate a reward of zero with all states at stages 
1 through and assign reward to every terminal state a bidding policy is a mapping from states into actions: for each legal state  
means that a will bid z for resource 
the value of policy at any state is the expected reward obtained by ex-
ecuting 	the expected value of 	given the agent's initial 
　　1  this is true under the current assumptions  but may not be under different models: see below. 
   '' for expository purposes  the model assumes ties are won. several rules can be used for ties: none complicate the analysis. 
state is simply  an optimal bidding policy is any that has maximal expected reward at every state. 
　we compute the optimal policy using value iteration   defining the value of states at stage / using the value of states at stage t + 1. specifically  we set 

denotes the optimal value at 
slate  while 	is the optimal bid. 
　　implementing value iteration requires that we enumerate  for each /  all possible stage t states and compute the consequences of every feasible action at that state. this can require substantial computational effort. while linear in the state and action spaces  and in the number of stages 1   the state and action spaces themselves are potentially quite large. the number of possible slates at stage / could potentially consist of any subset of resources  together with any monetary component. the action set at a state with monetary component d has size d+t. fortunately  we can manage some of this complexity using the following observations: first  a never needs to bid for any resource outside the useful set so its state space  at stage t  is restricted to subsets of and second  if a resource rt requires a complementary resource 
  that is  all bundles containing r  also contain then we need never consider a state where a has but not rt1 reducing the impact of the number of possible bids is more difficult. we can certainly restrict the state and action space to dollar values no greater than a's initial endowment e. if the pdf is well-behaved  e.g.  concave   pruning is possible: e.g.  once the expected value of a larger bids starts to decrease  search for a maximizing bid can be halted.' 
　this dynamic programming model deals with the complementarities and substitutability inherent in our resource model; no special devices are required. furthermore  it automatically deals with issues such as uncertainty  dynamic valuation   sunk costs   and so on. given stationary  uncorrected bid distributions  the computed policy is optimal. 
1 	extensions of the model 
while the assumptions underlying our  single-round  model are often reasonable  there are two assumptions that must be relaxed in certain settings: the requirement for discrete bids 
1this reasoning extends to arbitrary subset complementarities. 
   1 if we move to a continuous action space  the value function representation and maximization problems may become easier to manage for certain well-behaved classes of probability distributions and utility functions  see section 1 and  1| . 

and the prohibition of reselling or returning resources for resale. we are currently exploring these relaxations. 
　continuous bidding models are important for computational reasons. though money is not truly continuous  the increments that need to be considered generally render explicit value calculations for all discrete bids infeasible. continuous function maximization and manipulation techniques are often considerably more efficient that discrete enumeration  and approximately optimal  integer  bids can usually be extracted. we are currently exploring specific continuous models  specifically using parameterized bid distributions  such as gaussian and uniform distributions  and linear utility functions  as described above . the key difficulty in extending value iteration is determining an appropriate value function representation. while the maximization problem  over bids  for a specific state is not difficult  we must represent v' as a function of the continuous state space. this function is linear  in d  at all states where the remaining endowment d is greater than the maximal worthwhile bid. but a different function representation is needed for states with endowment less than the best bid. we are currently exploring a value function representation with piecewise  continuous representations of i for each  discrete  set of holdings h a  |1|. 
　reselling may be appropriate in many settings and can allow agents to bid more aggressively with less risk. we are currently developing a simple model in which agents are allowed  at the end of a round  to  put back  resources for reauction that are not needed  e.g.  are not part of the agent's max-valued complete bundle .1 several difficulties arise in this setting  including the fact that agents may need to estimate the probability that an unobtuined resource may be returned for re-auction. 
1 	equilibrium computation 
the model described above does not allow for strategic reasoning on the part of the bidding agent. the agent takes the expected prices as given and does not attempt to compute the impact of its bids on the behavior of other agents  how they might estimate its behavior and respond  and so on; that is  no form of equilibrium is computed. standard models in auction theory generally prescribe bidding strategies that arc in bayes-nash equilibrium: when each agent has beliefs about the types of other agents  i.e.  how each agent values the good for sale   and these beliefs are common knowledge  then the agents' bidding policies can be prescribed so that no agent has incentive to change its policy.'' this  for instance  is the basis for prescribing the well-known strategies for bidding in first- and second-price auctions  1. 
　our approach is much more  myopic.  there are several reasons for adopting such a model rather that a full bayesnash equilibrium model. first  equilibrium computation is often infeasible  especially in a nontrivial sequential  multiresource setting like ours. second  the information required on the part of each agent  namely a distribution over the pos-
   1  more complicated models that allow agents to put back re sources during the round or resell directly are also possible. 
   1  we use type here in the sense used in game theory for games with incomplete information . 
sible types of other agents  is incredibly complex-an agent type in this setting is its set of valuations for all resource bundles  making the space of types unmanagable. finally  the common knowledge assumptions usually required for equilibrium analysis are unlikely to hold in this setting. 
　we expect that the mdp model described here could be extended to allow for equilibrium computation. rather than do this  we consider an alternative  adaptive model for bidding in which agents will adjust their estimates of prices-hence their bidding policies-over time. implicitly  agents learn how others value different resources  and hopefully some type of  equilibrium  will emerge. we turn our attention to this process of adaptation. 
	1 	repeated auctions and value estimation 
in certain domains  agents will repeatedly need resources drawn from some pool to pursue ongoing objectives. we model this by assuming that the same resource collection is auctioned repeatedly in rounds. while agents could compute a single bidding policy and use it at every round  we would like agents to use the behavior they've observed at earlier rounds to update their policies. specifically  observed winning prices for resource auctions ai in the past can be used by an agent to update its estimate of the true distribution pr of high bids for r1. its bidding strategy at the next round can be based on the updated distributions. 
　if each agent updates its bidding policy based on past price observations  the prices observed at earlier rounds may not be reflective of the prices that will obtain at the next round. this means that the agents are learning based on observations drawn from a nonstationary distribution. this setting is common in game theory  where agents read to each oth-
ers past behavior. myopic learning models such as fictitious play   designed to learn strategy profiles  can be shown to converge to a stationary distribution despite the initial nonstationarity. this type of learning model has been applied to repeated  single-item  auctions and shown to converge . our model is based on similar intuitions-namely  that learning about prices will eventually converge to a steady state. hu and well man  also develop a related model for price learning in a somewhat different context. 
   the advantage of a learning model is that agents can come to learn which resources they can realistically obtain and focus their bidding on those. if agents a and b have similar endowments and both equally value having either or they may learn over time not to compete for  and ; instead they may learn to anticipate  implicitly  through pricing each other's strategy and  implicitly  coordinate their activities  with one pursuing  and the other  if one agent has a greater endowment than another  e.g.  it may have higher priority objectives in a distributed planning environment   the poorer agent should learn that it can't compete and focus on less contentious  and perhaps less valued  resources. another important feature of learning models is that they can be used to overcome biased or weak prior assessments. 
　given the form of the probabilistic model described in section 1  an agent can update its estimate of a bid distribution rather easily. suppose agent a has parameters  
	boutiuer  goldszmidt. and sabata 	1 

that characterize its distribution over the true distribution  of high bids for resource rt. after auction  the win-
 ning bid is announced to each agent.1 if a fails to win the resource  it should update these dirichlet parameters by setting at the next round  its estimate that the highest bid will be is thus increased. if  wins resource  for price the only information it gets about the highest 
bid  excluding its own  is that it is less than  the dirichlet parameters can then be updated with an algorithm such as em . roughly  the expectation step computes an update of the parameters of the dirichlet using current estimates to distribute the observation over the parameters  
each  i s increased b y t h e maximization step corresponds to the actual update followed by the substitution of these parameters in pr. whereas the em algorithm requires an iteration of these two steps until convergence  we performed this iteration about 1 times.1 
   in the specific probability model developed here  agents cannot profitably use this updated estimate during the current round. because prices are assumed independent  learning about one price cannot influence an agent's bidding strategy for other resources.1 thus the agent continues to implement the bidding policy computed at the start of the round. the updated bid distributions are used prior to the start of the next round of auctions to compute an new bidding policy. 
　as mentioned above  the price-independence assumption may be unrealistic. if prices are correlated  the observed price of a resource can impact the estimated price of another resource that will be available later in the round. agents in this case should revise their bidding policies to reflect this information. two approaches can be used to deal with correlations. first  agents can simply recompute their bidding policies during a round based on earlier outcomes. an alternative is to model this directly within the mdp itself: this entails making the mdp partially observable  which can cause computational difficulties. 
　one thing we do not consider is agents acting strategically within a round to influence prices at subsequent rounds. agents are reasoning  myopically  within a specific round. by formulating multi-round behavior as a sequential problem  we could have agents attempting to manipulate prices for future gain. our current model does not allow this. 
	1 	results 
we now describe the results of applying this model to some simple resource allocation problems. these illustrate interesting qualitative behavior such as adaptation and coordination. we also explain why such behavior arises. in all runs  multiple rounds are considered and remaining endowment d 
　1 our model can accommodate both more  e.g.  the bids of all agents  and less  e.g.  only whether an agent won or lost  revealed information about the auction outcome rather easily. 
　1  preliminary experiments showed this sufficient. 
　1  with correlated prices  an agent could attempt to provide misleading information about its valuation of one resource in order to secure a later resource at a cheaper price. this type of deception  studied for identical item auctions in   cannot arise within a single round in our current model  even if strategic reasoning is used. is valued at 1d  = 1 . agent priors have slightly increasing weights on higher bids.1 
　the first series of examples illustrates bidding behavior in allocation problems with specific parameter settings. 
example there are two agents whose optimal bundles are disjoint: requires =  value 1  or  = 
　　　　　　　　　 value 1   while a1 requires  = {r1  r1}  value 1  or =  value 1 . initially  both agents focus on the smaller  and lower-valued  bundles. 
at the first round  obtains while gets  stuck  with outbid it for the next round sees  bid less and more for  outbidding a.  . since it obtains it does not attempt to bid for but without and 
its estimated prices for resources in lowered  now bids for and gets   its optimal bundle . up to the 1th round  one of the agents gets its best bundle and the other its worst. at the 1th round  each gets its best bundle  and after the 1th round  the socially optimal allocation  the one with maximal total bundle value  is reached each time: the agents  more or less   realize  that they need not compete. the agents do  hedge their bets  and still keep bidding for resources  and  they also offer fairly high bids for the nonconflicting resources  though these bids are reduced over time. 
　this first example shows that optimal allocations will emerge when agents are not in direct competition. it also illustrates general behavioral phenomenon that occur in almost all examples.  1  agents tend to bid more aggressively  initially  for resources in bundles with smaller size  since the odds of getting all resources in a larger bundle are lower.  1  agents tend to bid more aggressively for resources that occur later in the sequence. once an agent obtains all resources in a bundle but one  the last resource is very valuable  for example  in round 1 above  a.  obtains by paying 1 for r  and r1  and 1 for r1.  1  agents tend to initially offer high bids for certain resources  and gradually lower their bids over time  realizing slowly that there is no competition . for example  a1 reduces its bid for r1 to 1 only at round 1. this is a consequence of the simple priors and belief update rules we use  and the lack of information it obtains when it wins the resource consistently: it is not told what the next highest bid is  it is zero   and can only conclude that it was less than 1  making belief update slow. the equivalent sample size of our priors also makes adjustment somewhat slow. domainspecific  more accurate  priors  and the use of exponential decay  or finite histories  in price-estimation would alleviate much of this slowness of response. 
example there are 1 resources and five agents with four bundles each  with an average of four resources per bundle . there exists an allocation of five disjoint bundles  one to each agent. for each agent three of the resources occur only in its bundles  so the agents are competing for only 1 of the 1 resources. the socially optimal allocation has value 1. over fifty rounds  the agents generally find very good  but not optimal  allocations. figure 1 shows the value of the allocations obtained at each round  
1 more realistic priors could reflect perceived demand. 


figure 1: behavior over 1 auction rounds: 1 agents with disjoint bundles  optimal allocation has value 1 . 


figure 1: sample behavior over 1 auction rounds: 1 agents  optimal allocation has value 1  

as well as the collective  surplus   total value minus readjusted prices paid . the agents quickly find good allocations  by the ninth round  no allocation has value less than 1   and also learn to pay less for the resources. 
example an interesting phenomenon emerges in a twoagent example of  that has no price equilibrium: assume resources with valuing bundle at 1  and  valuing either of at 1. the agents have equal endowments. though there is no price equilibrium  in our adaptive protocol wins one of its bundles much more frequently than it bids for and if it wins it need not bid for if it loses it can outbid for  since has paid for experiments with and wins it occasionally  gradually lowers its bid for and  since it does not model correlations in prices  occasionally loses allowing  to get both  and when this occurs  will quickly raise its bids and win one of the resources again. by modeling price correlations  or estimating the requirements of  agent   could guarantee that it obtains one of its resources  see section 1 . 
example we have 1 resources and 1 agents  each valuing  at 1 and at 1  but differing in initial endow-
ment: a1 begins with 1  with 1. initially  gets the first  higher-valued  bundle  at prices 1 and 1  and the second  at price 1 . by the fourth round   realizes that it can win with bids of 1 and 1. it spends 1 on leaving to bid 1 for these prices persist  with not bidding on and eventually not bidding on this illustrates that agents with larger endowments  or less relative value for money compared to bundles  have greater odds of obtaining their most important bundles  leaving 
 poorer  agents to get what is left.1 
   1 this last property is useful for teams if agents with higher pri ority objectives are given larger endowments. 
　we also studied the bidding behavior on randomly generated allocation problems. here we describe two sets of experiments. in problem set ps 1  live allocation problems were randomly generated with the following characteristics: four agents arc competing for 1 resources with an initial endowment of 1 each; each agent has a random number of needed bundles  normally distributed with mean 1 and s.d. 1 ; each bundle contains a random number of resources  normally distributed with mean 1 and s.d. 1  where the resources are themselves drawn uniformly from the set of 1 ; and the value of each bundle is random  normally distributed with mean 1 and s.d. 1 . problem set ps1 is identical except there are five agents and the mean number of resources per bundles is 1: hence problems in ps1 are more constrained  with more competition among the agents. 
　typical behavior for one trial from ps1  the more constrained problem set  is shown in figure 1  which plots the the value of the allocations obtained at each round  as well as the collective surplus. the agents find good allocations in this problem  reaching the  socially  optimal allocation  with value 1  at many of the rounds. on average  over the 1 rounds  the allocation obtained has value 1  1% of optimal . note that once the agents  find  a good allocation  they may not stick with it-generally such allocations are not in equilibrium in the sequential game induced by a round of auctions. at the very least  agents have a tendency to attempt to lower the prices they bid after consistently winning a good  due to the lack of information about what other agents bid and how they update their beliefs  as mentioned above . this itself can cause some instability. the greater cause of instability however is the fact that a socially optimal allocation does not generally make self-interested agents happy. 
　other trials illustrate similar qualitative behavior. when comparing psl  the less constrained problem set  to ps1  the more constrained   we find that the allocations in ps have value that is  on average  within 1% of the optimal  while with ps1  allocations are within 1% of optimal. this suggests that for less constrained problems  sequential auc-
	boutilier  goldszmidt  and sabata 	1 

tions among self-interested agents can lead to allocations with higher social welfare value. given that agents  discover  many different allocations  one might view sequential auctions as a heuristic search mechanism for combinatorial auctions.1 however  we emphasize that the main goal of our model is to compute bidding policies when combinatorial and simultaneous auctions are not possible. 
	1 	concluding remarks 
we have described a model for sequential auctioning of resources that exhibit complementarities for different agents and described a dynamic programming algorithm for the computation of optimal bidding policies. we have also illustrated how price learning can be used to allow agents to adapt there bidding policies to those of other agents. the sequential model can be applied in settings where combinatorial and simultaneous models are infeasible  e.g.  when agents enter or leave markets overtime  or when agents require resources from multiple sellers . preliminary results are encouraging and suggest that desirable behavior often emerges. 
　we have suggested several possible extensions of the model  some of which we arc currently exploring. these in-
clude developing continuous bidding models  models with reselling/return  incorporating correlated bid distributions and exploring the interactions between decision theoretic planning and bidding for the resources needed to implement plans and policies. 
　there are several more immediate directions we hope to pursue. one is the investigation of models where prices are estimated with greater weight placed on more recent prices. 
along with correlated price distributions  the use of limited 
 opponent  models may be helpful: by identifying which agents tend to need which resources  a bidder can make more informed decisions. additional revealed information about specific auctions  such as who bid what amount  could also lead to more informed decisions. this information may be appropriate in team situations  where distributed decision makers are not directly in competition. 
   apart from such myopic mechanisms  we would also like to develop a bayes-nash equilibrium formulation of the sequential model  and study the extent to which myopic models like our simple learning scheme approximate it. the conditions under which our model converges to interesting allocations  socially optimal allocations  equilibria  etc.  is also worthy of exploration. other avenues to be considered are the development of different auction ordering heuristics to maximize social welfare  seller's revenue or other objective criteria; and the development of generalization methods to speed up dynamic programming. we are also integrating the sequential auction model for resource allocation into the general planning context described in section 1. 
acknowledgments craig boutilier and moises goldszmidt acknowledge partial support from the darpa. co-abs program  through stanford university contract f1-c-1 . bikash sabata was funded by darpa through the spawarsyscen under contract number n1-c-1. craig boutilier was partially supported by nshrc research grant ogp1. thanks to bill walsh  piero la mura  tuomas sandholm  yoav shoham and mike wellman for their helpful comments  suggestions and pointers to relevant literature. 
