 
a foundational approach to modelling belief contraction and revision is presented  based on a notion of similarity between belief sets. in contracting  from a belief set  the result is the belief set s  most similar to the original in which is not believed; similar considerations apply to belief revision. the modelling of belief change generalises the grove modelling based on a system of spheres  where instead of having a total order on sets of possible worlds  we have a total order on sets of belief sets. given this modelling  sets of postulates are determined for contraction and revision. the resulting postulate sets subsume those in the agm approach. the approach sheds light on the foundations of belief revision in that  first  it provides a more general framework than the agm approach; second  it  illustrates assumptions under lying the agm approach; and third  it allows a  fine-grained  investigation of proposed principles underlying belief change. lastly  it demonstrates that  at their most  basic  revision and contraction of beliefs are not interdefinable notions  but rather distinct concepts 
1 introduction 
a belief set of facts  assertions  etc. will of course change over time with the addition or de1 tion of information. in this paper 1 am concerned with a foundational characterisation of belief contraction and revision. the questions addressed are familiar: given a belief set and a sentence to be added to the belief set  what can we say about the revised belief set  and: given a belief set and a sentence to be contracted  again  what can be said about the result  for reasons that will become apparent  i focus on belief contraction rather than the revision of beliefs. 
　two assumptions are made in addressing these questions. first  that a change is successful  so that after a sentence is contracted from a belief set  that sentence is no longer believed in the resulting belief set s . second  i assume that belief change is founded on a notion of similarity among belief sets. thus if a sentence a is 
1 
to be contracted from  added to  belief set a'  then the result will be the belief set most similar to a' in which  is not believed  is believed . this reduces the notion of belief change to that of similarity between belief sets. the focus here is on an abstract characterisation of beliefs  so we will be concerned with syntax-independent characterisations of change functions. 
　　clearly  there is not a great deal that can be said in general about similarity between belief sets. in the approach presented here  it is assumed that every belief set a has associated with it a binary metric of relative similarity to a'  and that this metric is a total preorder. that is  if is the relative similarity metric associated with a then is reflexive  transitive and connected; as well a is the minimum element in the order. 1 assume further that for every sentence  there is a -least belief set or set of belief sets in which a is believed. given such a similarity order  contraction and revision functions can be defined. subsequent to this modelling  corresponding postulates validated by these functions are determined. 
　the approach is intended to provide a minimal notion of belief change  in that for the postulates that obtain  all should arguably hold for any syntax-independent  successful change functions. consequently  the approach is more basic than  and so subsumes  the agm approach to belief change. however  as shown at the end of section 1  the approach does not subsume the katsuno-mendelzon approach to belief update. a benefit of the present  approach is that it allows a very  line-grained  investigation of principles underlying belief revision where distinct notions arc  in fact  distinguished. consequently the semantics illustrates that in the agm approach  there are a number of distinct  albeit very basic  and perhaps beyond debate  principles composing the approach. secondly  the approach is arguably intuitive and plausible  in that it is based on commonsense intuitions regarding belief revision and contraction. by imposing constraints on the semantic theory  additional postulates may be satisfied. arguably  such constraints will reflect plausible intuitions concerning belief change  and so the approach will help provide insight into different belief change functions. finally  and perhaps surprisingly  at this very basic level it proves to be the case that revision and contraction functions comprise distinct notions  with 

contraction being the more general. this is in contrast with the a g m approach  where revision and contraction are in a certain sense interdefinable. 
   one omission in this paper is that iterated revision is not addressed. the reason for this is that  at this point  our interests lie with a comparison to the a g m approach and  for the present  uniterated revision. the final section briefly considers how the notion of similarity may be used in iterated revision. 
   section 1 briefly reviews the a g m approach and the grove construction. section 1 presents the approach  while section 1 provides a conclusion. 
1 	background 
belief sets change over time  with the addition and deletion of information. in general  there is no purely logical reason for making one choice rather than another among the sentences to be retracted or kept. hence from a logical view there may be several ways of specifying a belief change function. however  general properties of such functions can be investigated. 
in the agm approach of alchourron  gardenfors  and 
makinson  agm1; gar1   standards for revision and contraction functions are given by various rationality postulates. the goal is to describe belief change at the knowledge level  that is on an abstract level  independent 
 of how beliefs are represented and manipulated. belief states are modelled by sets of sentences closed under the logical consequence operator of some logic in some language a  where the logic includes classical propositional logic. a belief set is a set a of sentences which satisfies the constraint: if a logically entails then  a'   is the deductive closure of and is called 
the expansion of a* by is the inconsistent knowledge base is the set of all belief sets. 
　　for contraction  some beliefs are retracted but no new beliefs are added. a contraction function - is a function satisfying the following postulates. 

　katsuno and mendelzon  km1  explore a distinct notion of belief change  comprising belief update and erasure  wherein an agent changes its beliefs in response to changes in its external environment. our interests here centre on the a g m approach; however in section 1  i briefly consider this approach. 
   in  gro1  a modelling of the a g m postulates is given based on lewis' system of spheres semantics  lew1 . ml is the set of all maximal consistent sets of sentences of l. intuitively  an element of  can be thought of as corresponding to an inlepretation in the language  or alternatively to a possible world. define  for system of spheres m. 
definition 1   gro1   a set of subsets s of mi is  system of spheres centred on a' where  if it satisfies the conditions: 

principal result is a correspondence between systems of spheres and the a g m postulates  in that  informally  for any system of spheres centred on  there is a corresponding revision function that satisfies the agm postulates and  conversely  for any revision function satisfying the a g m postulates there is a corresponding system of spheres centred on 
   in the next section  we take the grove modelling as our point  of departure  essentially advocating a modelling based on a system of spheres but where belief sets replace possible worlds in the modelling. 
1 	similarity orderings on belief sets 
contraction of belief sets is addressed first  followed by revision. the central intuition is that in contracting 
from / '  we want to select the most similar belief set s  to a' in which  is not believed.  as a point of interest  the agm approach assumes that one wants to retain as much of the information in the belief set as possible; this criterion would constitute a specific similarity measure.  
a belief set k has associated with it a  binary  metric  of relative similarity to k  and this metric is a total preorder. as well a' is the minimum element in the order. for every there is a -least belief set or set of belief sets in which is believed. this last constraint is analogous to the limit assumption of  lew1   
　for contracting  from a   we select the belief sets most similar to a' in which a is not believed. since there 
	delgrande 	1 

may be more than one such belief set  and since there is nothing to distinguish these belief sets  the contraction of a from a* corresponds to this set of belief sets. this is in contrast with the a g m approach  where a contraction function has as value a single belief set. 
1 	a m o d e l l i n g for b e l i e f c h a n g e 
a'  a'i  a o  ... will denote belief sets. recall that is the set of belief sets. when we come to the revision and contraction postulates  it will be convenient to be able to talk about the belief sets in which a sentence a is believed. 

1 	belief c h a n g e : 	c o n t r a c t i o n 
rninc     is defined as the least set of belief sets in which 

we can now define belief contraction. 
definition 1 the contraction of  from theory a in m is given by: 

given this semantics we can ask what postulates are satisfied. for reference i distinguish the postulates in a definition. the numbering is with reference to the corresponding  or most similar  a g m postulates. 
definition 1 the following constitute the set of kb contraction postulates. 

the same as their a g m counterparts. for traction isn't guaranteed to result in a single belief set. this corresponds to the fact that in the semantics there may be minimal  equivalently-similar belief sets in which a isn't believed. the a g m postulate  a' - 1   reflects the requirement that no new beliefs occur in a contraction. in our case  the most similar belief set s  to a' in which a isn't believed may indeed contain new information. consider for example a nonmonotonic belief set wherein bird opus   pcnguin opxt$ y and -* fly  opus  are believed. if penguin opus  is contracted  then if we have the usual default rules concerning birds and flying  we might elect to replace -*fly opus  by fly opus  in the resultant belief set.  reflects the fact that a belief set is most similar to itself  and so if -v* is consistent with k  contracting  results in the set of k. asserts that contraction is successful while reflects the fact that it is the content of  that determines the contraction and not its syntactic expression. 
   the a g m recovery postulate  is missing: if then a' and  may be quite different and  in fact  mav contain information not  contained in 
a'  since we don't have an equivalent to . hence  may be different from a'. it proves to be 
the case that equivalents to the a g m postulates and  a' - 1   are consequences of the kb contraction postulates. the quite different-looking  and are employed because they readily yield a representation result. i  is quite strong: if the contraction of  from a' results in at least one belief set in which  is consistent  then consists of just those belief 
sets in in which ... is consistent . semantical ly  asserts that if t and are equivalently-similar then so is 
　there are number of interesting results following from these postulates. we have already noted that   a ' - 1   and  a - 1   are consequences of the postulates. a selection of other results are given in the following theorem. 
t h e o r e m 1 


1 

second result  is analogous to the  factoring  result of the a g m postulates  gar1  p. 1  1    but expressed in 

terms of sets of belief sets. the final result essentially expresses a notion of transitivity in our representation theorem; this in turn is based on the fact that if  then any minimal belief set in which is consistent is also a minimal belief set in which is consistent  justifying an assertion that 
　we obtain the following results relating the kb contraction postulates to similarity order models. 
theorem 1 let m be any similarity order model on belief sets centred on a. if  is defined according to definition 1 then the kb contraction postulates are satisfied in m. 
theorem 1 let  be  function 	from 
satisfying the kb contraction postulates. then for any fixed theory  there is a similarity order model on belief sets centred on i  satisfying definition s.j  for all 

   we can determine what conditions are required to recover the other agm postulates. this can be accomplished in two ways. first   we can consider criteria which 
satisfy individual postulates. second  we can consider a criterion that would en masse as it were  yield the agm postulates.  a third  and most interesting  possibility is given in theorem 1 in the final subsection of this section.  
   in the first case  for example  one can obtain a postulate equivalent to  a* - 1  by restricting the similarity relation to belief sets strictly weaker than a'. to obtain a postulate equivalent to  a - 1  there are various strategies that can bv employed. to obtain a single belief set from a contraction  one could define some selection function that returns a single belief set given a set of equally-similar belief sets. for example  this function could select an arbitrary belief set  or it might select a belief set on the basis of some other criterion  for example  the overall simplicity of the belief set. or it might determine some representative belief set  for example  the intersection of the set . 
　　alternately  one might decide that the semantics be refined so that the contraction function returns a single belief set. again  there are various alternatives. for example  one could require that the similarity order be antisymmetric  so that  if  then unless  alternately  one could require that equally-similar belief sets be closed under intersection  so that ir e equally-similar to a then so would be the contraction then would return the minimal  in terms of containment  belief set. for either strategy  the imposition of additional constraints would not be ad hoc  but rather should reflect reasonable assumptions in the semantics. so if  were a total order on belief sets  then one would be compelled to accept the assumption that there are no  ties  in similarity of belief sets. if one decided that contraction is closed under intersections  then presumably one should be able to justify this choice. the point here is that the approach allows such distinctions to be made. 
　on the other hand  one obtains the full set of agm contraction postulates by asserting that successive weakenings of a' are less similar to a. this reflects a criterion of informational economy  that we retain as much as possible of our old beliefs. the use of a selection function  below  is one of a number of ways to guarantee that a single belief set results from a contraction. we obtain: 

　note that in the above theorem  if we allowed an arbitrary similarity order model  and we defined a new contraction operator to be   as suggested for example in  neb1   that the only new agm postulate satisfied is  a' - 1 . 
1 	belief change: revision 
we turn now to belief revision. the main result is that  surprisingly  this function is not  interdefinable with contraction  and in fact is weaker. 
　 iiven a similarity order model a/  we define min a  as the least set of belief sets in which  is true  following which we define belief revision. 

　revision postulates are given in the next definition  with numbering in reference to the corresponding  or most similar  agm revision postulates. 
as their agm counterparts. 
contraction  isn't guaranteed to result in a. unique belief set. reflects the requirement that the. revision be successful. i is an obvious weakening of  it is difficult to think of a situation where it shouldn't hold. in contrast  it seems feasible that a revision function may not satisfy the agm postulates and since if  is consistent with a  it  may be that isn't the most  similar belief set to a' in which is believed; for 
	delgrande 	1 

this to hold we could again bring in an assumption of informational economy. is nothing forbidding again are dissimilar from their agm counterparts. 
　again  various reasonable and interesting results following from these postulates. several examples are given in the following theorem. theorem 1 

mantic-ally  see below  the least tv  belief sets are no more similar to a than the least  belief sets. if a chain of such containments forms a  loop   then the revisions are equally similar and  in fact  equal. the final result provides a weaker version of the agm  factoring  result  see  gar1  p. 1  1.1   . it is also weaker than the corresponding result for contraction  theorem 1.1 . as well  the agm postulates  and  are not logical 
consequences of the kb revision postulates  in contradistinction to the agm contraction postulates  k - 1  and 
 a' -1  whose analogues are logical consequences of the kb contraction postulates. 
　in addition  we do not obtain the representation result for revision that we do for contraction. define a weak similarity order model on belief sets centred on a 
　to be a similarity order model on belief sets except rather than being connected  it is reflexive only. we obtain the following results relating the kb revision postulates to weak similarity order models. 
theorem 1 let m be  weak similarity order model on belief sets centred on a  if we define then the kb revision postulates are satisfied in m. 
theorem 1 let  be a function 	from 
satisfying the kb revision postulates. then for any fixed theory  there is  weak similarity order model on belief sets centred on a* s a t i s f y i n g f o r all 
   as with contraction we can ask what conditions are required to recover the other agm postulates. we can specify that revision has a unique belief set as its value via strategies sketched previously. to obtain an equivalent of  a'1  we would require  and not unreasonably  that the inconsistent belief set be the most dissimilar of belief sets to any consistent belief set. other postulates are dealt with by imposing similar conditions. 
1 	discussion 
as in the agm approach  the present approach leaves open how a specific contraction or revision function may 
1 
be defined. rather  the approach provides constraints that contraction and revision functions must obey. if one accepts that a notion of similarity as developed here underlies belief change then one presumably would accept the respective postulate sets that would limit properties of an acceptable change function. one can further restrict the class of acceptable functions by placing additional restrictions on the notion of similarity. thus if the range of a contraction function for belief set k is restricted to be a subsumed belief set of a'  this together with a selection function restricts the satisfying contraction functions to those satisfying the agm postulates. 
　　on the other hand  one could propose a specific metric of similarity for a  say  revision operator. for example  if we equated a belief set with a set of possible worlds rather than a set of sentences  then dalal's approach  dal1  is easily expressed using similarity: for belief set k the most similar belief sets to a  not the same as a would be those composed of possible worlds differing in one literal from a world in a'. the next closest set of belief sets would be those composed of worlds differing in two literals from a world in a'  and so on. the result of revising a' by would be the maximal  nearest belief set in which is true. 
　as mentioned  revision proves to be weaker than contraction. in detail  in the proof of theorem 1 a similarity order model is defined such that for belief sets 

there is no such relation among belief sets  and the belief sets in  may be distinct. we thus lose the capability to define connectivity in theorem 1. this difference in turn relies on the fact that contraction yields belief sets consistent with a sentence  whereas revision yields belief sets in which a 
sentence is provable. 
　interestingly  a revision operator satisfying the agm postulates is obtained in terms of kb contraction and the levi identity  but agm contraction is not recoverable from kb revision using the harper identity. 

see the discussion at the end of section 1 for meeting the first proviso in the theorem; the second proviso states that the incoherent belief set is maximally dissimilar to k. the theorem is interesting  in that it arguably demonstrates that agm revision is founded on 

assumptions of similarity  as given in kb contraction  plus informational economy  as implicit in the expansion in the levi identity  plus uniqueness  proviso one  plus the avoidance of incoherent belief states  proviso two . 
　we don't obtain a similar result for revision and the harper identity. 
 theorem 1 let m be any similarity order model centred on k with defined as in definition 1. 1 where 
　not surprisingly  the kb contraction/revision functions are weaker than the corresponding agm functions. 
theorem 1 let f be function satisfying the acm contraction  revision  postulates. then f satisfies the kb contraction  revision  postulates. 
more surprising is the fact that the contraction postulates are not strictly weaker than the km erasure postulates  km1   in that  is not a consequence of the erasure postulates. however the kb revision postulates subsume the update postulates. 
theorem 1 let f be  function satisfying the km update postulates. then f satisfies the kb revision postulates. 
it is an interesting  but unexplored  question to determine whether there is anything about contraction and revision as defined here that lends them most naturally to the agm and km approaches respectively. 
1 	conclusion 
a foundational approach has been presented in which to investigate belief change. the central intuition is that change to a belief set k by a sentence a is with reference to the belief set s  most similar to /   the approach is quite basic  in that various of the agm postulates don't hold  or only hold in a weaker form. arguably the approach is not too basic  in that interesting properties still obtain  as given in the set of kb contraction and revision postulates. moreover  the approach allows fine-grained control over the properties of contraction and revision functions. this is illustrated by the fact that of the basic agm postulates that don't hold in the approach  each may be independently satisfied in some augmentation of the approach. an advantage of the approach then  as a foundational approach to revision  is that while the semantic basis is intuitive  such additional assumptions must be explicitly recognised and made. as a corollary  the approach arguably demonstrates that agm revision can be viewed as being founded on a number of distinct assumptions including similarity  informational economy  and the avoidance of incoherent belief states. 
　a further result of this inquiry is that it appears that  at their core  revision and contraction constitute distinct functions  with revision being the weaker. a question for future work to ask what it is about the agm approach that leaves revision and contraction there interdefmable but not here. a second question concerns the relation of the approach to update and erasure. 
　there has been substantial recent interest in iterated belief revision. iterated revision has not been addressed here  mainly because our foremost interest is in developing an approach that in some sense is more basic than the agm approach. glearly iteration could be addressed by investigating relations among similarity orders; in fact it may be that iterated change is more easily addressed here than in the agm approach  primarily because here we have stepped back from some of the commitments of the agm approach. a straightforward approach for incorporating iterated revision is  in a model  to define a mapping from pairs of belief sets to ordinals  giving the relative similarity of every pair of belief sets. from this it is an easy step to define an epistemic state for a belief set  k  corresponding to the total preorder expressing the relative similarity of each belief set to /   
acknowledgements 
i thank maurice pagnucco for his extensive and very helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. as well i thank two reviewers for their comments. 
