 
based on an abstract framework for nonmonotonic reasoning  bondarenko et at. have extended the logic programming semantics of admissible and preferred arguments to other non-
monotonic formalisms such as circumscription  autoepisternic logic and default logic. although the new semantics have been tacitly assumed to mitigate the computational problems of nonmonotonic reasoning under the standard semantics of stable extensions  it seems questionable whether they improve the worst-case behaviour. as a matter of fact  we show that credulous reasoning under the new semantics in propositional logic programming and prepositional default logic has the same computational complexity as under the standard semantics. furthermore  sceptical reasoning under the admissibility semantics is easier ~ since it is trivialised to monotonic reasoning. finally  sceptical reasoning under the preferability semantics is harder than under the standard semantics. 
1 	introduction 
bondarenko et a/.  show that many logics for nonmonotonic reasoning  in particular default logic  dl   iteiter  1  and logic programming  lp   can be understood as special cases of a single abstract framework. the standard semantics of thes  logics can be understood in terms of stable extensions of a given theory  where a stable extension is a set of assumptions that does not attack itself and it attacks every assumption not in the set. in abstract terms  an assumption is attacked if its contrary can be proven  in some appropriate underlying monotonic logic  possibly with the aid of other conflicting assumptions. 
　bondarenko et al.  also propose two new semantics generalising  respectively  the admissibility semantics  dung  1  and the semantics of preferred extensions {dung  1  and partial stable models  sacca and zaniolo  1  for lp. in abstract terms  a set of assumptions is an admissible argument of a given theory  iff it does not attack itself and it attacks all sets of 
1 	automated reasoning 
assumptions which attack it. a set of assumptions is a preferred argument iff it is a maximal  wrt. set inclusion  admissible argument. 
　the new semantics are more general than the stability semantics since every stable extension is a preferred  and admissible  argument  but not every preferred argument is a stable extension. moreover  the new semantics are more liberal because for most concrete logics for nonmonotonic reasoning  admissible and preferred arguments are always guaranteed to exist  whereas stable extensions are not. finally  reasoning under the new semantics appears to be computationally easier than reasoning under the stability semantics. intuitively  to show that a given sentence is justified by a stable extension  it is necessary to perform a global search amongst all the assumptions  to determine for each such assumption whether it or its contrary can be derived  independently of the sentence to be justified. for the semantics of admissible and preferred arguments  however  a  local  search suffices. first  one has to construct a set of assumptions which  together with the given theory   monotonically  derives the sentence to be justified  and then one has to augment the constructed set with further assumptions to defend it against all attacks. 
　however  from a complexity-theoretic point of view  it seems unlikely that the new semantics lead to better lower bounds than the standard semantics since all the  sources of complexity  one has in nonmonotonic reasoning are present. there are potentially exponentially many assumption sets sanctioned by the semantics. further  in order to test whether a sentence is entailed by a particular argument one has to reason in the underlying monotonic logic. for this reason  one would expect that reasoning under the new semantics has the same complexity as under the stability semantics  i.e.  it is on the first level of the polynomial hierarchy for lp and on the second level for logics with full propositional logic as the underlying logic  cadoli and schaerf  1 . however  previous results on the expressive power of datalog  queries by sacca  suggest that this is not the case for lp. indeed  these results imply that reasoning under the preferability semantics for lp is at the second level of the polynomial hierarchy. 
in this paper  we extend these results and show that 

forkp and dl 
  credulous reasoning under the admissibility and preferability semantics has the same complexity as under the stability semantics  
  sceptical reasoning under the admissibility semantics is easier than under the stability semantics -
since it reduces to monotonic reasoning with the given theory  and  finally  
  sceptical reasoning under the preferability semantics is harder than under the stability semantics. in other words  here intuition seems to clash severely with the complexity-theoretic results. 
　the paper is organised as follows. section 1 summarises the abstract framework introduced by bondarenko et al.   its semantics and concrete instances capturing lp and dl. section 1 gives complexity theory background and introduces the reasoning problems. section 1 gives abstract upper bounds for credulous and sceptical reasoning  parametric wrt. the complexity of the under lying monotonic logic. section 1 gives the completeness results. section 1 discusses the results and concludes. 
1 	default reasoning via argumentation 
assume a deductive system  where is some formal language with countably many sentences and r is a set of inference rules inducing a monotonic derivability notion given a theory and a formula 
is the deductive closure 
of t. then  an abstract  assumption-based  framework is a triple 	where and 	is a mapping from a into 	  the theory  is a  possibly incomplete  set of beliefs  formulated in the underlying language  and can be extended by subsets of a  the set of assumptions. an extension of an abstract framework is a theory  with 	 sometimes an extension is referred to simply as finally  given an assumption denotes its contrary. 
　　lp is the instance of the abstract framework where t is a logic program  the assumptions in a are all negations not p of atomic sentences and the contrary notp of an assumption not p is p. is horn logic provability  with assumptions  notp  understood as new atoms  p*. 
　dl is the instance of the abstract framework where the monotonic logic is classical logic augmented with domain-specific inference rules of the form 
where are sentences in classical logic. t is a classical theory and a consists of all expressions of the form m where is a sentence of classical logic. the contrary .  1 of an assumption 
　in the remainder of the paper  without loss of generality  we will assume that the set of assumptions a in the abstract framework for dl consists of all assumptions m occurring in the domain-specific inference rules. 
　　given an abstract framework and an assumption set attacks an assumption  a iff and attacks an assumption set attacks some assumption 
the standard semantics of extensions of dl  reiter  
1  and stable models of lp  gelfond and lifschitz  1  correspond to the  stability  semantics of abstract frameworks  where an assumption set  a is stable iff 
1. does not attack itself  and 
1. attacks each assumption 
	a stable extension is an extension 	for 
some stable assumption set  
　bondarenko et al. define new semantics for the abstract framework  e.g.  by generalising the admissibility semantics originally proposed for lp by dung . an assumption set a is admissible iff 
1.  does not attack itself  and 
1. for all  attacks  then  attacks 
　　maximal  wrt. set inclusion  admissible assumption sets are called preferred. in this paper we use the following terminology: an admissible  preferred  argument is an extension for some admissible  preferred  assumption set bondarenko et al. show that preferred arguments correspond to preferred extensions  dung  1  and partial stable models  sacci and zaniolo  1  for lp. 
　in order to illustrate the effects of the different semantics  let us consider the following logic program: 

this logic program has no stable extension  two preferred arguments and and four admissible arguments  additionally and . if we drop the clause we get the same admissible and preferred arguments. in addition  the preferred arguments are also stable. 
　　in  bondarenko et al.  1   the definition of stable and admissible sets includes a third condition  namely  that the set  must be closed  i.e.  and in part 1 of the definition of admissible sets all f are required to be closed. here we omit these conditions because in the lp and dl instances of the framework every set is guaranteed to be closed. fvameworks with this property are called flat. 
in the sequel we will use the following properties: 
propi: every preferred assumption set is  trivially  admissible and every admissible assumption set is a subset of some preferred assumption set  bondarenko et o/.  1  theorem 1 ; 
prop1: the empty assumption set is always admissible  trivially  for all concrete lp and dl frameworks. 
1 	reasoning problems and complexity 
we will analyse the computational complexity of the following reasoning problems for the propositional variants 
	dim1ul1s  nebel. and t1ni 	1 

of the frameworks for lp and dl under admissibility and preferability semantics: 
  the credulous reasoning problem  i.e.  the problem of deciding for any given sentence in the set of possible queries whether for some 
assumption set sanctioned by the semantics; 
  the sceptical reasoning problem  i.e.  the prob-lem of deciding for any given sentence in the set of possible queries whether for all assumption sets  sanctioned by the semantics. 
the set of possible queries consists of  variable-free conjunctions of  literals in the lp case and formulas in propositional logic in the dl case. 
　instead of the sceptical reasoning problem  we will often consider its complementary problem  i.e. 
  the co-sceptical reasoning problem  i.e  the problem of deciding for any given sentence  in a set of possible queries  whether  for some assumption set sanctioned by the semantics. 
　　the computational complexity1 of the above problems for all frameworks and semantics we consider is located at the lower end of the polynomial hierarchy. this is an infinite hierarchy of complexity classes above np defined by using oracle machines  i.e. turing machines that are allowed to call a subroutine-the oracle-deciding some fixed problem in constant time. let c be a class of decision problems. then  for any class defined by resource bounds  denotes the class of problems decidable on a turing machine with an oracle for a problem in c and a resource bound given by based on these notions  the s e t s a r e defined as follows: 
i t 
the  canonical  complete problems are sat for 
	np and 	  where 	qbf is the 
problem of deciding whether the quantified boolean formula 

is true. the complementary problem  denoted by co-
qbf  is complete for 
　　all problems in the polynomia hierarchy can be solved in polynomial time iff p = np. further  all these problems can be solved by worst-case exponential time algorithms. thus  the polynomial hierarchy might not seem too meaningful. however  different levels of the hierarchy differ considerably in practice  e.g. methods working for moderately sized instances of np complete problems do not work for complete problems. 
　the complexity of the problems we are interested in has been extensively studied for existing logics for nonmonotonic reasoning under the standard  stability 
l
   for the following  we assume that the reader is familiar with the basic concepts of complexity theory  papadimithou  1   i.e.  the complexity classes p  np  and co-np and the notion of completeness with respect to log-space reductions. 
1 	automated reasoning 
semantics  cadoli and schaerf  1; gottlob  1; niemela  1; marek and truszczynski  1; stillman  
1 . in particular  the credulous reasoning problem is np-complete for lp and complete fot dl  and the sceptical reasoning problem is co-nph-complete for lp and -complete for dl  
1 	generic upper bounds 
we identify upper bounds for the credulous and sceptical reasoning problems by exploiting the following guessand-verify algorithm that  in order to decide these problems  guesses an assumption set  verifies that it is sanctioned by the semantics  and verifies that the formula under consideration is derivable or not derivable  respectively  from the set of assumptions and the given theory in the underlying monotonic logic. the upper bounds are parametric on the complexity of the derivability problem in the underlying monotonic logic. moreover  the upper bounds are determined by exploiting upper bounds for their sub-problem that an assumption set is sanctioned by the semantics  called the assumption set verification problem. 
　in lp  the underlying logic is  propositional  horn logic  hence the derivability problem is p-complete  under log-space reductions   papadimitriou  1  p. 1 . in dl  the underlying logic is classical  propositional  logic extended with domain-specific inference rules. however  these extra inference rules do not increase the complexity of reasoning. it is known  e.g. see  gottlob  1  p.1   that for any dl like propositional monotonic rule system 1  checking whether  is n p-complete. therefore  the following proposition follows immediately. 
proposition 1 given a dl framework deciding for a sentence . and an assumption set whether is co-np-complete. 
　we now prove the basic membership result for flat frameworks in general and lp and dl in particular. in fact  flatness seems to be a computationally important property. for non-flat frameworks  the assumption set verification problem under the admissibility and preferability semantics seems to become harder in general. 
theorem 1 given a flat framework with derivability 
problem in c  the assumption set verification problem is under the stability semantics  under the admissibility semantics  and under the preferability semantics. 
proof: 1. only polynomially many c-oracle calls are needed to verify that a given assumption set does not attack itself and it attacks all assumptions 
　1. the following deterministic  polynomial-time algorithm using a c-oracle decides whether a given assumption set is admissible: 
 a  verify that  does not attack itself  calls to a c-oracle . 

 b  compute does not attack calls to a c-oracie . 
 c  verify that does not attack  polynomially many oracle calls . 
if test  c  falls  then is not admissible  since attack* but  by  b   does not attack a* and  by  a   does not attack itself.1 otherwise  let be any attack against then  by monotonicity of the underlying derivability  . attacks  thus contradicting that test  c  succeeds. therefore    
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　attacks thus  attacks and  by  a   is admissible. 
   ＊1* the following nondeterministic  polynomial-time algorithm using a -oracle decides whether a given assumption set is not preferred: 
  verify that is admissible  one call to a -oracle  by part  1  . if not  succeed  otherwise 
  guess a set 
  verify that is admissible  one call to a-oracle  by part  1  . if it is  succeed  else fail. 
　the guess-and-verify algorithm and theorem 1 directly give upper bounds for the credulous and  co sceptical reasoning problems. however  properties propi and prop1 in section 1 allow to reduce these upper bounds. indeed  by propi  credulous reasoning under the preferability semantics is equivalent to credulous reasoning under the admissibility semantics  and the two problems have the same upper bounds. moreover  by prop1  the sceptical reasoning problem under the admissibility semantics reduces to the underlying derivability problem. as a consequence  the following upper bounds hold  for flat frameworks with a derivability problem in c: 
stable admissibility preferability credulous 
sceptical  npc co-npc npc 
c 　npc co-npnpc in particular  the credulous reasoning problem for stability  admissibility and preferability semantics is in np for lp and in for dl  the sceptical reasoning problem for the stability semantics is in co-np for lp and  for dl  the sceptical reasoning problem for the admissibility semantics is in p for lp and co-np for dl  and the sceptical reasoning problem for the preferability semantics is in  for lp and  for dl. the results summarised in section 1 imply that these upper bounds are tight for the stability semantics. since the sceptical reasoning problem for the admissibility semantics reduces to the derivability problems in the underlying monotonic logic for lp and dl  and these are p-complete and co-npcomplete  respectively  the corresponding upper bounds are also tight. in the next section we will prove that the remaining upper bounds are tight as well. 
     1 see that if the framework is not flat  the set of assumptions need not to be closed. therefore  even if  c  fails  can be still admissible  since it can be the case that 
attacks an assumption that is derivable torn 
1 	completeness results 
by instantiating the generic upper bounds of the previous section to the concrete reasoning problems we consider in the following  we obtain the necessary membership results. therefore  in order to show completeness  it is sufficient to prove hardness. 
　the next two results show that credulous reasoning under the admissibility and preferability semantics is as hard as under the stability semantics. intuitively  this is the case because the number of assumption sets that need to be considered under the admissibility semantics is not smaller than under the stability semantics  and it can be  as in the case of stability  exponentially large. 
　the following theorem is & direct corollary pf the result by sacca  that the expressive power of datalogqueries under the  possible m-stable semantics   corresponding to credulous reasoning under the preferability semantics  is db-np  i.e.  such queries characterise all collections of databases that are recognisable in np. prom that it is immediate that credulous reasoning in propositional logic programs is n p-complete. 
theorem 1 credulous reasoning in lp under the admissibility and preferability semantics is hp-complete. 
　as one would expect  reasoning in dl increases the computational complexity to the second level of the polynomial hierarchy. 
theorem 1 credulous reasoning in dl under the admissibility and preferability semantics is -complete. 
proof: we have seen that credulous reasoning under the preferability semantics coincides with credulous reasoning under the admissibility semantics. we prove the theorem by a straightforward reduction from 1-qbf to the credulous reasoning problem under the admissibility semantics. assume the quantified boolean formula with 	a formula in 1cnf over the propositional variables 	we construct a default theory 	such that the given quantified boolean formula is true iff some admissible argument for  contains 
	the language of 	consists of a	t  d 
consists of the default rules 
for each  simulating the choice of a truth value for the propositional variable 
　　obviously  this construction of d  can be done in log-space. moreover  it is easy to see that the given 1qbf is true iff there exists an admissible extension of d  containing 
　as noted earlier  sceptical reasoning under the admissibility semantics is  trivial  in the sense that it reduces to the underlying derivability problem. therefore  the sceptical reasoning problem needs to be considered only for the preferability semantics. theorem 1 suggests that 
	dimopoulos  nebel  and 	toni 	1 

this problem has higher complexity than the corresponding problem under the stability semantics  since in order to verify that a set is preferred we need to check that none of its supersets is admissible. the following two theorems show that we cannot do better than this. 
　again sacck  has shown that the expressive power of catalog- queries under the  definite mstable semantics   corresponding to sceptical preferability semantics  coincides with the class db-  hence  as a corollary we immediately obtain the following result. 
theorem 1 sceptical reasoning in lp under the preferability semantics is complete. 
　we now show that sceptical reasoning has a similar effect on dl. 
theorem 1 sceptical reasoning in dl under the preferability semantics is complete. 
proof: we show that co-sceptical reasoning is hard by a reduction from 1-qbf. assume the following quantified boolean formula: 
with a formula in 1cnf over the propositional variables we build a de-
fault theory such that the given quantified boolean formula is true iff some sentence f is not contained in some preferred argument for 
the language of contains atoms and as well as atoms 
intuitively holding if a truth value for the variables 	has been chosen. d consists of 
for each 	 to indicate that vari-
ables are assigned either true or false  but not both  and that a truth value for has been chosen   
of the 
　we will prove that the given quantified boolean formula is true iff there is a preferred argument not containing 
　　if t  is a truth assignment to the s  we denote by the assumption set 
	similarly  we denote by 	the 
1 	automated reasoning 
 assumption set  false  for some truth assignment to the 
first of all  it ie obvious that no admissible set can 
 contain any of the assumptions  furthermore  it is easy to see that for any truth assignment  to the 's  the set is an admissible set. moreover  
every preferred assumption set must contain a set for some truth assignment to the 's. finally  if is not preferred  then there exists a truth assignment u to the 's such that  is preferred. 
　assume that the quantified boolean formula is true under a particular truth assignment to the 's. we will show that the set  is a preferred assumption set. 
suppose that we try to extend by adding to it the set for some truth assignment to the 's. if the new set is admissible  it means that it counter attacks the attack  hence the qbf is not 
true for the truth assignment u  a contradiction. hence  is a preferred argument that does contain 
  
　　conversely  assume that i has a preferred argument p =   . . that does not contain f = 
	. clearly 	  for some truth assignment 
's. since p is preferred and does not contain f  none of the sets for every possible truth assignment  to the 's is admissible. this means that none of these sets of assumptions can counter attack the attack  and derive  therefore the qbf is true. 
　obviously  the above construction can be done in logspace. thus  the construction of  is a log-space reduction from 1-qbf to co-sceptical reasoning in dl under preferred arguments and hardness holds. 
　it should be noted that similar results to those for dl have been recently obtained for the case of disjunctive logic programs  eiter et a/.  1 . 
1 	discussion 
we have shown that credulous reasoning in dl and lp using the admissibility and preferability semantics is as hard as it is under the standard  stability semantics. moreover  sceptical reasoning under the preferability semantics is harder than under the stability semantics. 
　there appears to be a clash between these results and the intuition spelled out in the introduction  namely  that admissibility and preferability arguments are seemingly easier to compute than stable extensions. however  our results are not as surprising as they might appear. since the admissibility and preferability semantics do not restrict the number of extensions  one would expect that nonmonotonic reasoning under these semantics is as hard as under the stability semantics. the higher complexity of the sceptical reasoning problem under the preferability semantics is due to the fact that in order to verify that an assumption set is preferred  one needs to check that none of its supersets is admissible. 
　of course  our results do not contradict the expectation that in practice constructing admissible arguments 

is often easier than constructing stable extensions. for example  given the propositional logic program with p any set of clauses not defining the atom p  the empty set is an admissible argument for the query p that can be constructed  locally   without accessing p. moreover  if  is stratified or order-consistent  bondarenko et a/.  1   p is guaranteed to be a credulous consequence of the program under the stability semantics. indeed  in all cases where the stability semantics coincides with the preferability semantics  e.g. for stratified and order-consistent abstract frameworks  any sound  and complete  computational mechanism for the admissibility semantics is sound  and complete  for the stability semantics. 
　the  locality  feature of the admissibility semantics renders it a feasible alternative to the stability semantics in the first-order case  when the propositional version of the given abstract framework is infinite. for example  given the  negation-free  logic program:  the empty set of assumptions is an admissible argument for the query p 1  that can be constructed  locally   even though the propositional version of the corresponding abstract framework is infinite. 
　the complexity results in this paper discredit sceptical reasoning under admissibility and preferability semantics as trivial and  unnecessarily  complex  respectively. however  this does not seem to matter for the envisioned applications of this semantics  because credulous reasoning only is required for these applications  kowalski and toni  1 . for example  in argumentation in practical reasoning in general and legal reasoning in particular  unilateral arguments are put forwards and defended against all counterarguments  in a credulous manner. indeed  these domains appear to be particularly well suited for credulous reasoning under the admissibility semantics. 
acknowledgements 
the first author has been partially supported by the dfg as part of the graduate school on human and machine intelligence at the university of freiburg and the 
third author has been partially supported by the uk epsrc project  logic-based multi-agent systems.  we would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
