 
we analyze economic efficiency and equilibrium properties in decentralized task allocation problems involving hierarchical dependencies and resource contention. we bound the inefficiency of a type of approximate equilibrium in proportion to the number of agents and the bidding parameters in a particular market protocol. this protocol converges to an approximate equilibrium with respect to all agents  except those which may acquire unneeded inputs. we introduce a decommitment phase to allow such agents to decommit from their input contracts. experiments indicate that the augmented market protocol produces highly efficient allocations on average. 
1 	introduction 
we consider task allocation problems in which competing agents desire to accomplish tasks  which may require complex chains of production activity- in order to perform a particular task  an agent may need to achieve some subtasks  which may in turn be delegated to other agents  forming a supply chain through a hierarchy of task achievement. constraints on the task assignment arise from resource contention  where agents would need a common resource  e.g.  a subtask achievement  or something tangible like a piece of equipment  to accomplish their own tasks. we assume that agents are self-interested and have private information  and so we must allocate in a decentralized manner. 
　we take a market-based approach to decentralized resource allocation  utilizing the large body of solution methods and analytical techniques from economics. auctions mediate negotiation and determine prices and allocations. prices indicate relative values of resources to guide local agent decisions. experience with the market oriented programming approach has verified that it works predictably and effectively in convex domains  wellman  1 . discrete problems  such as the task allocation domain considered here  provide additional challenges. 
1 	distributed al 
　in previous work   we proposed a market protocol that reliably constructs supply chains in a decentralized manner. in this paper we generalize the model and protocol to account for multiple competing demands for multiple end tasks. we bound the inefficiency of a type of approximate equilibrium in proportion to the number of agents and the bidding parameters in a particular market protocol. this protocol converges to an approximate equilibrium with respect to all agents  except those which may acquire unneeded inputs. we introduce a decommitment phase to allow such agents to decommit from their input contracts. experiments indicate that the augmented market protocol produces highly efficient allocations on average. 
we describe the task allocation problem in section 1. 
we discuss price systems and competitive equilibrium in section 1  and survey some market protocols for decentralized resource allocation in section 1. in section 1 we analyze the equilibrium properties of the extended protocol  and in section 1 we examine its efficiency. we describe related task allocation work in section 1. 
1 	problem description 
tasks are performed on behalf of particular agents; if two agents need a subtask then it would have to be performed twice to satisfy them both. in this way  tasks are the same as any other discrete resource. hence we make no distinction in our model  and use the term  good  to refer to both. 
we describe the problem in terms of bipartite graphs. 
a task dependency network is a directed  acyclic graph   the vertices are where g is the set of goods  is the set of agents  
c is the set of consumers  ii is the set of producers  and s is the set of suppliers. the edges  e  connects agents with goods they can use or provide. there exists an edge  g a  from g  g to a  a when agent a can make use of one unit of g  and an edge  a g  when a can provide one unit of g. when an agent can acquire or provide multiple units of a good  we represent each unit as a separate edge. the goods can be traded only in integer quantities. 
　a consumer wishes to acquire one unit of one good from a set of some high-level goods. 	a producer can 

produce a single unit of an output good conditional on acquiring a certain number each of some fixed set of input goods. a producer's input requirements are complementary in that it must acquire each of its in-
puts; it cannot accomplish anything with only a partial set. a supplier can supply a set of goods  up to some maximum quantity for each  without requiring any input goods. 
　　an allocation is a subgraph  for g  g  an edge  a  g  means that agent a provides g  and  g a  means a acquires g. an agent is in an allocation graph iff it acquires or provides a good. a good is in an allocation graph iff it is bought or sold. 
　a producer is active iff it provides its output. a producer is feasible iff it is inactive or acquires all its inputs. consumers and suppliers are always feasible. an allocation is feasible iff all producers are feasible and 
all goods are in material balance  that is the number of edges into a good equals the number of edges out. 
　　a solution is a feasible allocation such that one or more consumers acquire a desired good. if c c 
　for solution  then  is a solution for c. 
　each supplier s has some opportunity cost . for supplying one unit  of good g. the total opportunity cost to s for allocation e' is  
 the cost might represent the value 
s could obtain from putting the goods to some other use  or some actual  direct cost incurred in supplying the goods. 
   we assume that a consumer has preferences over different possible goods  but wishes to obtain only a single unit of one good.1 thus  a consumer c obtains value for obtaining a single unit of good g  and  for allo-
cation 	  obtains value  
definition 1  value of an allocation  the value of allocation 
definition 1  efficient allocations  the of efficient allocations contains all feasible 
locations 	such 	that 	 
   'we overload the notation for opportunity cost and agent value  using as an argument either a single good or a set of edges. 1
　　more complicated consumer value functions can be expressed through combinations of multiple consumers and producers. for instance  a group of consumers  each desiring a single separate good  effectively represents an additive value function over the set of goods. if a consumer has preferences over bundles of goods  the bundles can be represented as output goods of producers  with the inputs of a producer corresponding to the components of the respective output bundle. note that transformations such as this may not be strategically equivalent  in that the group of consumers may not behave as would the single agent they represent. 
　one could find efficient allocations using centralized search techniques  but we assume that we are constrained to solve the problem in a decentralized fashion. in the following  we examine an abstract framework for how a price system can guide decentralized task allocation. we also examine market protocols for decentralized task allocation. 
1 	price systems and competitive 
equilibrium 
in the general-equilibrium approach to economic resource allocation  we posit a price system ;;  which assigns to each good g a nonnegative number p g  as its price. intuitively  prices indicate the relative global value of the goods. therefore  agents may use the prices as a guide to their local decision making. 
　we assume each agent has a quasilinear utility function. its utility is the sum of the  money  it holds and the value  or negative cost  obtained from its allocation of goods. agents wish to maximize their surplus. 
definition 1  surplus  the surplus  	of 
competitive 
to each agent an allocation that optimizes the agent's surplus at p. a competitive equilibrium allocation is stable in the sense that no agent would want  a different allocation at the equilibrium prices. 
　we should generally expect that iterative1 auction protocols with discrete bid adjustments would overshoot  exact equilibria by at least a small amount. however  approximate equilibrium is a useful concept for analyzing such protocols  demange et al.  1; walsh et al.  1 . we define and discuss properties and existence of a -a particular type of 
approximation equilibrium relevant to task dependency networks. the and parameterize an agent's maximum error in surplus optimization. 
denote as  the maximum surplus that agent a 
can obtain in  v e   at some prices p  subject to feasibility. that is  
such that a is feasible at  
definition 1 given the parameters: 

	walsh and wellman 	1 


an allocation -competitive equilibrium at prices p iff: 

 1. goods are indicated by circles  consumers and suppliers arc1 represented as boxes  and producers are indicated by curved boxes. a solid arrow from a good to an agent indicates that the agent buys the good  and a solid arrow from an agent to a good indicates that the agent sells the good. dashed arrows indicate input/output capabilities not part of the allocation. shaded agents receive non-null allocations. agent values and good prices are shown under their respective nodes. note that for 
　a competitive equilibrium corresponds to the standard notion of a competitive equilibrium when 
 -  = 1 for all producers  bikhchandani and mamer  and cul and stacchetti  show that  in an exchange economy  any competitive equilibrium set  of prices supports an optimal allocation. we extend this result belowr to the class of production economies represented by task allocation economies. we show this by proving the more general result that a equilibrium is suboptimally efficient by a fixed bound  

lemma 1 the value of a feasible any prices p  can he expressed as: allocation  at 		 1  
a e a 
　proof sketch.1 since supply equals demand in a feasible allocation  all the. price terms cancel out and we are 
	' complete 	proofs 	of 	all 	results 	appear 	at 
http://www-personal.engin.umich.edu/~wew/papers/ ijcai1-extended.ps.z. 
1 	distributed al 
figure 1: an economy with a competitive equilibrium solution when  
left with the original formula for the value of a solution  definition 1 .  
theorem 1  is a -competitive equilibrium for  v  e  at some prices p  then is a feasible allocation with a nonnegative value that differs from the value of an efficient allocation by at most  

　　proof sketch. we can compare the value of  to another feasible allocation agent-wise  using equation  1 . the competitive equilibrium conditions imposed on the agents imply a global value difference that obeys the stated bound.  
　not all task allocation economies have competitive equilibria  technically  this is due to complementarity of inputs for producers . however  we can always specify and  values such that a competitive equilibrium 
exists  even when a competitive equilibrium does not exist. for example  we can do this by setting prices of the goods desired by the consumers higher than their values  and the prices of all other goods to zero  if there are any suppliers that could sell directly to consumers with positive surplus on both sides  we can set the prices so that only these suppliers trade with those consumers . we then set and the values sufficiently high such that 	for all  hence producers could obey the competitive equilibrium conditions by being inactive1. unfortunately  we cannot  generally specify a -competitive equilibrium for some fixed  problem-independent values of  and 
indeed  the necessary values to obtain a non-solution equilibrium are proportional to the highest consumer 
value and the depth of the network. 
　figure 1 shows the constraints on  and  in order to have a solution in competitive equilibrium for a particular economy. the only solution involves all agents except b-c-d-to-e. the constraints on the prices of goods a and b ensure that suppliers a and b sell their goods. the constraint on the price of good c ensures that supplier c does not sell its good. the constraint on the price of good e ensures that a-b-to-e is active. the constraint on the price of good d ensures that b-c-d-to-e does not trade any goods. fi-

nally  the constraint on the price of good f ensures that d-e-to-f is active and also that the consumer buys good f. the constraint on the price of good f requires 
 1 to have a competitive equilib-
rium solution. since this solution is the only efficient allocation  it is the only candidate allocation for a pure competitive equilibrium. but since the parameters must be nonzero  there is no pure competitive equilibrium. note that to sustain the solution in competitive equilibrium the constraints on the prices for goods a and d. and hence the and  values  rise linearly with the cost  of supplier a. 
1 	market protocols 
the previous section sidesteps the issue of how we might compute an approximate competitive equilibrium. the market-based approach  which we adopt  is to design an auction mechanism that mediates negotiation and determines prices and allocations. the auctions along with the agents constitute an economy  or market  for the task allocation problem. 
　the agents' bidding policies govern their interaction with the auctions. the key distinction between the auction mechanism and bidding policies is that the former is under the control of the system designers  whereas the latter are determined by individual agents. together  these specifications for behavior constitute a market protocol  the market protocol as a whole is our subject of analysis. 
　in economies characterized by infinite divisibility of goods  nonincreasing returns to scale  and gross substitutes  equilibria  always exist and the tatonnement protocol converges to a competitive equilibrium. the walras protocol is a variant of tatonnement  that can be implemented in a distributed manner across goods  cheng and wellman  1 . highly efficient allocations can be achieved in discrete exchange economies for which each agent wants only a single good  fried man and rust  1; mcafee' and mcmillan. 1; yiekrey  1   or have non-complementary preferences for multiple goods  demange ct al. 1gj. however  economies with discrete goods and complementary preferences of agents can lack equilibria  and thus provide a much greater challenge to obtaining efficient  allocations. 
   many researchers have proposed combinatorial auctions to address the problem resulting from discrete1 goods and complementarities  rassenti ct al.. 1; sandholm  to appear . combinatorial auctions allocate and price bundles of goods. wurman and wellman have shown that there always exists a competitive1 equilibrium set of prices on bundles that supports an efficient allocation . approximation techniques can be used to make the computation tractable  fujishima et al.  1; sandholm  to appear . however  except in some restricted domains  rothkopf et al.  1; sandholm  to appear  a combinatorial auction must generally perform a search over a. combinatorial number of bundles. 
in this work  we focus on computationally feasible auctions that price individual goods. the ideal such auction would induce a protocol resulting in a  near  competitive equilibrium when one exists  and would produce a highly efficient allocations otherwise. unfortunately  no protocol has yet been proposed that always converges to near competitive equilibrium  even when one exists  in economies with discrete goods and complementarities. 
　backing an ideal mechanism  many researchers have considered simultaneous ascending auctions  milgrom  1 . when agents bid according to a straightforward rule  the auctions guarantee near-optimal performance in economies with no complementarities  demange ct a/.  
1g . observations of their performance in the united states fcc radio spectrum sale suggests that they can produce high-quality allocations even when complementarities exist  mcafee and mcmillan  1 . in the following sections we analyze a variant simultaneous ascending auction for the task allocation problem. 
1 	samp-sb protocol 
in the  simultaneous ascending price with 
simple bidding'1  samp-sb  protocol  extended from our previous work  to allow multiple consumers with preferences for multiple goods   agents negotiate for the goods through auction mediators  one for each good. an auction in turn determines the price and allocation of its respective good. we assume reliable  asynchronous message passing. 
1 	auction mechanism 
the task allocation market includes a separate auction for each good of potential value. auctions operate simultaneously and asynchronously- agents submit bids for goods they wish to buy or sell. a bid specifies the price below/above which the agent  is willing to buy/sell. auctions respond with price quotes. a price quote specifies the current going price and the number of units the recipient would trade at what price  given the current bid state. agents may in turn respond with further bids. each auction requires that an agent's successive bids increase by no less than some  generally small  positive increment 1. 
   when the market reaches quiescence a state in which no new bids or price quotes are issued- the auct ions clear. each bidder is notified of the final prices and how many units it transacted in each good. the ascending rule serves a key role in establishing relationships between market quiescence and solution convergence of the economy  walsh arid wellman. 1 . in particular  the market always reaches quiescence with the bidding policies described in section 1. 
   according to the the  m i 1  st-price rules  satterthwaite and williams  1; wurman ct al.  1   an auction balances reported supply and demand at a uniform clearing price. winners include all buyers/sellers strictly above/below the price  and. to maximize the benefits from trade  some agents at the clearing price. 
	walsh and wellman 	1 

auctions  and theorem conditions ensure for all a  a. consumer c c maintains at most a single bid such that if is active in quiescence  the theorem guarantees when is inactive  which occurs only if the bidding policies ensure is feasible. supplier s s sells 
hence 	the auctions ensure material balance.  

figure 1: prices and allocations determined by a run of samp-sb when  
1 	bidding policies 
although multiagent system designers do not generally have control over the agents' behaviors  any conclusions about the outcome of a protocol must be based on some assumptions about these behaviors. in this work  we investigate the equilibrium and efficiency properties of a set of policies that obey the ascending auction bid constraints and require only local  private information. 
　let the current going prices specified by the last price quotes be p. supplier s places a one-time bid of 
for each unit it can supply. when consumer c is not winning a good  it bids = arg  otherwise it stops bidding. a producer initially bids zero for its output when the prices of its inputs change   bids  where k is the number of input bids is currently losing  and  is its previous bid for a producer initially bids zero for each input good  and raises its bid on input cj by when it is winning its output but losing its bid for g. the and  parameters correspond to parameters in a competitive equilibrium  as described in the following section. 
1 	equilibrium convergence of samp-sb 
　　　competitive equilibria do not always exist for fixed and and even when they do  the samp-sb protocol is not guaranteed to converge to one. figure 1 shows the results of a run1 of samp-sb when  - 1 for all producers  note that b-c-d-to-e has a negative surplus  which is a violation of defining condition  1  of a competitive equilibrium. however  if no inactive producer buys a positive-price input in quiescence  then the economy is in competitive equilibrium. 
theorem 1 the prices and allocation determined in quiescence by the samp-sb protocol is a  competitive equilibrium iff no inactive producer buys any positive-
price 	input. 
   proof sketch. case only if: condition  1  of competitive equilibrium fails if an inactive producer buys any positive-price input. case if: the bidding policies  
1
　　the nondeterminism of an asynchronous system implies that different runs may produce different results. 
1 	distributed al 
1 	contract decommitment 
value is lost when inactive producers purchase some inputs at positive prices. figure 1 shows a run of samp-sb in which b-c-d-to-e buys good c  even though it does not sell its output. a straightforward protocol extension for correcting the inefficiency is to remove the wasteful dead ends by selective contract decommitment. 
　we propose a contract decommitment protocol that is applied after samp-sb reaches quiescence. each inactive producer that wins some inputs at a positive price can deconimit from its contracts for its inputs. the protocol is applied recursively to the producers that lose their outputs due to decommitment  we refer to samp-sb with decommitment as samp-sb-d . when the decommitment process terminates  agents exchange goods as specified by the remaining contracts. 
　in figure 1  both b-c-d-to-e would deconimit from its contract with supplier c. clearly  theorem 1 implies that no agent decommits iff samp-sb produced a competitive equilibrium. moreover  if we remove all producers that deconimit  and all supplier resources corresponding to decommited contracts  the remaining agents are in competitive equilibrium. note that whereas some producers can lose money in the samp-sb protocol  no agent receives a negative surplus from participating in samp-sb-d. 
1 empirical efficiency and equilibrium analysis of samp-sb 
we conducted a series of 1 randomly generated simulations in order to empirically evaluate how often samp-sb converges to equilibrium as well as its average quality. we ran 1 trials for each of 1 goods and each of 1 consumers. 
　for a trial with n goods  we imposed a total order on the goods. goods n and n - 1 had a number chosen from  1 -of suppliers. all other goods i had a number chosen from  1 -of sellers with output i  each of which had a 1/n chance of being a supplier and a  tv - 1 /tv chance of being a producer. to ensure the network was acyclic  a producer with output i had two randomly chosen input goods j and k  such that j  a:  i. each consumer desired a single good. one consumer desired good 1  and the other consumers desired randomly chosen goods. we drew consumer valuations uniformly from  1  1n  and supplier costs uniformly from  1n . 
we fixed  = 1. 

pev range samp-sb samp-sb-d  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 .1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 	mean pf.v for samp-sb 	1 
	mean pev for samp-sb-d 	1 
	percentage of trials in equilibrium 	1 
	mean non-equilibrium pev of samp-sb 	1 
	mean non-equilibrium pev of samp-sb-d 	1 
table 1: distributions over percentage of the efficient value  pev  ranges  mean pev  and equilibrium attainment for 1 trials. 
　as a benchmark  for each economy we computed the value of an efficient  optimal  allocation using a* search with an admissible heuristic. we ran samp-sb and samp-sb-d  and computed the resulting percentage of the efficient value  pev . we discarded all trials for which the efficient value was zero  and substituted a new trial using a different configuration but the same number of consumers and goods. 
　table 1 shows the distributions over ranges of pev and mean pev for samp-sb and samp-sb-d. the decommitment protocol greatly increases the pev of samp-sb  raising the overall mean from 1% to 1%. 
the distribution of the pev of samp-sb-d is quite high: 1%  of the trials had 1% efficiency and 1%  of the trials had at least 1% efficiency. 
　the samp-sb protocol reached equilibrium in over 1% of the trials. when we remove all equilibrium trials from the trial set  the mean pev of samp-sb decreases from 1% to 1%. this is not surprising because the trials that reach equilibrium have high pev values  theorem 1 . however  the pev of samp-sb-d decreases only a small amount  from 1% to 1%. we might conclude from these simulations that the majority of efficiency loss from the samp-sb protocol can be attributed to inactive producers that acquire some inputs  with the resulting wasted costs of suppliers that feed into them. 
　we note that the pev numbers we report are somewhat arbitrary in that they depend on the particular method for generating trials. moreover  if a solution forms for a consumer in a particular economy  then we can get an arbitrarily high pev by setting the consumer's value arbitrarily high  while holding constant the rest of the configuration. we attempted to mitigate this effect by setting consumer values at reasonable levels. 
1 	related work in task allocation 
the contract net protocol forms supply chains topdown in a greedy fashion  davis and smith  1 . this approach produces satisficing allocations when there are no resource limitations. however  the firm resource constraints we impose in our model would generally require 
contract net to backtrack in order to guarantee a feasible allocation. additionally  since the allocation policy is loosely specified in the original work  we cannot draw any conclusions about the efficiency of the approach. 
　sandholm  examines a specialization of contract net for a generalization of task oriented domains  tods   rosenschein and zlotkin  1 . agents begin with an initial allocation of tasks and negotiate task exchanges until there are no more mutually beneficial trades. the trades can greatly increase the allocation quality  but the system may get stuck in local minima. 
　sandholm's model includes local constraints on task achievement  but does not impose a hierarchical dependency structure. thus each locally feasible bilateral trade can be executed immediately and independently of other trades. we cannot generally apply an incremental trading protocol to our task allocation model. a local exchange may require reallocation throughout the entire network to maintain production feasibility. 
　andersson and sandholm  find that decommitment protocols increase the quality of the resulting allocations in variants of tods. with incremental trading  decommitment gives agents the opportunity to engage in other more cost-effective task allocation contracts. 
1 	conclusions and future work 
we have shown that we can bound the inefficiency of a a- s-competitive equilibrium in a task dependency network in proportion to the number of agents and the bidding parameters in the samp-sb protocol. samp-sb can sometimes converge to a a- -compctitive equilibrium  when one exists. when combined with contract decommitment  samp-sb produces highly efficient allocations on average. 
　samp-sb relies on the competitive assumption that agents take price quotes as the actual prices  and do not attempt to manipulate them. although this assumption is reasonable when there are many agents trading in each good-and hence no agent has significant market power--this assumption is less realistic in thinner markets. an agent may have opportunities to gain higher surplus by using other bidding policies  particularly if it has knowledge of other agents' preferences or behavior. an enforcement mechanism could ensure that agents correctly follow the decommitment protocol  but the potential to decommit may still affect agents' negotiation policies. we seek to establish conditions under which it 
	walsh and wellman 	1 

is rational for agents to play samp-sb-d  and to analyze strategic behavior when these conditions do not hold. 
　we wish to examine the possibility of including combinatorial auctions with samp-sb in the task allocation market. if we can identify portions of task networks with structures amenable to feasible bundle pricing  we may be able to increase the efficiency of allocations. 
acknowledgments 
this work was supported by a nasa/jet propulsion laboratory graduate student researcher fellowship  a darpa information survivability grant  and a nsf/darpa/nasa digital library initiative grant. a portion of this work was performed at the 1 santa fe institute workshop on computational economies. we also thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions. 
