 
in the present work we examine the causal theory of actions put forward by mccain and turner  mccain and turner  1  for determining ramifications. our principal aim is to provide a characterisation of this causal theory of actions in terms of a shoham-like preferential semantics  shoham  1. this would have a twofold advantage: it would place mccain and turner's theory in perspective  allowing a comparison with other logics of action; and  it would allow us to glean further insights into the nature of causality underlying their work. we begin by showing that our aim is not attainable by a preferential mechanism alone. at this point we do not abandon preferential semantics altogether but augment it in order to arrive at the desired result. we draw fhe following moral which is at the heart of our paper: two components - minimal change under a preferential structure and causality - are required to provide a concise solution to the frame and ramification problems. 
1 	introduction 
one of the cornerstone developments in the field of reasoning about action  and nonmonotonic reasoning  was shoham's preferential semantics  shoham  1 . while work in this area has since progressed  preferential semantics remain an important and intuitively appealing concept. it furnishes a semantics for a class of nonmonotonic logics. under this idea 
1 	automated reasoning 
an ordering is placed over the class of interpretations. the models corresponding to a particular inference are then identified as the minimal models under this ordering that satisfy the premises. in an intuitive sense  the ordering represents a preference or plausibility ordering over interpretations with only the most preferred  most plausible  being countenanced as serious possibilities. at the heart of this approach lies the principle of minimal change: consider only the minimal  i.e.  most preferred  models. 
　in more recent times the notion of causality has attracted much attention  mccain and turner  1; thielscher  1; sandewall  1  in an attempt to provide a concise solution to the frame problem  and  more specifically  the ramification problem . this is mainly in response to the recognition that traditional domain constraints alone are not sufficient for providing compact solutions to these problems. 
   in this work we focus on a proposal by mccain and turner  mccain and turner  1 which includes a causal component. mccain and turner introduce causal laws of the form  where  and  are fluent formulae  i.e.  they do not 
contain further instances of  but only classical truth functional connectives . from an intuitive standpoint these formulae can be read as  causes . in this way they express 'a relation of determination between states of affairs that make and true'  mccain and turner  1  p. 1 . in fact  it is possible to do away with traditional domain constraints altogether in deference to these causal laws  mccain and turner  1  proposition 1. an important point to note is that causal laws function as 'uni-directional' implications - the contrapositive does not hold in general. 

　the principal aim of this paper is to determine whether it is possible to supply mccain and turner's causal theory of actions with a preferential-style semantics. more specifically  the contributions of this paper are as follows. we show that it is not possible to characterise mccain and turner's causal theory via a traditional preferential semantics applied to interpretations of the original  unaugmenled  language. we rectify this  not by abandoning preferential semantics but by augmenting it with a further relational structure. a similar result was sought by peppas et al.  peppas et ai  1  but the counterexample they present assumes a transitive and total ordering where we only assume transitivity  and the semantics they develop only characterises a subset of the possible mccain and turner causal systems whereas the semantics we present captures all. 
　in arriving at this result we introduce two state-selection mechanisms: state elimination systems and state transition systems. state transition systems enhance a preference structure  based on symmetric difference  with a binary relation on states. state elimination systems function as a way of tying together mccain and turner causal systems and state transition systems. both state elimination systems and state transition systems give a clearer insight into the nature of causality at play in mccain and turner's causal theory of actions. 
　the results contained herein are significant on a number of fronts. they allow us to gain a deeper understanding of the nature of causality underpinning mccain and turner's framework. they also permit us to place mccain and turner's causal theory in the context of other nonmonotonic logics whose semantics make use of preferential structures. it has previously been suggested that minimal change and causality are interreducible  for instance  gustafsson and doherty  1 . however  such works make use of an expanded language. in doing so they move away from the ideal of a concise solution to the frame and ramification problems. we  on the contrary  claim that minimal change and causality can coexist in separate roles and  moreover  can complement each other. 
　this paper is structured as follows. in the next two sections we shall outline some basic terminology and notation followed by a brief overview of mccain and turner's  mccain and turner  1j causal theory of action. in section 1 we shall show that it is not possible to supply a straightforward preferential semantics to capture mccain and turner's approach. the solution we suggest here is not to abandon preferential semantics entirely but rather to augment it. in sections 1 we investigate the different state selection mechanisms  giving the desired result. we end with a discussion of the significance of these results and our conclusions. 
1 	technical preliminaries 
throughout this paper we shall be working with a fixed unitary propositional language whose propositional letters we shall call fluents. the set of all fluents is denoted by a literal is a fluent or the negation of a fluent. a state  or world  is defined as a maximal consistent set of literals. the set of all literals will be denoted  the set of all states will be denoted  b y w e denote all states consistent with the sentence 	occasionally we will refer to 
1 causal systems 
in this section we briefly review mccain and turner's  mccain and turner  1  causal theory of actions. in so doing we shall introduce some further notation that will be useful for the remainder of the paper. 
　as outlined above  mccain and turner introduce a new connective  to stand for the existence of a causal relationship between sentences  and of the underlying language 
this allows for expressions of the form   where which are termed causal laws  or casual rules '1 
a set of causal laws 	is referred to as a causal system. 
given any set of sentences 	and a causal system  the 
 causal  closure of in is denoted and defined to be the smallest superset of t closed under classical logical consequence and such that for any then  we also say that v causally implies   with respect to v if and only if and denote this 
　　another notion that will be of importance is that of a legitimate state with respect to a causal system . any state r is legitimate with respect to  if and only if 
that is  a state is legitimate if and only if it docs not contravene any causal laws of  the set of legitimate states with respect to is denoted by legit-p. 
　　mccain and turner's aim is to determine the set of possible next  or resultant  states  given an initial state w and the direct effects  or post-conditions  of an action represented by the sentence formally speaking  we have for any causal system a function  mapping a legitimate 
 initial  state w and sentence e  direct effects  to the set of states  according to the definition  mccain and 
turner  1 : 
 we often refer to the elements of fixed-points. note that it follows from this definition that if  must satisfy the di-
rect effects of the action . intuitively speaking  the elements are simply those e-states where all changes with respect to can be justified by the underlying causal system. 
　we arc now in a position to state our aims more clearly. the desire is to mimic mccain and turner's  ixed-point definition using a preference ordering over states and in such a way as not to introduce auxiliary sentences into our language. more specifically  we wish to investigate whether this is at all possible; whether we can provide a preferential-style semantics characterising for any legitimate state w and sentence e. 
   1  note that nesting of  is not permitted. 
   1 for the sake of simplicity we shall assume here that the antecedent of any causal law is consistent. 
   1  we shall refer to actions only through their direct effects as they play no direct role in mccain and turner's framework. 
	peppas et al. 	1 

1 	impossibility results 
in this section we clearly specify what we mean by a preferential semantics. we then present an impossibility result showing that a traditional preferential semantics is not capable of characterising mccain and turner's fixed-point definition. 
　　we are given an initial state w and a  strict  preference ordering on states. the only restriction we place on is that it satisfy transitivity. adhering to the essence of preferential semantics  shoham  1  we seek to define those states resulting from the occurrence of an action with direct effects e at initial state w as the minimal e-states under  the following condition expresses these desiderata: 
	 p  	
　now  according to mccain and turner  there is no need to consider illegitimate states as possible resultant states since they contradict the causal laws. hence  we begin by focusing on a variant of condition  p : 
	 p'  	
　we are now in a position to state a fundamental result of this section; that  in general  it is not possible to satisfy the condition  with transitive  note firstly that a nontrivial language is one with at least three fluents. 
theorem 1  first impossibility theorem  
　the following impossibility result now follows quite straightforwardly and is more appropriate for our purposes given that condition  p  is a more faithful rendering of the spirit of preferential semantics than condition  p' . it allows us to conclude that a traditional preferential semantics  captured by condition  p   cannot  in general  be given to mccain and turner's causal theory of actions. 
theorem 1  second impossibility theorem  
 given  non-trivial language there exists a causal system and  initial  state such that no ordering  on states  generated by satisfies  p . 
1 	automated reasoning 
　we shall not give away preferential semantics entirely however. our aim now becomes to retain as much of preferential semantics as possible and include a further mechanism to capture the influence of causality. to this end we investigate separate  though related  mechanisms for selecting possible resultant states. 
1 	state-selection mechanisms 
taking a step backwards for a moment  we can simply view mccain and turner's approach as a state-selection mechanism. more specifically  mccain and turner's causal theory of actions  given some domain knowledge in terms of a causal theory specifies a way of selecting a subset given an initial state and direct effects returns exactly those states that are possible 
upon the occurrence of an action with direct effects e at state 

　　viewing this as a selection function however  we consider to be a function selecting the 'best' states from among  with respect to  this is the view we shall adopt here in presenting two further state-selection mechanisms: state elimination systems and state transition systems. state transition systems will provide the augmented preferential semantics we seek in terms of our aims. 
　　this desired result is achieved in two steps. we begin by showing how to intertranslate mccain and turner causal systems and state elimination systems in a way that preserves the selection process. we then show how to intertranslate state elimination systems and state transition systems  again preserving the selection process . in truth  we could do away with state elimination systems and simply translate directly between causal systems and state transition systems. however  we choose not to do so because it simplifies the proofs and provides further insight into the nature of causality captured by mccain and turner's approach. 
mechanism 1: state elimination systems 
in this section we describe our first state-selection mechanism: state elimination systems. the underlying idea is to use state elimination rules to discard e-states from further consideration for we have noted above that in mc-
cain and turner's  mccain and turner  1  causal theory 
a state rejected or eliminated by a state 
elimination rule is one which contravenes a causal relationship deemed to hold in the resultant state  in fact  in the causal system as a whole . 
definition 1  state elimination rule  
 a state elimination rule  or simply  elimination rule  is an expression of the form where each 	is state. 
a state elimination system 1 is a set of state elimination rules. 
an elimination rule functions by rejecting certain states from among those currently considered possible. suppose that according to an agent's current beliefs it considers the states that are possible to be among  an elimination rule like that in definition 1 allows the agent to reject states 


　let us briefly consider the mechanics of a state elimination system. at any point we are working with the set of states currently being entertained  a subset of . we repeatedly apply elimination rules to this set of states to reject the illegitimate ones  those not possible  focusing on the possible resultant states. all elimination rules need to be applied until no further states can be rejected to ensure that all illegitimate states have been purged and only definite possibilities remain. to put it another way  a state elimination system acts as a filtering mechanism; illegitimate states are successively filtered out through use of elimination rules. 
definition 1 
in a state elimination system s  we shall say that a set of yields a set of states r. in one step  denoted by r  iff there exists an elimination rule such that and . we define to be the reflexive 

transitive closure of 
　after the application of certain elimination rules we find that any further application does not result in the rejection of additional states. at this point we reach a compact set of states; a point of equilibrium. 
definition 1  compact state  
a set of states  is compact  in s  iff for any r such that 
 r  it follows that is singleton and compact  we will call the state in compact. 
　one last notion that we require is that of an e-predecessor of a given state; those instates preceding the given state with respect to an ordering based on symmetric difference. more formally: 
definition 1 	 e-predecessor  
given any two states and any sentence e  the epredecessors of with respect to w is defined to be the set and 
where difflx  y  denotes the symmetric difference of states x and as in the pma i winslett  j 1. 
it is clear that any is an e'-prcdeccssor of itself with respect to  i.e.  . the e-prcdecessors of 
with respect to w are just the instates which agree with u on at least those fluents where and agree and possibly others. if one considers a pma ordering  winslett  1 of states  iff then the 
e-predecessors are those e-states at least as close to 	as 
　we are now in a position to define a state-selection mechanism based on state elimination systems. 
definition 1 
with any state elimination system s we associate  result 
             defined as folis compact  in s  and 
in the following section we characterise i  in terms of nexts . first  however  let us briefly consider the definition of next1 . according to the definition above  a state  is a possible resultant state if and only if all its e-predecessors  with respect  are rejected by elimination rules in 1 but r and only  is retained. if is retained along with some other state  then there is some closer state  one with less' change  consistent with the state elimination system s  and  therefore  causal system under consideration. moreover  it means that there is something in the state s  for which causality cannot account. if  is rejected on the other hand  it must violate a causal relationship. for these reasons we only consider the e-predecessors of  to determine whether it belongs to next    we need to determine whether  is illegitimate or whether a 'closer' state satisfies the causal relationships. if either is the case  we can safely reject the state. otherwise  we can retain the state. 
1 causal systems and state elimination systems 
we now establish the interrelationship between causal systems and state elimination systems. this will give us a way of moving back and forth between the two systems facilitating the final intcrtranslation between causal systems and state transition systems. the following definition will prove useful. 
definition 1 	 selection-equivalent  
a causal system is selection-equivalent to state elimination system s iff 	for every sentence e and state w. 
the notion of selection-equivalence will be useful in relating causal systems and state elimination systems. moreover  it will be useful in relating any two state-selection mechanisms  in an obvious way . 
　we now turn to the main result of this section. a state elimination system can exactly capture a causal system  and vice versa . 
theorem 1 for every causal system there exists selection-equivalent state elimination system. conversely  
for every state elimination system there exists a selection-
equivalent causal system. 
proof  sketch  
be an arbitrary causal system. for every causal 
law 	in p  produce the elimination rule 
call s the set of elimination rules so produced. it is not difficult to verify that for any legitimate state and sentence 
　　　　let s be an arbitrary state elimination system. for every elimination rule produce the causal law 
where are such t h a t   s i n c e our language is a finitary propositional one  such and always exist . the set of causal laws so produced  call it is selection-equivalent to s. 
　　of particular note in this proof is the relationship between causal laws and elimination rules: if and only if 
 or  equivalently  
　we can also identify an important class of state elimination systems that will be useful later  in the proof of theorem 1 . 
definition 1  s unary  
a state elimination system s is unary iff every elimination rule eliminates precisely one state  i.e. for all  singleton. 
	peppas et al. 	1 

the following result reveals an interesting and important aspect of unary state elimination systems. 
theorem 1 every state elimination system is selectionequivalent to a unary state elimination system. 
1 	mechanism 1: state transition systems 
in this section we consider our second  and last  stateselection mechanism: state transition systems. again  we shall obtain a direct characterisation of causal systems  and state elimination systems . in this case we have a preferential mechanism augmented by further structure to achieve the result we desire in this paper. 
　a state transition system consists of a binary relation on states intended to represent possible transitions between states due to the presence of causality. it is this relation that  together with a preferential ordering based on symmetric difference  will be used to determine possible resultant states. we begin with some requisite definitions. 
definition 1 a state transition system is binary relation on the set of states whenever 
	we will write 	  we shall say that a state 
is final  in 	iff for any r' such that 
the binary relation  can be considered to represent state transitions due to the influence of causality. 
   we are now in a position to define the mechanism for selecting possible resultant states  or successor states   for a state transition system m given initial state w and action with direct effects e. 
definition 1 
to any state transition system 	we associate  function 
              mapping a 	final 	state 	and  sentence e to the set of states 	defined as follows: 
	: 	is and 
there is a hamiltonian path through states in 
 a hamiltonian path is one which traverses every vertex  here states  of a graph  wilson  1. in this case  the graph's vertices are the e-predecessors of  and the edges are given by the binary relation  i.e.  there is an edge between states  and s iff the significance of a hamiltonian path will be considered further in the next section. 
　it is important to notice that  is determined by two components: a preference ordering on states  based on symmetric difference  used to derive the e-predecessors of 
with respect to  and the binary relation on states  we maintain that the preference ordering captures the principle of minimal change while the binary relation captures the effect of causality. notice firstly that a state must be reachable via a hamiltonian path through all e-predecessors ending in . if this is not possible  either a 'closer' instate is consistent with the causal relationships that hold  absence of hamiltonian path  or violates a causal relationship  path does not end at is not final . another important point is that  like state elimination systems  we only need consider e-predecessors of   with respect to  to determine whether it is a possible resultant state. 
1 	automated reasoning 
1 state elimination systems and state transition systems 
in this section we establish an intertranslation between state elimination systems and state transition systems. we can then use the results of section 1. to establish a correspondence between causal systems and state transition systems. this gives us the result we seek: an augmented preferential semantics for mccain and turner's causal theory of actions. 
theorem 1 for every state elimination system s there is a selection-equivalent state transition system .  conversely  
for every state transition system  there is a selection-
equivalent state elimination system s. 
proof.  sketch  
    let s be a state elimination system. let s' be a 
　unary state elimination system that is selection-equivalent to s. from s' we construct a selection-equivalent state transition system  first we require some definitions. 
consider an arbitrary set of states  with cardinality 
　　　　　　　we shall say that the string of elimination rules dissolves  iff after applying these rules successively  in the order given   all but one of the states of are eliminated and  furthermore  the one remaining state is compact. 
	assume that 	dissolves  and for all 1 
               be the state of that is eliminated by the rule let us also call w the one state of that is not eliminated. 
we shall call the sequence of states a trace for 
　　we now construct from  a state transition system in the following manner. for any two states if and only if there is a dissolvable set of states containing 
and  such that for some trace of in appears immediately after . it can be shown that   is selection-equivalent to s'. 
    essentially proved by reversing the construction presented above. 	
　the central result of this paper  as expressed by the following corollary  is now obtained by combining theorems 1 and 
1. 
corollary 1 for every causal system there exists selection-equivalent state transition system conversely  
for every state transition system  there exists a selectionequivalent causal system 
this result states that it is possible to exactly characterise mc-
cain and turner's causal theory of actions via a preferentialstyle semantics  defined in terms of symmetric difference  augmented with a binary relation on states and through the notion of a hamiltonian path. 
1 	discussion 
one of the morals that we have attempted to stress in this work is that it is possible to retain preferential semantics and augment it in capturing the causal theory of mccain and turner. we maintain that the preferential component of state transition systems relates to the principle of minimal change while the binary relation on states relates to the causal system. it is our contention that both of these components - minimal 

change and causality - are required if one is to supply a concise solution to the frame problem; the two can co-exist and  in fact  complement each other. 
　it has been suggested that other preferential-style approaches to reasoning about action are capable of capturing mccain and turner's causal theory of actions  for instance  
 gustafsson and doherty  1  ; an apparent contradiction of what is suggested by our impossibility theorems in section 1. however  this and similar approaches are able to do so only by augmenting the original language c  with  for instance  predicates like occludes or so-called frame fluents . at the outset we made clear that we did not wish to adopt this tactic. to do so would be to call into question our adherence to the quest for conciseness in seeking a solution to the frame problem and  more specifically  the ramification problem. moreover  the ontological status of added predicates is not always clear and places a huge burden on the designer who must determine whether and when to occlude predicates. 
　the notion of a hamiltonian path through e-predecessors in a state transition system to determine possible resultant states is an interesting one. essentially  a hamiltonian path serves as a contextual mechanism much in the same way that augmenting the underlying language through the addition of extra predicates does. the additional information allows the effects of causality to contribute in certain situations and not in others. 
1 conclusion and future work 
in this paper we set out to determine whether it is possible to furnish mccain and turner's  mccain and turner  1  causal theory of actions with a preferential semantics in the spirit of shoham fshoham  1 . we demonstrated  through use of an impossibility theorem  theorem 1   that this is not possible in general when we do not embellish the original language c and assume the preferential ordering satisfies transitivity. choosing not to abandon preferential semantics entirely  we then adopted an abstract view in terms of stateselection mechanisms introducing two such systems: state elimination systems and state transition systems. the latter of these provides the sought after semantics augmenting a preferential structure based on symmetric difference with a binary relation on states and making use of the notion of a hamiltonian path. the former provides a stepping stone and  of equal importance  gives further insight into the nature of causality at play in mccain and turner's approach. significantly  we show that causal systems  state elimination systems and state transition systems  as defined here  are  selection  equivalent. that state transition systems augment a preferential structure with a binary relation on states demonstrates  we claim  that minimal change and causality - the former captured by preferential semantics and the latter by a 
binary relation - together are essential in furnishing a concise solution to the frame and ramification problems. 
　providing mccain and turner's causal theory of action with an augmented preferential semantics allows comparison with other logics of action and provides an interesting direction for future work. another avenue for future work would be a contrast of sandewalls causal propagation semantics  sandewall  1  and our state transition systems. this would indirectly link sandewall's semantics with mc-
cain and turner's causal theory of actions giving further insight into causal approaches to reasoning about action. it may also be possible to modify the approach here in terms of state transition systems and hamiltonian paths to capture other causal approaches such as that of thielscher  thielscher  1 . note  however  that thielscher's system does not satisfy the property that the possible resultant states lie among the e-states. this suggests that such a result is not likely to be a straightforward extension of the current work. 
acknowledgements 
the authors would like to thank members of the school of computing science at simon fraser university for their comments on this work. 
