 
there is a lot of research on formalization of intention. the common idea of these theories is to interprete intention as an unary modal operator in kripkean semantics. these theories suffer from the side-effect problem seriously. we introduce an alternative approach by establishing a nonclassical logic of intention. this logic is based on a novel non-kripkean semantics which embodies some cognitive features. we show that this logic does provide a formal specification and a decidable inference mechanism of intention consequences. all and only the instances of sideeffects  except ones in absorbent forms  are forbidden in the logic. 
1 	introduction 
formalization of intention has drawn the attention of researchers  cohen and levesque 1; rao and georgeff 1; konolige and pollack 1; wainer 1; linder et al.  1; huang et al.  1; singh  1; 
schild  1 . the common idea is to formalize intention into a modal operator on the framework of kripkean possible world semantics. many varieties of the semantics have been put forward  and a lot of models of intention have been established. but all the formalizations suffer from the side-effect problem  bratman  1 . the problem has two most difficult cases  the one concerning closeness of intention consequences under tautological implications and the other concerning closeness under logical equivalencies. the former is about the relation between tautological implications and intention consequences. it asks the question 
 q  given  a tautological implication of  whether intending that  is a consequence of intending 
that 
the latter is a special case of the former where  equivalence  is substituted for  implication  and  conse-
1 	automated reasoning quence . 
　to the question  q   some of the previous theories answer  yes   most of the others answer  no   and the remainders give indefinite answers. we argue that both of the  yes  and the  no  answers are wrong. moreover  the first answer causes confusion between an agent's goal and its side-effects  and the second answer results in forsaking the specification of intention consequences. 
　we provide an alternative approach to formalizing intention. the basic idea is to develop a novel semantics which introduce  cognitive abstraction  into interpretation rules. it turns out that the semantics produces an appropriate specification of intention consequences to the extent that all and only the instances of side-effects  except those in absorbent forms  are avoided. besides that  the semantics supports a decision procedure for the intention consequences defined in the semantics. 
　in the next section  we examine the side-effect problem and previous work on it. section 1 states our motivation and basic ideas. the semantics is developed in section 1 and discussed in depth in section 1. finally  in section 1  we draw some conclusions and point the way toward further development of our logic of intention. 
1 	the side-effect problem 
the language we use in this section is a modal extension of a propositional language with operators i and b  where 
i and b represent intention and belief  respectively   and  are arbitrary formulas  and  represent material im-
plication and equivalence  respectively. the so-called side-effect problem is captured by the following cases 

　 seb  is the case of side-effect under belief implications. in this case  an agent's intentions are closed under his/her belief implications.  set  is the case of sideeffect under tautological implications  logical conse-

quences   that is  an agent's intentions are closed under tautological implications. it can be regarded as a special case of the well-known problem of logical omniscience  hintikka  1 . as pointed out in  konolige and pollack  1   this problem is more serious and harmful to intention than belief: logically consequential closure cannot be assumed for intention  even as an idealization; not all the consequences of an agent's intention are intentions of the agent  even the consequences he/she has anticipated.  sel  is another case of the side-effect problem. 
there are good solutions to  seb   e.g.  cohen and 
levesque  1; rao and georgeff  1; wainer  1   so we will not consider it in this paper. but  on the other hand  neither  set  nor  sel  has been solved satisfactorily. a major difficulty in dealing with  set  comes from the fact that either of the following rules has exceptions  

that is  tautological implications cannot be transferred to intention consequences in a globally uniform manner. 
　previous work concerning  set  can be classified into three categories. the models of intention in the first category take  ci  and reject  c1   cohen and levesque  1; wainer  1 . these models employ normal modal logics to characterize cognitive states including intention. this makes them tolerate and hence suffer from  set  strictly speeking   cohen and levesque  1  takes some more constraints on  ci   which avoids  set  in some way. but cohen and levesque did not consider the way satisfactory . the models in the second category take  c1  with constraint  for example  the representationalist theory of intention  konolige and pollack  1  employs the minimal model semantics  chellas  1  to interpret the operator i. the only way to infer formulas containing i is by using the rule hence  if any intention is derivable from another in the theory  then their content must be logical equivalence. this means that both  set  and the intention consequence are eliminated from the model. the models in the third category restrict both  ci  and  c1  such that neither of them are valid for all q  and  linder et al  1; huang et al  1 . obviously  these models are more appropriate than the ones in the other two categories. but these models are not self-contained: one could not employ these models by themselves to decide whether f 1  holds for any  and  for instance  the model proposed in  linder et al  1  uses awareness  fagin and halpern  1  to define preferences  and then goals  intentions . because the explicit preferences cannot be characterized by a formalized system  the intention consequences in the model are not specified. moreover  no remedial measures to overcome this short-
age have been put forward in literature. 
　as for  sel   it is usually considered harmless  linder et al  1 . but from the point of view of bounded rationality and resource-boundness   sel  is inappropriate and harmful: logical equivalencies are not  cognitive equivalencies . for example  from 
the side-effectv is introduced. perhaps one may think the situation could be remedied by demanding that agents always take the  simplest  content of an intention. this requires the specification of  simplest content   the criterion of which has not been established definitely. it follows from the discussion above that all the models mentioned are inadequate. we believe the inadequacy results from the formal tools. we are to deal with these issues in depth. 
1 	motivation 
for simplicity  in this paper we only consider the formal specification of the intention consequence relation between the content of two intentions. hence we assume in the rest of this paper that any formula in our formal language represents the content of an intention. for any that  is an intention consequence of   means is an agent's intention whenever is the agent's intention. thus   need not contain the modal operator i. a binary operator  is added into and means that is an intention consequence of 
　in all existing theories  the semantic interpretation of an intention  is based on some set of the intended worlds  where each intended world is a classical possible world  chellas 1  satisfying  the content of the intention. however  classical possible worlds have following properties that are harmful to the appropriate specification of intention and intention consequences. suppose  is the formula representing the content of the intention being considered  and hence being satisfied by all the intended worlds . 
 h1  all tautologies are satisfied by each classical possible world. thus all tautologies are always intentions of any agent. this is a special case of  set .  h1  any  logically equivalent to  is satisfied by each of the intended worlds. so  is also an intention whenever is. this is  sel . 
 h1  suppose formula  is stronger than  then  may not be satisfied by an intended world  or even specified by a set of the intended worlds. this causes the failure to the specification of  strong consequences   see below . 
　to overcome all the drawbacks  we introduce a new sort of possible worlds based on  cognitive abstraction . in our semantics  an intended world about  is a  minimal model  of in the sense that only a possibly smallest 
	chen and liu 	1 

 number of propositional symbols occurring in are assigned classical truth values while others are assigned the same abstract value  1 or 1 . any proposition assigned the abstract values are considered to be  abstracted cognitively   neglected cognitively . a world of this sort is a cognitively finite object  just matching the ability or nature of resource-bounded agents. based on the set of minimal models  the intention consequence defined in the next section will draw or extract from  such that is a piece of  partial content  of as a result  the semantics avoids all the harmful properties listed above and fits our purpose well. most importantly  it supports a welldefined and decidable inference scheme that can derive both  strong consequences  and  weak consequences  of an intention. if an agent intend that  then both and are  partial content   or  subgoals  as usually called  of the agent's intention. generally  is called a weak consequence of  is stonger than in the classical logic. sometimes an agent need derive from his/her intention some as a  means  to the  end    where is stronger than we call such a strong consequence of 
  the compositions of strong and weak consequences are called hybrid consequences. for example  given intention its weak consequences are and  strong consequences are and   and hybrid 
consequences are 
　　we will establish a logic of intention   and employ the set of the  valid formulas of the form to provide a formal specification for the intention consequence. therefore  for any   the problem  if  is an intention consequence of is reduced to the problem  if  holds in the three kinds of intention consequence described above will be defined uniformly in  this makes it an uniform mechanism of inferring intention consequences. moreover  we can also provide an algorithm to decide whether an intention consequence is a strong  weak  or hybrid one. if  and satisfy the single-level description assumption  sda   i.e.  all items of the primitive intention content  represented by proposition symbols in occurring in  also occur in then that holds in will guarantee that will realize or elaborate without side-effect. 
　it follows from the discussion above that the validity characterized by our logic should conform to the following principles 

1 	formalization 
let  be the propositional language with a set of propositional symbols atom and logical connectives  and  the formulas of are defined as usual. let l  the language of be an extension of  with only one additional operator any formula of l has the form where the semantic interpretation of is defined over the set where t and f mean truth and falsehood  respectively  and 1 and 1 represent two states of  cognitive abstraction . 
definition 1  assignment  a o-assignment is a mapping 

a 1-assignment is a mapping gl: atom 
an assignment is either a o-assignment or a iassignment. 	
　we will use  to denote the set of 1assignments and the set of i-assignments  respectively  and m to denote 
   the connectives and  are interpreted by operators  a n d r e s p e c t i v e l y . these operators are defined in figure 1. 

x -x t 
f 
1 
1 f 
t 
1 
1 
* t f 1 t 
f 
1 
1 t f 1 t f f 1 f 1 1 t f 1 + t f 1 t t t t 1 f t f f 1 
1 t f 1 
1 1 1 

figure 1. the definitions of -  * and + 
1 	automated reasoning 


   vn is an extension of  and will be abbreviated hereafter. for simplicity  we will use to denote 
also the set of valuations that are extensions of assignments in 
definition 1  model  for any 	is a 
model of if and only if 
   if 	is a model of and 	-t f   then 	is called a tmodel  f-model  of   hereafter 	denotes the set oft-models f-models of and 	denotes 
　the key idea to embody the cognitive characteristics of resource bounded agents is to introduce a  cognitive abstraction  relation on m. 
definition 1  cognitive abstraction  for any 
 1  is a o-abstraction of   denoted by 
 1  n is a cognitive abstraction of denoted by if and only if 
definition 1  minimal model  for any is a minimal model of iff there exists no 
　for any  denotes the set of minimal models of 


theorem 1  decidability  the intention consequence in is decidable. that is  there exists an algorithm a such that for any ~ a returns  yes  and 
 no  
1 features of 
we show the side-effect-free property of  by examining  sel  and  set  separately. 
1 free from  sel  
we describe the relative results following the thread of their proofs  but omit these proofs here. 
   any are called intention equivalent in denoted by 
theorem 1 has properties  p1 - p 1 . 
　this indicates that all the methods for transferring formulas into normal forms are preserved in  so we have 
corollary 1 for any 	f normal form such that 

theorem 1 for any following assertions are equivalent: 

　there are two sorts of equivalencies closely relative to  sel . a formula  is called an absorbent form if has a sub-formula of the forms is called an absorbent normal form of is in absorbent form and is a normal form of is called a strict normal form of if is a normal form of   and atom =atom   i.e.  for all atom  x occurs in  iff x occurs in 
theorem 1  equivalence  for any  where  is in normal form  is a strict normal form of or 
	is an absorbent normal form of 	
corollary 1  side-effect-free in equivalence under 
	chen and liu 	1 

 atom  for any not being of absorbent form  if then atom 	
　this result can be strengthened further even in situations where atom 
theorem 1  side-effect-free in equivalence  

　the instances of this invalidity can be found next subsection  e.g.   pi-1    pi-1  and  p1   etc. 
　now the feature of intention equivalencies in lmp1c can be summarized in two aspects. first  intention equivalencies cover all strict and absorbent normal forms. second  all of the other forms of equivalencies in the standard logic are forbidden. this means that all instances of  sel   except absorbent equivalencies  are avoided in 

1 free from  set  
theorem 1  side-effect-free in consequence under 
atom  for any is not in ab-
sorbent forms  then atom 	
   at the first glance  the property is shared with bochvar's 1-valued logic  where is a semantic consequence of iff it is in the classical logic and 
atom however  there are remarkable differences between bochvar's and ours  which will become clear in the following discussion. 
theorem 1 has the properties  pi-1 - p1 . 
　this theorem  together with theorem 1  shows that follows all the principles previously put forward. 
　it seems from properties  pl-1  and  pi-1  that is similar to the standard logic in deriving weak consequences: a conjunct of a conjunctive intention is also an intention  or a  sub-intention .  pi-1  and  pi-1  reveal 
that it is not the case. in particular  the inference in 
is not  driven  only by the surface layer of the syntactic description of formulas  while at least in some extent the standard logic is. moreover   pi-1  also gives an instance that  forbids the unnecessary weakening of intentions. 
   properties  p1  and  p1  indicate other significant differences between the intention consequence in and the logical consequence in the standard logic: can derive strong consequences of a given intention  i.e.  sufficient means for the end without side-effects. the difference is made clearer by  p1  and  p1   where 
1 	automated reasoning 
the latter also shows that unnecessary strengthening is not allowed in  further properties about strong consequences are given as follows. 

　properties  p1    p1  and  p1  are three more instances of prohibiting intention consequences from deriving side-effects. these side-effects contain logical contradictions  but they may not contain new atoms. however  a  contingent  intention can be extracted from its compound with a logical contradiction  as  p1  shows. it is also forbidden in to infer intention consequences from contradictory intentions  an instance of this property is  pi-1 . 
　another kind of side-effects concerns tautological intentions. fortunately  this kind of side-effects is also refused by 
theorem 1 

　from above discussion we can draw the conclusion that  avoids all side-effects usually appearing in 
intention consequences  except ones in absorbent form. 
1 	conclusion 
 is rather simple and powerful. it does provide a 
formal specification and a decidable inference mechanism of intention consequences. most strikingly  all and only the instances of side-effects we have identified  except those in absorbent forms  are forbidden in meanwhile  all the rules for transferring formulas into normal forms in classical logics are preserved in 
this indicates that the logic has a moderate descriptive granularity  lying between that of the standard semantics and that of the syntactic approach  eberle  1; konolige  1 . perhaps the traditional idea of interpreting intention as an unary modal operator in kripke's semantics is misleading  although this idea has many advantages. in addition   is not just a subsystem of the classical proposition logic - both weak and strong consequences can be derived in it with a unified 

mechanism. so it could be used as a new tool of reasoning about plans. 
　we have concentrated on intention consequences in this paper. some further development is also under consideration. first  need to be extended to languages including action terms and be able to function beyond the 
sda  see section 1 . second  we have discovered that provides an interesting definition and mechanism of 
some kind of non-monotonic reasoning. third  it is deserved to consider whether the semantics of  can be generalized and employed to treat other kinds of cognitive state such as belief  and to model the interaction among these cognitive operators. last  the tractability of the decision procedure for is an open problem. 
acknowledgements 
this work is supported by the national natural science 
foundation of china  1 . the first author thanks yulin feng  yutian wang and shifu chen for their helps. 
