 
shopbots are agents that automatically search the internet to obtain information about prices and other attributes of goods and services. they herald a future in which autonomous agents profoundly influence electronic markets. in this study  a simple economic model is proposed and analyzed  which is intended to quantify some of the likely impacts of a proliferation of shopbots and other economically-motivated software agents. in addition  this paper reports on simulations of pricebots - adaptive  pricesetting agents which firms may well implement to combat  or even take advantage of  the growing community of shopbots. this study forms part of a larger research program that aims to provide insights into the impact of agent technology on the nascent information economy. 
1 	introduction 
shopbots  agents that automatically search the internet for goods and/or services on behalf of consumers  herald a future in which autonomous agents become an essential component of nearly every facet of electronic commerce  chavez and maes  1; kephart et al.  1; tsvetovatyy et al.  1 . in response to a 
consumer's expressed interest in a specified good or service  a typical shopbot can query several dozen web sites  and then collate and sort the available information for the user - all within seconds. for example  wvv.shopper.com claims to compare 1 1 prices on 1 computer-oriented products! in addition  vvv.acses.com compares the prices and expected delivery times of books offered for sale on-line  while vvv.jango.com and webmarket.junglee.com offer everything from apparel to gourmet groceries. shopbots can out-perform and out-inform even the most patient  determined consumers  for whom it would take hours to obtain far less coverage of available goods and services. 
　shopbots deliver on one of the great promises of electronic commerce and the internet: a radical reduction in the cost of obtaining and distributing information. it is generally recognized that freer flow of infor-
1 	distributed al 
mation will profoundly affect market efficiency  as economic friction will be reduced significantly  lewis  1; delong and froomkin  1 . transportation costs  menu costs - the costs to firms of evaluating  updating  and advertising prices - and shopping costs - the costs to consumers of seeking out optimal price and quality - will all decrease  as a consequence of the digital nature of information as well as the presence of autonomous agents that find  process  collate  and disseminate that information at little cost. what are the implications of the widespread use of shopbots and related types of autonomous agents in electronic marketplaces  and how might species of computational agents evolve  
　delong and froomkin  qualitatively investigate the ongoing emergence of shopbots; in particular  they note that short of violating anti-trust laws  firms will be hard pressed to prevent their competitors from sponsoring shopbots  in which case those who do not do so will experience decreased sales. in this paper  we utilize quantitative techniques to address the aforementioned questions. we propose  analyze  and simulate a simple economic model designed to capture the present role of shopbots as agents of economic change  particularly with regard to consumer preferences  as they decrease the cost of obtaining information in markets known to exhibit price dispersion. looking ahead several years into the future  we project that shopbots will evolve into economic entities  i.e.  utility maximizers  in their own right  interacting with billions of other self-interested software agents. moreover  we predict the emergence of pricebots - economically-motivated agents that set prices so as to maximize the profits of firms  just as shopbots seek prices that minimize costs for consumers. accordingly  we study adaptive price-setting algorithms which pricebots might utilize to combat the growing community of shopbots  in a full-fledged agent-based economy. 
　this paper is organized as follows. the next section  section 1  presents our model  which is analyzed in section 1 from a game-theoretic point of view. section 1 describes various adaptive price-setting algorithms and the results of their simulation under the prescribed model. a possible evolution of shopbots and pricebots is discussed section 1. concluding remarks and ideas for future work appear in section 1. 

1 	model 
we consider an economy in which there is a commodity that is offered for sale by 1 sellers and of interest to b buyers  with b  s. each buyer b generates purchase orders at random times  with rate  while each seller s resets its price  at random times  with rate  the value of the good to buyer 1 is  the cost of production for seller s is 
a buyer b's utility for a good is a function of price: 
		 1  
this states that a buyer purchases a good from a given seller if and only if the seller's price is less than the buyer's valuation of the good; if price equals valuation  we make the behavioral assumption that a transaction occurs. we do not assume that buyers are utility maximizers; instead we assume that they consider the prices offered by sellers using one of the following strategies: 
1. any seller: buyer selects seller at random  and purchases the good if the price charged by that seller is less than the buyer's valuation. 
1. bargain hunter: buyer checks the offer price of all sellers  determines the seller with the lowest price  and purchases the good if that lowest price is less than the buyer's valuation.  this type of buyer corresponds to those who take advantage of shopbots.  
the buyer population consists of a mixture of buyers employing one of these strategies  with a fraction using the any seller strategy and a fraction using the bargain hunter strategy; buyers employing these respective strategies are referred to as type a and type b buyers. 
　a seller s's expected profit per unit time  is a function of the price vector  
 1  
where is the rate of demand for the good produced by seller s. this rate of demand is the product of the overall buyer rate of demand  the likelihood 
of a given buyer selecting seller 1 as their potential seller  and the fraction of buyers whose valuations satisfy denoted  
 1  
note that is the prob-
ability density function describing the likelihood that a 
then 	and the 
 1  
without loss of generality  we define the time scale such that i t follows t h a t a n d   
is seller s's expected profit per unit sold systemwide. 
　the probability  that buyers select seller a as their potential seller depends on the distribution of the buyer population  namely  in particular  
 1  
where are the probabilities that seller a is selected by buyers of type a and b  respectively. the probability that a buyer of type a select a seller s is independent of the ordering of sellers' prices; in particular  
 buyers of type b  however  select a seller a if and only if s is one of the lowest price sellers. given that the buyers' strategies depend on the relative ordering of the sellers' prices  it is convenient to define the following functions: 
   is the number of sellers charging a lower price than s  and 
   is the number of sellers charging the same price as s  excluding s itself. 
now buyers of type b select seller s iff 1 is s.t.  
in which case a buyer selects a particular such seller 1 
 1  
where whenever 
　the preceding results can be assembled to express the profit function  for seller in terms of the distribution of strategies and valuations within the buyer population. in particular  assuming  as we do from here forward  that all buyers share the same valuation  and all sellers share the same cost c  then 
		 1  
where 
		 1  
1 	analysis 
in this section  we perform a game-theoretic analysis assuming sellers are profit maximizers. in particular  we first show that there is no pure strategy nash equilibrium  and we then compute and describe the symmetric mixed strategy nash equilibrium. recall that b  1; in particular  the number of buyers is assumed to be very large  while the number of sellers is a great deal smaller. in accordance with this assumption  it is reasonable to consider the strategic decision-making of the sellers alone  since their relatively small number suggests that the behavior of individual sellers indeed influences market dynamics  while the large number of buyers renders the effects of individual buyers' actions negligible. a nash equilibrium is a vector of prices  at which sellers maximize their individual profits and from which 
	greenwald and kephart 	1 

they have no incentive to deviate  nash  1 . throughout this exposition  we adopt the notation which distinguishes the price offered by seller a from the prices offered by the remaining sellers. 
　traditional economic models consider the case in which all buyers are bargain hunters: i.e.   = 1. in this case  prices are driven down to marginal cost; in particular.  for all sellers a  see  for example  tirole  . in contrast  consider the case in which all buyers are of type a  meaning that they randomly select a potential seller: i.e.   = 1. in this situation  tacit collusion arises  in which all sellers charge the monopolistic price  in the absence of explicit coordination; in particular   for all sellers s. of particular interest in this study  however  is the dynamics of interaction among buyers of various types: i.e.   
   we begin our analysis with the following observation: at equilibrium  at most one seller a charges  suppose that two distinct sellers not an equilibrium price for seller a. now suppose that set their equilibrium prices 
　on the other hand  at equilibrium  at least one seller a charges  given that all sellers other than s set their equilibrium prices at v  seller a maximizes its profits 

equilibrium price for seller a. it follows from these two observations that at equilibrium  exactly one seller a sets its price below the buyers' valuation 
other sellers a' maximize their profits by charging price 
 thus  the unique form of pure strategy equilibrium which arises in this setting requires that a single seller a set its price while all other sellers set their prices the price vector with however  is not a nash equilibrium. while v is in fact an optimal response to  since the profits of seller are maximized at v given that there exists low-priced seller is not an optimal response to  on the contrary  
in particular  the low-priced seller a has incentive to deviate. it follows that there is no pure strategy nash equilibrium in the proposed model of shopbots. 
there does  however  exist a symmetric mixed strategy 
nash equilibrium. let  denote the density function 
distributed al 
according to which sellers set their prices  and let f p  be the corresponding cumulative distribution function. 1 the event that seller a is the low-priced seller occurs with probability  substituting this into  1  we obtain the demand expected by seller s: 
		 1  
the precise value of f p  is determined by noting that at equilibrium expected profits are equal for all sellers  and moreover the expected profit level is given by the guaranteed minimum achieved at price namely 
 now  by setting 
equal to this value and solving for f p   we obtain: 
 1  
 1  
the functions f p  and f p  are plotted in figure 1. 
when  exceeds a critical threshold  
 equal to 1 for s = 1   f p  is bimodal. in this regime  as either wb or s increases  the probability density concentrates either just below v  where sellers expect high margins but low volume  or just above  where they expect low margins but high volume; moreover  the latter solution becomes increasingly probable. since p* itself decreases under these conditions  see eq. 1   it follows that both the average price paid by buyers and the average profit earned by sellers decrease. these relationships have a simple interpretation: buyers' use of shopbots catalyzes competition among sellers  and moreover  smaller fractions of shopbot users induce competition among larger numbers of sellers. 
1 	simulations 
when sufficiently widespread adoption of shopbots by buyers forces sellers to become more competitive  it seems likely that sellers will respond by creating pricebots that automatically set prices so as to maximize profitability. it is unrealistic  however  to expect that pricebots will simply compute the mixed strategy nash equilibrium and distribute their prices accordingly. the real business world is fraught with uncertainties that undermine the validity of traditional game-theoretic analyses: sellers lack perfect knowledge of buyer demands  and have an incomplete understanding of competitors' strategies. in order to be profitable  pricebots will need to continually adapt to changing market conditions. 
   1as the equilibrium is symmetric  we abbreviate p  p  and we suppress dependence on p. 
　　1  a similar derivation of the mixed strategy equilibrium appear  in varian . 

　in this section  we discuss simulations of two adaptive pricing strategies  and we compare the resulting price and profit dynamics with the game-theoretic equilibrium. recently  empirical studies of sophisticated learning algorithms have revealed that learning tends to converge to pure strategy nash equilibria in games for which such equilibria exist  greenwald et al.  1 . as there does not exist a pure strategy nash equilibrium in the shopbot model  it is of particular interest to study the outcome of adaptive pricing schemes. 
1 	p r i c i n g strategies 
we consider three pricing strategies  each of which makes very different demands on the required level of informational and computational power of agents: 
gt the game-theoretic strategy is designed to reproduce the mixed strategy game-theoretic equilibrium computed in the previous section  provided that it is employed by all seller agents. it makes use of full information about the buyer population  and assumes that its competitors also use the gt strategy. it therefore generates a price chosen randomly from the probability density function derived in the previous section. 
my the myopically optimal  or myoptimal  1 pricing strategy  kephart et al.  1  uses information about all the buyer characteristics that factor into the buyer demand function  as well as the competitors ' prices  but makes no attempt to account for competitors' pricing strategies. instead  it is based on the assumption of static expectations: even if one seller is contemplating a price change under myoptimal pricing  this seller does not assume that this will elicit a response from its competitors; instead it assumes that competitors' prices will remain fixed. 
the myoptimal seller uses all of the available information and the assumption of static expectations to perform an exhaustive search for the price  that maximizes its expected profit  in our simulations  we compute according to eqs. 1 and 1. the optimal price is guaranteed to be either the valuation or below some competitor's price  where e is the price quantum  or the smallest amount by which one seller may undercut another  set to 1 in these simulations. this limits the search for to s possible values. 
df the derivative-following strategy is far less informationally intensive than either the myoptimal pricing strategy or the game-theoretic strategy. in particular  this strategy can be used in the absence of any knowledge or assumptions about one's competitors or the buyer demand function. a derivative follower simply experiments with incremental increases  or decreases  in its price  continuing to move its price in the same direction until the observed profitability 
   *ln the game-theoretic literature  this adaptive strategy is known as cournot best-reply dynamics  cournot  1 . level falls  at which point the direction of movement is reversed. the price increment s is chosen randomly from a specified probability distribution; in the simulations described here the distribution was uniform between 1 and 1. 
1 	p r i c e a n d p r o f i t d y n a m i c s 
we have simulated an economy with 1 buyers and 1 sellers employing various mixtures of pricing strategies. in each of the simulations depicted below  each buyer's valuation of the good  = 1  and each seller's production cost c = 1. the mixture of buyer types is set at  = 
1  i.e.  1% are bargain hunters. 
　the simulation is asynchronous: at each time step  a buyer or seller is randomly selected to carry out an action  e.g.  buying an item or resetting a price . the chance that a given agent is selected for action is determined by its rate; the rate  at which a given buyer b attempts to purchase the good is set to 1  while the rate at which a given seller reconsiders its price is 1. each simulation was iterated for 1 million time steps. 
gt pricing strategy 
simulations verify that  if agents are gt strategists  the cumulative distribution of prices closely resembles the derived f p   to within statistical error   and moreover  the time-averaged profit for each seller is  = 1 1  which is nearly the theoretical value of 1. 
m y pricing strategy 
fig. 1 a  illustrates the cyclical price wars that typically occur when all 1 sellers use the myoptimal pricing strategy. regardless of the initial value of the price vector  a pattern quickly emerges in which prices are positioned near the monopolistic price  = 1  followed by a long episode during which the sellers successively undercut one another by c. during this latter phase  no two prices differ by more than  and the prices fall linearly with time. eventually  when the lowest-priced seller is within  above the value  = 1  the next seller finds it unprofitable to undercut  and instead resets its price to  = 1. the other sellers follow suit  until all but the lowest-priced seller are charging  = 1. at this point  the lowest-priced seller finds that it can maintain its market share but increase its profit dramatically - from - .1 = 1 to 1 - - by raising its price to 1 - no sooner than the lowest-priced seller raises its price does the next seller who resets its price undercut  thereby igniting the next cycle of the price war. 
　fig. 1 a  shows the sellers' profits averaged during the intervals between successive resetting of prices. the upper curve represents a linear decrease in the average profit attained by the lowest-priced seller as price decreases  whichever seller that happens to be. the lower curve represents the average profit attained by sellers that are not currently the lowest-priced; near the end of the cycle they suffer from both low market share and low margin. the expected average profit can be computed by averaging the profit given by eqs. 1 and 1 over one price-war cycle:  which 
	greenwald and kephart 	1 

yields  = 1 in this instance. the simulation results match this closely: the average profit per time step is 1  which is just over twice the average profit obtained via the game-theoretic pricing strategy. 
　since prices fluctuate over time  it is of interest to compute the probability distribution of prices. fig. 1 a  depicts the cumulative distribution function for myoptimal pricing. this measured cumulative density function has exactly the same endpoints  - 1 and v - 1 as those of the mixed strategy equilibrium  but the linear shape between those endpoints  which reflects the linear price war  is quite different from what is displayed in pig. 1 a . 
df pricing strategy 
fig. 1 b  shows the price dynamics that result when 1 derivative followers are pitted against one another. recall that derivative followers do not base their pricing decisions on any information that pertains to other agents in the system - neither sellers' price-setting tendencies nor buyers* preferences. nonetheless  their behavior tends towards what is in effect a collusive state in which all sellers charge nearly the monopolistic price. this is tacit collusion as defined  for example  in tirole   so-called because the agents do not communicate at all and there is consequently nothing illegal about their collusive behavior. note that df sellers accumulate greater profits than myoptimal or game-theoretic sellers. according to fig. 1 b   sellers that are currently lowestpriced can expect an average profit of 1 to 1  while the others can expect roughly the game-theoretic profit of 1. averaging over the last 1 million time steps  to eliminate transient effects   we find that the average profit per seller is 1. this is near the absolute collusive limit of  =1  which would be obtained if all sellers were to fix their prices at 1. 
　how do derivative followers manage to collude  like myoptimal sellers  df sellers are capable of engaging in price wars; such dynamics are visible in fig. 1 b . however  these price wars tend to involve only two sellers  and the positive feedback that drives them depends critically on both the sequence of price increments and the timing of the asynchronous moves by the sellers. downward trends are therefore very easily disrupted. for example  if a}& price is currently above b's  but a reduces its price by an amount insufficient to undercut b  then a's profits decrease  so that a raises its price in subsequent time steps. soon after a breaks the downward cycle  b discovers that it can improve profits by increasing its price  and does so. simulations clearly show that upward trends in price are much faster and more certain than downward trends. the tendency of a society of df sellers to reach and maintain high prices is reflected in the cumulative distribution function  shown in fig. 1 b . 
it is also of interest to study the interplay among gt  
my  and df sellers. typically  we find that  when a myoptimal seller is introduced into a population of df or gt sellers  it substantially outplays them  and their profits decline significantly. 
1 	distributed al 

figure 1: nash equilibria for 1 = 1  v = 1  c = .1  and {.1 .1  .1  .1  .1} 

figure 1: price dynamics for a  1 my sellers and b  1 df sellers during the first 1 million time steps. 

figure 1: profit dynamics for a  1 my sellers and b  1 
df sellers during the first 1 million time steps. 

figure 1: cumulative distribution functions for a  1 my sellers and b  1 df sellers  derived from prices observed between times 1 million and 1 million. 

1 	evolution of shopbots and pricebots 
in additional simulations  we investigated a situation in which all five sellers use identical pricing strategies  but one of the sellers resets its price more quickly than the others. we observed that the faster price-setter earns substantially more profit than the others because  for example  in the case of myoptimal agents  it undercuts far more often than it itself is undercut. in the absence of any throttling mechanism  it is advantageous for sellers to re-price their goods as quickly as possible  but this could potentially lead to an arms race in which sellers do so with ever-increasing frequency. in such a world  a human price setter would undoubtedly be too slow and costly  and would be replaced with a pricebot  likely one based on a more sophisticated algorithm than any explored in section 1! . almost certainly  this strategy would make use of information about the buyer popular tion  which could be purchased from other agents. even more likely  however  the strategy would require knowledge of competitors' prices. how would the pricebot obtain this information  prom a shopbot  of course! 
　with each seller seeking to re-price its products faster than its competitors  shopbots would quickly become overloaded with requests. a pricebot representing amazon. com might submit a million or more queries  one per book title  to a shopbot every hour - or maybe even every minute! since shopbots must query individual sellers for prices  they would in turn pass this load back to amazon. corn's competitors: e.g.  barnesandnoble. com  kingbooks. com. the rate of pricing requests made by sellers could easily dwarf the rate at which similar requests would be made by human buyers  eliminating the potential of shopbots to ameliorate market frictions. 
　a typical solution to an excess demand for shopbot services would be for shopbots to charge pricebots for price information. today  shopbots tend to make a living by selling advertising space on their web pages. this appears to be an adequate business model so long as requests are made by humans. agents  however  are unwelcome customers because they are are not influenced by advertisements; as a result  agents are either barely tolerated or excluded intentionally. by charging for the information services they provide  shopbots would be economically-motivated agents  creating the proper incentives to deter excess demand  and welcoming business from other agents. once shopbots begin to charge for pricing information  it would seem natural for sellers - the actual owners of the desired information - to themselves charge the shopbots for their information. the sellers could use another form of pricebot to dynamically price this information. this scenario illustrates how the need for agents to dynamically price their services could quickly percolate through an entire economy of software agents. the alternative is  meltdown  due to overload which could occur as agents become more prevalent on the internet. rules of etiquette followed voluntarily today by web crawlers and related programs could be trampled in the rush for competitive advantage. 
1 	conclusion 
game-theoretic analysis of a model of a simple commodity market established a quantitative relationship between the degree of shopbot usage among buyers and the degree of price competition among sellers. this motivated a comparative study of various pricebot algorithms that sellers might employ in an effort to gain an edge in a market in which shopbots have increased the level of competition. pricebots were shown to be capable of inducing price wars  yet even so they may earn profits that are well above game-theoretic equilibrium levels. future work will explore the dynamics of markets in which more sophisticated shopbots base their search on product attributes as well as price  and in which pricebots use more sophisticated learning algorithms such as q-learning. 
