 
for an effective teacher-student interaction  the 
teacher has to maintain a constant understanding of 
 what is going on  in the student's mind. when coming to physics  the teacher's ability to propose and to relate explanations at different levels of abstraction - as a chains of causal interactions  deep  or as a set of observable phenomena  shallow  - may determine a successful and lasting learning in the student. 
here  we describe a knowledge representation to be used by the teacher to depict to herself the student's mental model and to tune her future lessons according to the current student comprehension. 
supported by a cognitive theory of children physics learning  we used the system why for modeling the evolution of a student's learning as it appeared at the teacher's eyes. two of why's features turned out to be essential:  a  to deal with explanations having different levels of abstraction  and  b  the possibility to continuously evaluate the coherence of the hypothesized learner's model with respect to her explanation. 
in the long term  the work's outcome might contribute to the development of teaching assistant systems that support the teacher in identifying  what has to be explained next . 
1 introduction 
for an effective teacher-student interaction  it is essential for the teacher having a continuous understanding of  what is going on  in the student's mind  i.e. to continuously hold a hypothesis about the student's knowledge consistent with her explanations. in addition  when coming to physics  the teacher's ability to propose and to relate explanations at different levels of abstraction  for instance  as a chains of causal interactions  deep  or just as a set of observable phenomena  shallow   may determine a successful and lasting learning. 
1 	cognitive modeling we describe our experience in using the system why  saitta et. al.  1  for modeling the evolution of a student's learning as it would appear from the point of view of a teacher that is aware of a specific cognitive framework accounting for children learning in physics  tiberghien  1 . the why system helps the teacher in inferring and representing the student's model from a 
sequence of interviews collected along a teaching period. the hypothesized learner's model is structured according to tiberghien's cognitive framework   derived from psychology results and educational experiences. 
two of why's features were determining its choice for this research:  a  its capability to deal with explanations having many levels of abstraction  and  b  its capability to continuously validate the coherence of the learner's model  proposed by the teacher  with respect to her explanations. 
the long term work's outcome might possibly contribute to the development of teaching assistant systems supporting the teacher in identifying  what has to be explained next  during a cycle of lessons. at the present time  our research enabled the teacher to better realize and explore the limits involved in the learner's evolving knowledge as observed in a past teaching experience  tiberghien  1 . this a-posteriori experience enabled the teacher to consider what-if situation where alternative next lesson topics could be selected in order to canalize the student learning effort towards the acquisition/understanding of scientifically correct physics models. 
the paper is organized as follows: in section 1  we summarize current approaches to the modeling of human learning and we discuss the aspects that differentiate our approach from them. in section 1 and 1  we describe the considered educational context and the system why  respectively. in section 1  a case study of student modeling is reported  and in section 1 we compare the student's explanations with respect to the why's ones. finally  in section 1  some conclusions are drawn. 

1 related works 
from the point of view of cognitive science  various aspect of human learning have been identified and studied. our research mainly related to the study of the phenomena of conceptual change  tiberghien  1; 
vosniadou & brewer  1; caravita & halkten 1; chi et al.f 1; vosniadou  1 . no definition of conceptual change with universal validity has yet been found  white  1 . but  roughly speaking the term conceptual change describes the evolution of the models of the world used by people to interpret data  to explain phenomena and to make predictions. conceptual change has been mainly studied in the context of learning mathematics or physics  forbus & gentner  1; disessa  1; vosniadou  1; chi et al.  1  because both areas make available a body of knowledge that is enough completed and detailed to allow a formal representation  logic or calculus . all this models use rich and  informal  knowledge representation and have essentially a descriptive nature: they describe mental models or knowledge states  but do not include a description of the  learning strategy   i.e.  the actual mechanisms of transition from a knowledge state to another. trying to represent the evolution of a student's learning by using these rich and informal knowledge models without the help of an automatic system  is almost impossible. consequently  exploiting these frameworks to hypothesize what a student is learning during a cycle of lessons is a very though and long work. 
　on the other end  computer scientists also proposed models of human learning  sleeman et al.  1; baffes & mooney  1; sage & langley  1; newell  1; schmidt & ling  1; shultz et al.  1 . and  they all show a dynamic nature: they are able to coherently match the variations of the learner's performances by exploiting some computer-oriented mechanisms such as backpropagation  theory revision operation  etc.. unfortunately  the price to be paid for obtaining such automatically evolving systems consists in the use of simple formalisms to represent the learner's knowledge and  in some cases  in the complete carelessness for the kind of changes occurring to the learner's knowledge as only a mimic of her performance is pursued. then these approaches provide only a limited  if any  support to the teacher in understanding what exactly the student currently knows. 
　we believe that an important aspect is overlooked in these last models: the strict interconnection between the shallow phenomenological knowledge in a specific domain and pre-existing deeper knowledge structures or theories  vosniadou  1  1; tiberghien  1; chi et al. 1. this is particularly evident when examining a learner's explanations during learning: shallow and deep pieces of knowledge are mixed again and again by the learner in the effort to develop one coherent view of the world. in addition  human learning is  to a great extent  a search for explanations; then  any model of human learning should provide an explanatory framework  allowing not only to predict questions to answers  but also to put forward reasons in support of those answers. 
　our approach intends to address these major aspects in the learner modelization by extending a descriptive model of learning  tiberghien  1  with the explanatory framework provided by the learning system why  saitta  botta & neri  1 . note  however  that we do not claim that proposed knowledge representation resembles to the one in the student's mind. on the contrary  we claim that the resulting model is a functional model of the student's understanding of the domain. in our approach  the transitions between successive knowledge states are accomplished through interactive human-computer sessions. during these interactions  the teacher evaluates the coherence of her hypothesized learner's state against the previously collected student's answers and why proposes possible knowledge refinement when a student's answer cannot be explained on the basis of the current knowledge. 
　finally  we believe that is relevant to clarify the differences between tutoring systems like  for instance  the andes one  gertner et al.  1  and our approach. 
tutoring systems are student oriented  our approach is teacher-oriented. in the firsts  the student model is automatically built to select the next most effective hint during problem solving; instead  we help the teacher to described her perceived evolution of the student's model  and we delegate to her experience the choice about the  next lesson  topic. essentially we chose to operate at a different time scale: days instead of minutes or hours. in addition  we focalize on the effective teaching/learning of  large  theories more than on providing hints to the student while she is solving a specific problem. 
1 the educational perspective 
in education research  results on students' conceptions show difficulties in learning physics  hestenes  1; duit  1; disessa  1 . in  tiberghien  1  a theoretical framework for interpreting such difficulties has been proposed. the framework has its foundation both in pedagogical studies and in the epistemology of science. in experimental sciences  questions are strongly linked to three main factors: the theoretical background  the experimental facts considered  and the explanations produced. in the chosen theoretical framework  interpretation and prediction in physics imply a modelling process articulated on three levels:  theory    model  and  experimental field  of reference. 
　tiberghien  assumes that an explanation of the learner's behaviour can be given by focusing the modelling process on the specific task of understanding the material world  rather than on general logicalmathematical reasoning. in this framework  a basic assumption  concerning the learner's cognitive activities  is made: when the learner is interpreting  or predicting  a 
	neri 	1 

material situation  she constructs a  model  of the situation  which depends on her background theory and is also internally coherent. 
　in  tiberghien  1 no formal definition of these levels was given. a tentative addition of operational specifications is reported in  neri et al.  1 . our basic assumption is that the  theory  level contains a causal model of the domain; thus  an explanation is a causal attribution. 
　the specific learning context considered is the following: students of six classes  at the first and second years of secondary school  1 year old   participated in a physics course  consisting of 1 sessions  once a week  including experiments  questions  discussion and explicit teaching. the contents of the course were basic concepts and qualitative relations in the domain of heat transfer in everyday life situations. two students of each class were interviewed individually about the subject before and after the set of teaching sessions; and all the students filled two questionnaires  as well. in this paper we focalise our attention on the student david. 
1 the modeling tool why 
why  saitta  botta & neri  1  has been chosen as testbed because of its ability to model both the answers and the causal explanations given by the children. 
　why learns and revises a knowledge base for classification problems using domain knowledge and examples. the domain knowledge consists of a causal model c of the domain  stating the relationships among basic phenomena  and a body of phenomenological theory p  describing the links between abstract concepts and their possible manifestations in the world. 
　the causal model provides explanations in terms of causal chains among events  originating from  first  causes. the phenomenological theory contains the semantics of the vocabulary terms  structural information about the objects in the domain  ontologies  taxonomies  domain-independent background knowledge  such as symmetry  spatial and temporal relations . finally  p contains a set of rules aimed at describing the manifestations of abstractly defined concepts in terms of measurable properties  objects and events in the specific domain of application. 
　the causal model is represented as a directed  labeled graph. three kinds of nodes occur in the graphs: causal nodes  corresponding to processes or states related by cause-effect relations  constraint nodes  attached to edges and representing conditions which must be verified in order to instantiate the corresponding cause-effect relation  and context nodes  associated to causal nodes  representing contextual conditions to be added to the cause in order to obtain the effect. the phenomenological theory is represented as a set of horn clauses. 
　as said above  why's objective is to build up or revise a knowledge base kb of heuristic classification rules. a causal explanation  justification  for any proposed 
1 	cognitive modeling 
revision to the knowledge base is automatically provided. 
　it is important to stress the relations between the causal model and the heuristic knowledge base. as reasoning on the causal model is slow  some of the rules in kb act as shortcuts compiled from c. some other rules  instead  do not have any relations with c. for instance  when kb is not derived from c but is directly acquired by the learner on a pure inductive basis. in the latter case  kb will give classifications  correct or not   for which no explanation exists with respect to c. exploiting these different types of relations between kb and c  all the learning models emerged in the experimentation could be modeled. in the interplay between kb and c  the knowledge in p supplies the links between the general principles stated in c and the concrete experiments. 
　why relies on a sophisticated algorithm for uncovering errors or incompleteness in its knowledge that can be triggered when one of why's explanations does not match the student's ones. this provided useful information to the teacher in discovering where her hypothesized student's model was incoherent with the learner answer. 
　to model david's knowledge in why  we proceeded as follows. each question answered by david consists of a  the description of an experimental setting for which a prediction about the heating effect has to be made  b  david's prediction and his  shallow or causal  explanation. in why  the experimental setting is an example description  the prediction is viewed as the example classification  and the student's explanation is interpreted as a chain of  shallow/deep  relationships determining the experiment outcome. 
1 david learns that heating causes phase transitions in objects 
as a case study: we compare here two significant knowledge states of david: before and after the teaching course. david's knowledge before teaching has been inferred on the basis of his answers and explanations to questions and interviews done before teaching. part of david's knowledge before teaching is represented as a causal model in figure 1. the drawing of the causal model make evident the findings emerging from david's answers. the most important are that david uses a notion of material causality linked to the  substance  of a body to describe what will happen when heating the body:  what happens to the body depends on what it is . for instance  water will eventually boil  if heated  whereas lead or iron or gold will melt  and  for this reason  they will become hot. similarly  sugar becomes  caramel  and  again  it becomes hot. questioned on the subject  david shows evidence to believe that  boiling  and  melting  are alternative  and mutually exclusive  behaviors  exhibited by different substance. in fact  he say that iron  gold and lead shall not boil  because they melt. 


figure 1 - causal model hypothesized to represent part of david's knowledge before teaching. elliptic nodes contain the domain phenomena. arrows represent causal relationships among them. rectangle and clouds represent accessory conditions. 

figure 1 - part of david's hypothesized knowledge after teaching. the most relevant change is represented by the bold causal path. 
	neri 	1 


figure 1 - explaning with different levels of abstraction the phenomena: 'the water becomes hot because of heating . relations between the causal model and the phenomenological knowledge are outlined. the double thickrectangles represent predicates occurring in the phenomenological theory. such predicates are defined using horn 

clauses  and  thus  they are depicted using and/or graphs. 
one of the limits of this model of heating is the student cannot answer questions about materials that he has not experience of: david actually answered  i don't know  about the possibility of diamond  salt and aluminum to become liquid or gaseous. 
aware of this findings  the teacher might decide to select as  next lesson topic  some working experience that stress the independence of the heating effect from the body material. 
　up to here the why system helped the teacher to develop and to describe her comprehension of david's heating model according to his answers. at the same time  why took care to validate the coherence  consistency  of the model with respect to david's answers. in case of incoherence  why actives its interactive theory revision module to propose some useful adjustment to the causal model. 
　after the teaching course  during which david has seen several other experiments involving different materials  he fills the final questionnaire and participates to the final interview. from these latter answers  we may infer that his deep knowledge of the world is changed  under various respect. in figure 1  the inferred heating model of david after teaching is reported. two changes deserve to be noted. the first one is that david explicitly considers time in determining the final state of a material. at the beginning  in fact  he simply said that the sand would become hot  when heated. now  he is able to understand that the effect of heating takes time to happens  suggesting the idea of a  process . this finding is confirmed by the answers like:  in order for the water to start boiling  at least a quarter of an hour is necessary . 
　however  the most relevant change  with respect to the goal of the teaching course  is that david seems less 
1 	cognitive modeling 
committed to material causality for determining behaviors. he generalized from  iron    lead    gold  and  ice   that any  solid  may become liquid if sufficiently heated. moreover   to boil  and  to melt  are not anymore mutually exclusive behaviors  but they are possibly in sequence  as it should be. david's causality shows a shift from the  substance  to some underlying process  which  on the other hand  he is not yet completely capable of pinning down. 
　aware of these findings  the teacher may just declare herself satisfied of david's progress. on the other hand  she might even try to evaluate the kind of conceptual changes occurred in david by comparing his two knowledge states  figure i vs figure 1   or she may plan the teaching of new learning topics exploiting the freshly learned notions. 
1 explaining at many levels of abstraction 
for developing the student's model and to trace her learning evolution  the capability to represent and to compare the student's explanations with respect to the ones deducible from the causal model is essential. in figure 1  we report why's explanation for an experimental setting derived from david's model before teaching. this explanation is relative to a simple heating situation: some water  contained into a pot  is being heated by means of a camping gas; the water starts boiling and becomes hot. 
figure 1 shows the relations between the causal model and the phenomenological theory. the causal path explains  from the abstract point of view  that a liquid becomes hot because of the heat transfer produced by an heat source. the phenomenological theory make the explanation 

concrete: the liquid heated is some water  the water is contained into a pot  the pot is over the heat source  and the heat source is a camping gas. 
   in fact why explanation is a template of explanations where either abstract or concrete concepts may be included to interpret an observed phenomenon. such explanations can thus be read at many abstraction levels ranging from a pure causal explanation  i.e. deep knowledge based  down to a plain sequence of measurable phenomena  i.e. shallow knowledge based . these explanations template facilitate the task of accounting for david's explanations while the teacher was developing david's model. in fact most of a student's early explanations mix shallow and deep knowledge in the effort to acquire a coherent view of the new subject matter. in the case of the mentioned experiment  david performed the experience by himself  under the teacher's supervision  in the school's laboratory. when he was questioned about the heating phenomenon  he said  the water is a liquid and is over the fire. the fire is hot. then  the water boils and becomes hot . 
1 conclusion 
we proposed a way of interpreting and describing learning progresses during teaching from the point of view of the teacher. in our approach  the tutor constructs and maintains a model of the student while the automatic system support the modeling activity by providing an enhanced knowledge representation framework. the articulated representation allows the modeling of phenomena observed in children learning elementary physics: notably their explanations in terms of simple causality  and the interdependence of  surface  pragmatic knowledge and  deep  causal one. moreover  the structuring of the knowledge in terms of causal theory  phenomenological knowledge and experimental field provide a valuable framework for evidencing differences between the learner's knowledge and the target physics knowledge. 
　in the long term  we hope this research may contribute to the development of teaching assistant systems able to support the teacher in identifying  what has to be explained next  in a sequence of lessons. 
