 
we compare tractable classes of constraint satisfaction problems  csps . we first give a uniform presentation of the major structural csp decomposition methods. we then introduce a new class of tractable csps based on the concept of hypertree decomposition recently developed in database theory. we introduce a framework for comparing parametric decomposition-based methods according to tractability criteria and compare the most relevant methods. we show that the method of hypertree decomposition dominates the others in the case of general  nonbinary  csps. 
1 	constraint satisfaction problems 
an instance of a constraint satisfaction problem  csp  
  also constraint network  is a triple / =  var u c   where var is a finite set of variables  u is a finite domain of values  and is a finite set of constraints. each constraint is a pair   where  is a list of variables of length rni called the constraint scope  and  is an -ary relation over  /  called the constraint relation.  the tuples of  indicate the allowed combinations of simultaneous values for the variables si . a solution to a csp instance is a substitution 
v :   such that for each 
the problem of deciding whether a csp instance has any solution is called constraint satisfiability  cs .  this definition is taken almost verbatim from  jeavons et a/.  
1 .  
¡¡many problems in computer science and mathematics can be formulated as csps. for example  the famous problem of graph three-colorability  1col   is elegantly formulated as a csp. constraint satisfiability is an npcomplete problem. 
¡¡it is well-known  bibel  1; gyssens et al  1; dechter  1  that the cs problem is equivalent to various database problems  e.g.  to the problem of evaluating boolean conjunctive queries over a relational database 
 maier  1   or to the equivalent problem of evaluating join dependencies on a given database. 
1 	constraint satisfaction 
¡¡this paper is organized as follows. in section 1 we discuss tractability of csps due to restricted structure. in section 1 we briefly review well-known csp decomposition methods. in section 1 we describe the new method of hypertree decompositions. in section 1 we explain our comparison criteria and in section 1 we present the comparison results for general csps. the case of binary csps is briefly discussed in section 1. 
1 	tractable classes of csps 
much effort  has been spent by both the ai and the database communities to indentify tractable classes of csps. both communities have obtained deep and useful results in this direction. the various successful approaches to obtain tractable csp classes can be divided into two main groups  pearson and jeavons  1 : 
1. tractability due to restricted structure. this includes all tractable classes of csps that are identified solely on the base of the structure of the constraint scopes {s  ... sq   independently of the actual constraint relations r1 ...  rq. 
1. tractability due to restricted constraints. this includes all classes that are tractable due to particular properties of the constraint relations r1 ...  rq. 
¡¡the present paper deals with tractability due to restricted structure. the structure of a csp is best represented by its associated hypergraph and by the corresponding primal graph  defined as follows. 
¡¡¡¡to any csp instance / =  var  u c   we associate a hypergraph where v = var  and 
  where var s  denotes 
the set of variables in the scope s of the constraint c. since in this paper we always deal with hypergraphs corresponding to csps instances  the vertices of any hypergraph 'h =  vr  h  can be viewed as the variables of some constraint satisfaction problem. thus  we will often use the term variable as a synonym for vertex  when referring to elements of v. 
let  =  v h  be the constraint hypergraph of a 
csp instance 1. the primal graph of / is a graph g =  v e   having the same set of variables  vertices  as and an edge connecting any pair of variables 

such that for some h h. 
¡¡note that if all constraints of a csp are binary  then its associated hypergraph is identical to its primal graph. 
¡¡the most basic and most fundamental structural property considered in the context of csps  and conjunctive queries  is acyclicity. it was recognized independently in ai and in database theory that acyclic csps are polynomial  solvable. / is an acyclic csp iff its primal graph g is chordal  i.e.  any cycle of length greater than 1 has a chord  and the set of its maximal cliques coincide with edges  hi   beeri et a/.  1 . 
¡¡¡¡a join tree jt h  for a hypergraph h is a tree whose nodes are the edges of h such that whenever the same vertex x   v occurs in two edges a and  of h  t h e n 
 and 	are connected in   	  and x occurs in each 
node on the unique path linking 	and 
   acyclic hypergraphs can be characterized in terms of join trees: a hypergraph h is acyclic iff it has a join tree  bernstein and goodman  1; beeri et a/.  1; maier  1 . acyclic csp satisfiability is not only tractable but also highly parallelizable. in fact  this problem is complete for the low complexity class logcfl  gottlob et a/.  1 . 
¡¡many csps arising in practice are not acyclic but are in some sense or another close to acyclic csps. in fact  the hypergraphs associated with many naturally arising csps contain either few cycles or small cycles  or can be transformed to acyclic csps by simple operations  such as  e.g.  lumping together small groups of vertices . consequently  csp research in ai and in database theory concentrated on identifying  defining  and studying suitable classes of nearly acyclic csps  or  equivalently  methods for decomposing cyclic csps into acyclic csps. 
1 	decomposition methods 
in order to study and compare various decomposition methods  we find it useful to introduce a general formal framework for this notion. 
for a hypergraph h =  v  h   let edges h  = h. 
moreover  for any set of edges h'  h  let var h'  = and for the hypergraph 'h  let var h  - 
 w.l.o.g.  we assume that var h  = v  i.e.  every variable in v occurs in at least one edge of 1i  and hence  any hypergraph can be simply represented by the set of its edges. moreover  we assume w.l.o.g. that all hypergraphs under consideration are both connected  i.e.  their primal graph consists of a single connected component  and reduced  i.e.  no hyperedge is contained in any other hyperedge. all our definitions and results easily extend to general hypergraphs. 
¡¡let us be the set of all  reduced and connected  hypergraphs. a decomposition method  short: dm  d associates to any hypergraph  a parameter dwidth h   called the d-width of h. 
¡¡the decomposition method d ensures that  for fixed k  every csp instance / whose hypergraph  has d-
width   k: is polynornially solvable  i.e.  it is solvable in  time  where  denotes the size of /. for any k   1  the k-tractable class c d k  of d is defined by c{d k  = {h|d-width. . thus  c{d k  collects the set of csp instances which  for fixed k  are polynornially solvable by using the strategy d. typically  the polynomial above depends on the parameter k. in particular  for each d there exists a function / such that  for each a:  each instance can be transformed in time into an equivalent acyclic 
csp instance  from where it follows that all problems in c d k  are polynornially solvable . 
	every dm d is complete w.r.t. 	w  i.e.  us = 
i. note that  by our definitions  it holds that jd-widthcw  = min 
¡¡all major tractable classes based on restricted structure fit into this framework. in particular  we shall compare the following decomposition methods: 
  biconnected components  short: bicomp   freuder  1 . any graph g =  v e  can be decomposed into a pair  t  x   where t is a tree  and the labeling function x associates to each vertex of t a biconnected component of g  a component which remains connected after any one-vertex removal . the biconnected width of a hypergraph h  denoted by bic1mpwidth h   is the maximum number of vertices over the biconnected components of the primal graph of h.. 
  cycle cutset  short: cutset   dechter  1 . a cycle cutset of a hypergraph h is a set s  var h  such that the subhypergraph of h induced by var h  -~ s is acyclic. the cutset width of h is the minimum cardinality over all its possible cycle cutsets. 
  tree clustering  short: tcluster   dechter and pearl  1 . the tree clustering method is based on a triangulation algorithm which transforms the primal graph g =  vr  e  of any csp instance i into a chordal graph . the maximal cliques of  are then used to build the constraint scopes of an acyclic csp /' equivalent to /. the tree-clustering width  short: tcluster width  of  is 1 if  is an acyclic hypergraph; oth-
erwise it is equal to the maximum cardinality over the cliques of the chordal graph 
  treewidth  treewidth   robertson and seymour  1 . we omit a formal definition of graph treewidth here. the treewidth of a hypergraph h is the treewidth of its primal graph plus one. as pointed out below  treewidth and tcluster are two equivalent methods. 
  hinge decompositions  short: hinge   gyssens et a/.  1; gyssens and paredaens  1   let h be a hypergraph  and let v var 'h  be a set of variables and x y ' var h . x is  vr -adjacent to y if there exists an edge h   edges h  such that {x y} {h - v . a 
 v -path  from x to y is a sequence x = .  ...  = y of variables such that: xi is  v -adjacent to .   for each i   1...l-1 . a set w  var h  of variables is 
 v' -connected if  w there is a  v -path from x to y. a  v -component is a maximal  v -connected non-empty set of variables w   var h  - v . for any 
	gottlob  leone  and scarcello 	1 

 v1-component c  let edges c  = edges 
hs and let h be either edges h  or a proper subset of edges h  containing at least two edges. let c   ..   be the connected -components of h. 
then  h is a hinge if  for i = l ... m  there exists an edge  h such that var edges   
a hinge is minimal if it does not contain any other hinge. 
 our definition of hinge is equivalent to the original one in  gyssens et a/.  1; gyssens and paredaens  1 .  
¡¡a hinge-decomposition of h is a tree t such that all the following conditions hold:  1  the vertices of t are minimal hinges of h;  1  each edge in edges h  is contained in at least one vertex of t;  1  two adjacent vertices a and d of t share precisely one edge l  edges h   moreover  l consists exactly of the variables shared by 
a and .   1  the variables of h shared by two vertices of t are entirely contained within each vertex on their connecting path in t. 
¡¡the size  i.e.  the cardinality  of the largest vertex of t is called the degree of cyclicity of h. this is precisely what we call here the hinge width of h. it was shown in 
 gyssens and paredaens  1  that for any csp instance /  the hinge width of h1 is the cardinality of the largest minimal hinge of 
  hinge decomposition + tree clustering 	 short: 
  gyssens et a/.  1 . it has been shown  gyssens et a/.  1  that the minimal hinges of a hypergraph can be further decomposed by means of the triangulation technique of the above-described tree-clustering method. this leads to the 
method. let t =  n  e  be a hinge tree of a hypergraph h. for any hinge h  n  let w h  be the minimum between the cardinality of h and the tcluster width of the hypergraph  var h   h . tt h o f 
t is  . define 	t	d	t	h of 
h as the minimum hingetcluster width over all its hinge decompositions. 
¡¡for each of the above decomposition methods d it was shown that for any fixed k  given a csp instance /  deciding whether a hypergraph  has d-width is feasible in polynomial time and that solving csps whose associated hypergraph is of width  a: can be done in polynomial time. in particular  d consists of two phases. given a csp instance /  the  a:-bounded  d-width w of  along with a corresponding decomposition is first computed. exploiting this decomposition  
i is then solved in time   for most methods this phase consists of the solution of an acyclic csp instance equivalent to i . 
¡¡the cost of the first phase is independent on the constraint relations of /; in fact  it is   where   i - i 	f t 
 is the size of the hypergraph are two constants relative to the method d for the methods above . observe also that computing the d-width w of a hypergraph in general  i.e.  without the bound w k:  is np-hard for most methods; while it is polynomial for hinge  and it is even linear for bicomp. 
1 	constraint satisfaction 
¡¡further interesting methods that do not explicitly generalize acyclic hypergraphs are based on a notion of width as used in  freuder  1; 1 . if c is a total ordering of the vertices of a graph g =  v  e   then the cwidth of g is defined by wc g  = maxvev |{ {v w} € e s.t. w c v} . the width of g is the minimum of all c-widths over all possible total orderings c of v. for each fixed constant a:  it can be determined in polynomial time whether a graph is of width k.  freuder  1  observed that many naturally arising csps are of very low width. note that bounded width in this sense is a structural property. the following theorem shows that bounded width alone does not entail tractability. 
theorem 1 constraint solvability remains npcomplete even if restricted to csps whose primal graph has width bounded by 1. 
proof. 1col remains np-complete even for graphs of degree 1  cf.  garey and johnson  1  . such graphs  however  have width   1. the theorem follows by the well-known natural encoding of 1col as a csp. | 
¡¡freuder showed that a csp of width a: whose relations enjoy the property of k' -consistency  where k;'   a:  can be solved in a backtrack-free manner  and thus in polynomial time  freuder  1; 1 . 
    dechter and pearl  1  consequently introduce the notion of induced width w* which is - roughly the smallest width k of any graph g' obtained by triangulation methods from the primal graph g of a csp such that g' ensures k 1- 1-consistency. graphs having induced width   a: can be also characterized as partial k-trees  freuder  1  or  equivalently  as graphs having tree width   k  arnborg et a/.  1 . it follows that  for fixed at  checking whether w*   k is feasible in linear time  bodlaender  1 . if w* is bounded by a constant  a csp is solvable in polynomial time. the approach to csps based on w* is referred to as the w*-tractability method  dechter  1 . note that this method is implicitly based on hypergraph acyclicity  given that the used triangulation methods enforce chordality of the resulting graph g' and thus acyclicity of the corresponding hypergraph. it was noted  dechter and pearl  1; dechter  1  that  for any given csp instance /  tcluster-width w/  = w* hj  + 1. 
1 	hypertree decompositions of csps 
a new class of tractable conjunctive queries  which generalizes the class of acyclic queries  has been recently identified  gottlob et a/.  1 . deciding whether a given query belongs to this class is polynomial time feasible and even highly parallelizable. in this section  we first generalize this notion to the wider framework of hypergraphs  and then show how to employ this notion in order to define a new decomposition method we will refer to as hypertree. 
¡¡a hypertree for a hypergraph h is a triple  t  x a   where t =  n  e  is a rooted tree  and x and a are labeling functions which associate to each vertex p e n 


figure 1: a 1-width hypertree decomposition of h1 
example 1 consider the following constraint  scopes: 
is clearly 
cyclic  and thus   as only acyclic hypergraphs have hypertree width 1 . figure 1 shows a  complete  hypertree decomposition of  having width 1  hence 
¡¡it is easy to see that the acyclic csps are precisely the csps of hypertree width one. 
¡¡we say that a csp instance / has a;-bounded hypertree-width if   where  is the hypergraph associated to /. from the results in  gottlob et a/.  1   it follows that a;-bounded hypertree-width is efficiently decidable  and that a hypertree decomposition of width k can be efficiently computed  if any . 
¡¡we next show that any csp instance / is efficiently solvable  given a k-bounded complete hypertreedecomposition hd of h1. to this end  we define an acyclic csp instance which is equivalent to / and whose size is polynomially bounded by the size of /. 
¡¡for each vertex p of the decomposition hd  we define a new constraint scope whose associated constraint relation is the projection on x p  of the join of the relations in x p . this way  we obtain a join-tree  of an acyclic hypergraph  corresponds to a new csp instance 
/' over a set of constraint relations of size i    where n is the input size  i.e.  n =  1   and k is the width of the hypertree decomposition hd. by construction  /' is an acyclic csp  and we can easily show that it is equivalent to the input csp instance l thus  all the efficient techniques available for acyclic csp instances can be employed for the evaluation of /'  and hence of 1. 
theorem 1 given a csp i and a k-width hypertree decomposition of   i is solvable in  = 
1 nk logn  time  where n is the size of i. 
1 	comparison criteria 
for comparing decomposition methods we introduce the 

is sufficient to exhibit a class of hypergraphs contained 
i n some but i n n o | for   . intuitively  means that at least on some class of csp instances  outperforms d1. 
	i f 	a. i n this case w e 
say that d1 strongly generalizes 
   mathematically   is a preorder  i.e.  it is reflexive  transitive but not antisymmetric. we say that equivalent to   denoted     if both 
and  ~ 	 '  hold. 
¡¡the decomposition methods d  and d1 are strongly incomparable if both  and . note that if  and  are strongly incomparable  then they are also incomparable w.r.t. the relations 
1 	comparison results 
figure 1 shows a representation of the hierarchy of dms determined by the  relation. each element of the hierarchy represents a dm  apart from that containing tree clustering  w*  and treewidth which are grouped together because they are -equivalent as easily follows from the observations in section 1. 
theorem 1 for each pair  and d1 of decompo-
sitions methods represented in figure 1  the following holds: 
	gottlob. leone  and scarcello 	1 

  there is a directed path from 
	i.e.  	iff d1 	strongly generalizes d1. 
  d1 and d1 are not linked by any directed path iff they are strongly incomparable. 
¡¡hence  fig. 1 gives a complete picture of the relationships holding among the different methods. 

figure 1: constraint tractability hierarchy 
¡¡below we sketch a proof of theorem 1. for space reasons  we report only succinct versions of selected proofs. detailed proofs of all results are available in the full version of this paper  gottlob et a/.  1b . 
¡¡for any n   1 and m   1  let circle n m  be the hypergraph having n edges { h 1   . . .   hn} defined as follows: 

for m = 1  circlc{n  1  is a graph consisting of a simple cycle with n edges  like a circle . note that  for any n   1 and m   1  circle n m  has hypertree width 1; a 1-width hypertree decomposition of circle n  ra  is shown in figure 1. thus  
c hypertree  1  


l e m m a 1 tcluster hypertree. 
proof.  tcluster hypertree.  let h =  v  h  be a hypergraph  and be the result of the application of the tree-clustering method on h  where t =  n e  is a tree  and  is a labeling function which assigns to each vertex of t a set of variables of h. for any m the set of variables   corresponds to a 
maximal clique identified by the tree-clustering method. 
¡¡from   we define a complete hypertree decomposition hd =  t x  a  having the same tree t as the output of the tree clustering method. the labelings x and are defined according to the following procedure. 
¡¡we have that hd is a complete hypertree decomposition of h  and its hypertree width is smaller than or equal to the tcluster-width of h. 
 hypertree  tcluster.  let 
1}. for any ra    1  the primal graph g of circle 1 m  is a clique of 1ra variables. thus  g does not need any tri-

1 	constraint 	satisfaction 

angulation  because it is a chordal graph. the tclusterwidth of circle 1 m  is clearly 1ra; while its hypertree 
  tcluster k   whereas 	i 
l e m m a 1 hinge and tcluster are strongly incomparable. 

cause all these graphs can be triangulated in a way that their maximal cliques have cardinality 1 at most. | 

   interestingly  even the combination of tcluster with hinge is strongly generalized by the hypertreedecomposition method. 
l e m m a 1 
proof. the proof of   hypertree is very similar to that of lemma 1  except that the  labelings must be initialized in a suitable way  instead 

1 	binary csps 
on binary constraint networks  where the constraints relations have arity two  the differences among the decomposition strategies highlighted in section 1 become less evident. indeed  bounding the arities of the constraint relations  the k-tractable classes of some decomposition strategies collapse. in particular  as shown in the full version of this paper  gottlob et ai  1b   on binary constraints networks  
and 	hold. the relationships among the other decomposition methods remain the same as for the general case  fig. 1 . 
   to evidentiate the differences of the above decomposition strategies on the domain of binary csps  we can compare their respective widths. for each discussed decomposition method d  any csp instance / is solvable in time   once the d-width w of  along with a corresponding decomposition have been computed  as noted in section 1. thus  the d-width is a measure of the efficiency of a decomposition method: the smaller the   the more efficient the application of strategy d to /. 
t h e o r e m 1 

acknowledgments 
research supported by fwf  austrian science funds  under the project z1-inf and by the cnr  italian na-
tional research 	council   	under grant n.1.1. 
