 
in recent years auctions have grown in interest within the ai community as innovative mechanisms for resource allocation. the primary contribution of this paper is to identify a family of hybrid auctions  called survival auctions  which combine the benefits of both sealed-bid auctions  namely  quick and predictable termination time  and ascendingbid auctions  namely  more information revelation often leading  among other things  to better allocations and greater expected revenue . survival auctions are multi-round sealed-bid auctions with an information-revelation component  in which some bidders are eliminated from the auction from one round to the next. these auctions are intuitive  easy to implement  and most importantly provably optimal. more precisely  we show that  a  the survival auction in which all but the lowest bidder make it into the next round  the* auction lasts for  n - 1  rounds when there are n bidders  is strategically equivalent to the japanese ascending-bid auction  which itself has been proven to be optimal in many settings  and that  b  under certain symmetry conditions  even a survival auction in which only the two highest bidders make it into the next round  the auction la.sts only two rounds  is nash outcome equivalent to the japanese auction. 
1 	introduction 
auction theory has recently captured the attention of computer scientists and especially of ai researchers. one reason  of course  is the explosion of auctions on the internet and to facilitate business-to-business trade  hansell  1; cortese and stepanek  1 . a more specific reason for interest within ai  however  is the use of auctions a.s a distributed protocol to solve re-
source allocation problems. 	for example  auctions as 
   *this work was supported in part by the darpa coabs program  contract number f1-c-1 
1 	distributed ai 
well as other market mechanisms are used in parts configuration design  factory scheduling  operating system memory allocation  atm network bandwidth allocation  and distributed qos allocation.  clearwater  1; yarnaki et al.  1 . within ai  market-oriented programming  mop   wellman  1; mullen and wellman  1  has excited many researchers with the prospect of market-based control. 
　mop and related approaches leverage ideas from economics and game theory  but these ideas provide little help with computational issues. this paper is concerned with the speed with which an auction terminates.  in the following we assume familiarity with some auction theory. unfamiliar readers should consult the brief primer provided in section 1.  
   sealed-bid auctions are attractive since they last exactly one round  but in some situations they have substantial disadvantages. bidders in an auction often possess information that would be useful to other bidders to assess the value of the good for sale. sealed bidding denies bidders the opportunity to learn about others' information during the course of the auction  which  as we discuss later  can lead to bad outcomes. in particular  the wrong bidder will sometimes win  the auction will tend to yield lower revenues  and winners will be subjected to more uncertain payoffs. in such situations  an ascending-bid auction is generally preferable on information-revelation grounds. in an ascending-bid auction  bidders with high estimates of a good's value can see the drop-out points of other bidders who have lower estimates. this information - a sense of just how bad is the worst information of others - helps bidders to assess the good's worth to them. for example  in an auction of a purported rembrandt painting  very aggressive bidding by several experts should convince a non-expert 
that the painting is unlikely to be a fake. in a sealed-bid auction  bidders can not similarly condition their bidding behavior on the behavior  and hence information  of others. 
　yet ascending-bid auctions have a distinct disadvantage. they can take a long and unpredictable amount of time to terminate. this shortcoming can be devastating  for example  when using auctions to allocate time-shared resources in real-time environments. 

　the primary contribution of this paper is to present and analyze a new sort of auction  the  survival auction   which shares the information-revelation property of ascending-bid auctions but which looks essentially like a multi-round sealed-bid auction. here is how a survival auction works. in the first round  all bidders submit a sealed bid. as a function of these bids  the auctioneer announces which bidders  survive  to the second round  a minimum bid for the second round  and  most importantly  all losing bids. 
　in the final round of a survival auction  the remaining bidders have seen bids submitted by all of the others. before making their final bids  therefore  they have some sense of the information possessed by the others. in the final stage of an ascending-bid auction  similarly  the last two bidders have seen drop-out points of all of the others  from which they can and should infer similar information. 
　the usual challenge of auction design is not so much to propose a reasonable-looking scheme as to analyze its equilibrium properties - in particular  its success in allocating the good optimally and in raising maximal revenue. one advantage of survival auctions over other sorts of  accelerated auctions  is that we are able to analyze them with the tools of game theory. 
　we show that one survival auction is strategically equivalent to the japanese ascending-bid auction. in this survival auction  all bidders except the lowest survive each round and the minimum bid for each round is the losing bid of the previous round. we call this  the  n - l -round survival auction  since it requires  n - 1  rounds to complete when there are n bidders. strategic equivalence of two auctions implies that  as long as bidders behave rationally and do not care about the superficial details of the auction in which they are participating 
 which would not be true  for example  if bidders derive  entertainment value  only out of ascending-bid mechanisms   the same bidder will always win and pay the same amount in both auctions. other survival auctions have the advantage of ending even more quickly than the  n - l -survival auction  but are not strategically equivalent to the japanese auction. if we impose certain symmetry assumptions  however  these survival auctions are still  nash outcome equivalent  to the japanese auction. this includes an auction which lasts only two rounds. 
　the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 1 is an auction primer  which includes a description of the most common types of single-good auctions  a brief literature review pertaining to the comparison of ascending-bid and sealed-bid auctions  and an introduction to the two principles of rational bidding most essential to our equilibrium analysis in section 1. section 1 introduces survival auctions and presents our results. the first result  in subsection 1  is that the round survival auction is strategically equivalent to the japanese ascending-bid auction. the second result  in subsection 1  is that all of our survival auctions are nash outcome-equivalent to the japanese auction in the context of a model with several symmetry assumptions. 
section 1 outlines how our results can be extended to the setting of multiple-good auctions. we conclude with a few comments about the relevance of our results. 
1 	auction primer 
the most common auctions fall into three categories: ascending-bid auctions  descending-bid auctions  and sealed-bid auctions. ascending-bid and descending-bid auctions are known together as open outcry auctions. 
　ascending-bid auctions are the most prevalent in practice  accounting for an estimated 1% of all auctions worldwide  cassady  1 . in the english auction  participants make successively higher bids. the winner is the last bidder and pays the last bid. another common  ascending-bid auction is the japanese auction. here  the auctioneer continuously raises the price. each bidder decides when to drop out  and once a bidder drops out he can not reenter. the last bidder to remain is the winner and pays the final price. 
　in a sealed-bid auction  all bidders submit a single bid to the auctioneer in ignorance of others' bids. the winner is the one who submitted the highest bid. payment is made as a function of the bids. the most common sealed-bid auctions are the first- and the second-price. in the first-price auction  the winner pays his own bid. in the second-price auction  the winner pays the secondhighest bid. 
　descending-bid auctions are the least common in practice. the most familiar descending-bid auction is the dutch auction. the auctioneer continuously lowers the price until a bidder expresses willingness to buy. that bidder wins and pays the final price. 
　auction theorists have shown that under certain symmetry assumptions  when bidders are risk-neutral  do not care about the information possessed by others  and receive statistically independent information  all of the common auctions described above are optimal in the sense that they all allocate the good optimally  the bidder with the highest value for the good always gets the good  and all raise the highest possible expected revenue  see for example  mcafee and mcmillan  1  . relaxing various of these assumptions induces rank orderings of the common auctions  both in allocation and revenue terms. in particular  when bidders care about the information possessed by others  ascending-bid auctions outrank sealed-bid auctions in three important settings. 
　　 1  let  represent bidder i's valuation for the good  which is allowed to be a function of all bidders' information. when for all  and for all ascending-bid auctions are always efficient whereas sealed-bid auctions are not  dasgupta and maskin  1 . 
　 1  in the model of section 1  when bidders are risk averse the ascending-bid auction has higher expected revenue than the second-price auction. in an ascendingbid auction  the drop-out points of losing bidders reveals information that helps remaining bidders make a tighter estimate of the good's value to them. since winning 
	fujishima  mcadams  and shoham 	1 

bidders are thus exposed to less risk  all bidders will be willing to bid more aggressively on average for the chance to win.  for more on this  see the discussion of extensions of the revenue equivalence theorem to risk averse bidders in any auction or game theory text  such as  fudenberg and tirole  1 .  
　 1  in the model of section 1  when bidders are risk neutral with affiliated private information the ascendingbid auction has higher expected revenue than any sealedbid auction  milgrom and weber  1 . roughly speaking  affiliation means that the more optimistic a given bidder's information  the more likely other bidders are to have more optimistic information. see milgrom and weber for a rigorous exposition. 
　finally  our analysis presumes that bidders are aware of and act in accordance with the principles of rational bidding. for example  each bidder should reflect:  1 make a payment only if i win the auction. thus  when i choose how much to bid  i ought to presume that i will be the winner . we will call this the winning bidder principle. when bidders fail to abide by this principle  they 
will suffer from  the winner's curse . typically  the bidder to win an auction is the one with the most optimistic information. if a bidder works off of the presumption that his information is average  he will systematically overvalue the good those times when he does win. 
   more subtlely  each bidder should reflect upon the marginal relevance of his bid. in the japanese auction  a bidder considering dropping out at price p when there are k other bidders left in the auction should reflect:  why should i drop out exactly now  if i stay in the auction and drop out instead at  1 will still not win unless all other bidders drop out in between p and p -f  when deciding to drop out at p  therefore  a savvy bidder will presume that all other remaining bidders will drop out immediately. we will call this the marginal bid relevance principle. 
1 	survival auctions 
first  we describe the class of multi-round single-good auctions that we have named  survival auctions''. each survival auction is characterized by a survival rule  a 
minimum bid rule  and a final price rule. the survival rule specifies which bidders are allowed to continue in later rounds of the auction. once excluded from participating in a given round  a bidder is not allowed to return in later rounds. an initial bid minimum is in effect in the first round; in all later rounds  the minimum bid is set as a function of the bids in earlier rounds. the final price rule specifies the winner's payment. 
1. all bidders are active. the auctioneer announces an initial minimum bid. 
1. each active bidder submits a sealed bid. the bid must be no less than the minimum bid. 
1. the auctioneer announces which of the active bidders remain active. 
1 	distributed al 
1. if only one bidder remains active  this is the winner. the auctioneer announces how much he must pay. 
1. if more than one bidder remains active  then the auctioneer announces a minimum bid for the next round and all bids of those who have become inactive. repeat from 1. 
　although some of our results extend to a broader family of survival auctions  we will focus in this paper on a special subclass of survival auctions  called  our survival auctions   in which:  1  the number of survivers in the second round  the third round  and so on is commonly known in advance;  1  the bidders who survive are those who submit the highest bids;  1  the minimum bid is always equal to the lowest losing bid in the previous round  and the initial minimum bid is  and  1  the final round has two bidders. 
1 	 n - l -round survival auction 
consider the specific survival auction in which only one bidder is eliminated at a time and the minimum bid in each round is the losing bid of the previous round. we call this the -round survival auction  since it takes rounds to complete when there are n bidders. in this section we prove that the 
-round survival auction is  strategically equivalent  to the japanese auction. strategic equivalence is the strongest possible formal relationship to establish between two auction mechanisms. 
   two auctions are strategically equivalent if there exists an isomorphism between their strategy spaces which preserves payoffs. a strategy of bidder  maps each of bidder i's decision points  also known as action nodes or information sets  into a feasible action. each of these decision points corresponds to the information that bidder will possess if he reaches a certain potential moment of decision. for example  suppose that in the first round of the  n - l -round survival auction bidder 1 bids b  and is eliminated. in this scenario  bidders 1  ... n each have a second-round decision point at which they have the information  bidder 1 bid exactly b  in the first round while all other bidders bid at least b1 in the first round . the set of feasible actions of each of these bidders at these decision points is simply the set of bids no lower than b1. the strategy space  of bidder i is the set of all of his strategies. for formal convenience we will include in a bidder's set of decision points the set of his  terminal points . each of these corresponds to information the bidder can have when the auction terminates.  no decision is made at a terminal point.  a bidder's payoff from an auction is a function both of the auction outcome and of the information available to that bidder at the end of the auction. an outcome consists of an allocation of the good and payments by the bidders. 
　to show that there exists an isomorphism between the strategy spaces of two auctions preserving payoffs  one must show that:  1  an isomorphism exists between each bidder's sets of decision points in the two auctions. the structure which must be preserved by the isomor-

phism is that of decision point precedence. one decision point precedes another iff the follower decision point can only be reached if the precedent decision point is reached first. we will say that decision points in the two auctions are  the same  if they are related by this isomorphism. note that  1  implies that there must be a bi-
jection between the sets of information that each bidder can acquire immediately after every pair of same decision points;  1  there exists an isomorphism between feasible action sets at same decision points which is consistent with the precedence structure. that is to say  there is a set of  vectors of  actions which are consistent with each follower decision point being reached after its immediate precedent. the isomorphism must induce a bijection between all such sets for all same follower-precedent pairs. we will say that actions in the two auctions are  the same  if they are related by this isomorphism; and  1  bidder payoffs are always the same at same terminal points. that is to say  if g .  h .  are the isomorphisms of feasible actions and decision points  then each bidder's payoff at a terminal point t following actions a in the first auction must be the same as his payoff at the same terminal point h t  following the same actions g a  in the second auction. 
theorem 1 the  n - 1 -round survival auction is strategically equivalent to the japanese ascending-bid auction. 
 proof  we follow the proof outline established above. 
　 1  in the survival auction  the new information that bidder i receives in between rounds k and k+1  if he survives round a;  is the identity of the loser in round k and the losing bid in that round. each of his decision points in the  k 1 l st round can thus be described by the 1k-dimensional vector of all losing bidders and losing bids in the first k rounds. in the japanese auction  the new information that bidder i receives in between the  a: - l st and kth drop-out  if he is not himself the one to be the kth drop-out  is the identity of the kth bidder to drop out and his drop-out point. his decision after the kth drop-out can thus be described by the 1kdimensional vector of the first k bidders to drop out and their drop-out points in the first k rounds.1 
　the isomorphism of decision point sets is the identity mapping. thus  for example  we will say that a bidder's decision of what to bid in the second round of the survival auction after observing that bidder 1 lost with a bid of b  in the first round is the same as his decision of how long to wait before being the next to drop out in 
   1the possibility that bidders can drop out simultaneously in the japanese auction presents a wrinkle. if we presume that bidders can react instantaneously to others' drop-outs  however  then this does not change the analysis. sometimes  based on one bidder's drop-out  another bidder wants to drop out immediately. we allow such immediate reaction  with the proviso that the bidder who dropped out first can not reverse his decision to drop out after observing the other bidder's drop out. this way  every bidder is faced with a 
   new decision  and new information  after every drop-out. the japanese auction after observing that bidder 1 is the very first to drop out at the price b1.  a decision in the japanese auction is not how long to wait until dropping out but how long to wait before being the next one to drop out. if someone else drops out first  a bidder should revise his willingness to remain in the bidding.  
　 1  in the survival auction  each bidder in the  a; 1 
l st round can make any bid higher than the minimum allowable bid in that round  which equals the losing bid in the kth round. in the japanese auction  each bidder after the kth drop-out can decide to wait until any price higher than the last drop-out before being the next to drop out. thus  the feasible action sets are identical and consistency with the decision point isomorphism is obvious. 
　 1  if play in the two auctions reaches the same terminal point  then all actions will have been same actions at same decision points. thus   a  the same bidder will win   b  this bidder will pay the same amount  and  c  the information available to all bidders at the end of the auction will be the same.  
　since strategic equivalence implies outcome equivalence  all of the allocation and revenue advantages of the japanese auction over sealed-bid auctions carry over to the  n - l -round survival auction. since the  n - 1 round survival auction predictably takes  n - 1  rounds whereas an ascending-bid auction can conceivably require hundreds or even thousands of rounds of communication  this marks a significant improvement in speed and reliability. 
1 	1 - r o u n d s u r v i v a l a u c t i o n 
can we do better than the  n - l -round survival auction  for example  can we construct a survival auction which requires o l  rounds to terminate and which is strategically equivalent to the japanese auction  unfortunately  no. in any survival auction which takes less than ri-1 rounds  the winner makes fewer than n - 1 decisions. thus  requirement  1  of strategic equivalence can not be met. nonetheless  under certain symmetry assumptions  we can prove that all of our survival auctions are  nash outcome equivalent  to the japanese. 
　two auctions are nash outcome equivalent if each auction possesses a nash equilibrium such that  when those nash equilibria are played out  the same bidder wins and pays the same price after every realization of uncertainty. nash outcome equivalence is weaker than strategic equivalence since it is model-specific. furthermore  bidders may not coordinate on nash equilibrium play  especially if there are multiple equilibria. 
　　consider the following model. each bidder i possesses one-dimensional private information  all signals {st} are drawn from a common distribution and possess a symmetric correlation structure.  the conditional distribution of all signals given is symmetric in all of the other signals and the same as the conditional distribution of all signals given  for all a: i. similarly  all conditional distributions given 
	fujishima  mcadams  and shoham 	1 

two signals  three signals  and so on are symmetric and equal.  
　each bidder  willingness to pay for the good is a function of all private information   for 
each bidder  this function is symmetric in all other bidders' information  increasing in all signals  and satisfying 

this inequality states  loosely  that  each bidder always cares about his own information more than others do.  thus  given any set of information available to both bidders  and  bidder  has a higher valuation of the good iff his signal is higher. finally  bidders have identical expected utility functions defined over the difference between valuation and payment. that is to say  there exists a function  such that bidder  utility from getting the good at price p when his valuation is vi  equals this allows bidders to be risk averse or risk loving  as  
theorem 1 in the model of this section  all of our survival auctions are nash outcome equivalent to the japanese auction. 
    proof  recall that in  our survival auctions  the minimum bid equals the lowest losing bid of the previous round and the final round always has two bidders. to conserve space  some details have been left to the reader. 
first  we construct a symmetric equilibrium of the 
japanese auction. by the principles of rational bidding 
 see the primer  and model symmetry  at every decision point each bidder chooses the price at which he wants to be the next to drop out by working off of the presumption that all remaining bidders have the exact same signal as he does. thus  in any symmetric equilibrium  bidder n must choose  as the price at which he will be the first to drop out.  the n - 1 signals to the right of the semi-colon are those of bidders 1 through n~ 1  since this is bidder valuation function.  now  if bidder 1 drops out first at all remaining bidders should infer that his signal satisfies bidder n must then wait until the price before being the next to drop out. and so on after every subsequent drop-out. 
　consider now the one of our survival auctions with r rounds and  survivors of the rth round kr-1 - 1 . again  by the principles of rational bidding and model symmetry  each bidder in round r must work off of the presumption that his signal is highest and equal to kr others in any symmetric equilibrium. to minimize notational complexity  we will continue the proof under an additional assumption of risk neutral bidders.1 
in the first round  then  bidder n wants to bid 

     1 if a bidder is not risk neutral  in round r he ought to bid so as to maximize his expected utility from paying his bid and winning the good given that his signal is the highest and equal to kr other signals. 
1 	distributed al 
if all others follow a similar strategy  where  s  high  k1 
equal  means 	and  = ... =  
for some set of other bidders  {j1 ...  jk1} . suppose that bidders lose in the first round with bids 
             given the specified first round bid strategy  all remaining bidders should infer each of their signals  

similarly  in the second round  bidder n wants to bid 

if all others do the same  and so on in all subsequent rounds. these second-round bids will always be feasible since they will never be less than the lowest bid in the first round. and bidder n knows in the second round that 	whereas the lowest losing bidder based his first round bid on less optimistic presumptions.  thus  bidders have no incentive to bid less aggressively in the first round to avoid a possibly disadvantageous position in the second round  nor similarly in later rounds  and these strategies do indeed form a nash equilibrium. 
　the winner in this equilibrium is always the same as in the equilibrium of the japanese auction  since it is the bidder with the highest signal. finally  in both equilibria the price when n wins and n - 1 is second equals the final drop-out point bid of n - 1  

since the final round of the survival auction has two bidders.  
　define the  1-round survival auction  to be the one in which only two bidders survive to the second round and in which the minimum bid is the lowest losing bid. this auction always takes two rounds to complete. 
corollary 1 the 1-round survival auction is nash outcome equivalent to the japanese auction. 
1 	extension to multiple goods 
all of our arguments in the context of single-good auctions easily extend to prove analogous claims about multiple-good auctions. in particular  consider the  kgood japanese auction  in which each bidder may receive any number of units of the good at auction. each bidder begins by choosing a number of  active bids . as the price rises  each bidder can lower his number of active bids. the auction ends when exactly k active bids remain. similarly  define ''k-good survival auctions  to be those in which each bidder can have multiple active bids and in which the last k active bids win. in particular  define the one-at-a-time /c-good survival auction to be the one which eliminates one active bid at a time.  the number of rounds that this auction takes depends on the initial number of active bids.  also  let  our /c-good survival auctions  be those in which:  1  the number of surviving active bids in each round is known in advance 

as a function of the number of initial active bids;  1  the highest bidders survive;  1  the minimum bid equals the lowest losing bid in the last round; and  1  the final round has k+1 bidders. 
theorem 1 the one-at~a-time k-good survival auction is strategically equivalent to the k-good japanese ascending-bid auction. 
　 proof  the proof is analogous to that of theorem 1  but accounting for the richer strategy spaces of bidders since each must first choose his number of active bids. 
* 
theorem 1 in the model of subsection 1  all of our k-good survival auctions are nash outcome equivalent to the k-good japanese auction. 
　 proof  the proof is analogous to that of theorem 1  also accounting for the richer strategy space.  
　it is important to note  however  that the k-good japanese auction in the k-good setting does not share all of the desirable theoretical properties of the .japanese auction in the 1-good setting. in particular  the k-good japanese auction will not always get the k goods to the bidders who value them most. which multiple-unit auctions always allocate k-goods optimally is  as far as we are aware  still an open question. 
1 	conclusion 
there is a reason why the vast majority of auctions are ascending-bid auctions; they reveal information. given rational bidding  this information revelation leads to better allocations and higher revenue  or  given irrational bidding  can at least mitigate the severity of the winner's curse. their main practical disadvantage is a long and uncertain termination time. we have proposed a new class of auctions  survival auctions  which combine the speed and predictability of sealed-bid auctions with the desirable properties of ascending-bid auctions. 
　other sorts of auctions appear to offer a similar blend. for example  in what we call  the binary price-search auction   the auctioneer queries all bidders whether they are willing to pay a given price. if only one bidder answers yes  he gets the good at that price. if zero or more than one answer yes  another query follows at a lower or higher price  in such a way to converge at logarithmic speed to a price that exactly one bidder will be willing to pay. unfortunately  this and other  accelerated auctions  are difficult to analyze with the tools of game theory. 
　in any event  one should be cautious about applying our pure analysis in real-world situations  especially in consumer-based auctions. for example  it is not realistic to expect all bidders to be present at the very beginning of an auction  and it seems likely that psychological factors may lead human bidders to behave differently in auctions which are game-theoretically equivalent. we do believe  however  that survival auctions should provide a more desirable protocol than ascending-bid auctions in resource allocation problems with computerized agents. 
1 	acknowledgments 
we are grateful to participants of the stanford coabs and stanford gsb game theory seminars for their helpful feedback  in particular craig boutilier  moises goldszmidt  leonardo rezende  michael schwarz  robert wilson  and muhamet yildiz. we especially thank jeremy bulow for his insightful comments. 
