 
nowadays  firms  formerly considering the human operator as the main error source in process control  bend their efforts towards anthropocentric approaches to  re integrate the human factor  especially the knowledge he/she has been developping  as the essential resource for a high quality decision process. 
as the expert operator remains a rare resource and in order to capitalize his/her knowledge and know-how  the development  of tools integrating this new dimension has become an important challenge. 
this paper deals with a tool for knowledge acquisition under cognitive constraints  assuming that cognitive principles could be sometimes useful to improve machine learning tools results. additionally  we have to cope with the difficulty linked to the fact that the acquired strategies have to be adapted on-line. 
after describing the underlying cognitive principles  we will introduce the decision representation space and its related notations. we will then show the difficulties linked to the search of an optimal representation of the expert strategies set and how the heuristics used by the algorithm studied avoid these np-complete problems. finally  the current results and our work perspectives are stated. 
1 	introduction 
in a context of short time  if not on-line  decision making for the control of industrial processes  we've been led to defining a new method for process control experts decision support. as the classical machine learning and total quality management tools are not fully convenient here because they lnav not fully account for flexibility and reuse  we have adopted an anthropocentric approach  putting back the expert  operator in the center of the decision process so that the algorithm can turn his/her capacities as advantage. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
　this on-going work has been initialised in the frame of the european brite-eurarn project c1maps  cognitive management of anthropocentric production systems - be 1g-1 . 
1 	cognitive model 
we distinguish 1 phases in the life cycle of a process  see figure 1 and  barthelemy et a/.  1  : 
  a learning phase: the operator comes from the  novice  state to the  expert  state. during this phase  the operator daily makes trials on the process  
  a maintenance phase: the expert operator applies his/her know-how and adapts the process control 
rules  
  a reinitialisation phase  breaking/revision phase : the structural changes are so important that a simple adaptation is not  enough anymore. a learning phase must bo initialised once more. 

figure 1: life cycle of a process 
   in the frame of anthropocentric production systems  which are forms of advanced manufacturing dependent upon a balanced integration between human skill  collaborative work organisation and adapted technologies  the human being is always inside the loop of the industrial process. consequently  we have to adapt classical machine learning techniques to give back to the expert user the possibility to intervene in the decision process. 

　the underlying cognitive models we've used in this aim suppose the operator is an expert  applying stabilised process control rules for the usual maintenance of the production process. once this restriction is cleared  we can apply the two following cognitive models: 
  bounded rationality as described by simon in  si-mon  1   
  moving basis heuristic from barthelemy and mullet   barthelemy and mullet  1  . 
1 	b o u n d e d 	r a t i o n a l i t y 
it assumes that the decision maker shows rationality  for situations in his/her usual domain of expertise  in the way that something is optimised. but this rationality is bounded by his/her cognitive abilities  of stocking and computing in short-term memory  and his/her satisfaction. 
　it also supposes he/she uses a not too large set of stable strategies involving a small number of attributes. these strategies  constructed by his/her experience  are assumed to be stored in his/her long-term memory and they may be rather complex. 
　in addition  it supposes that some combinations of attributes are used more frequently than others. 
   as defined  this bounded rationality can be seen as a constraint for the expert to search among aspects  subset of attribute values  for a subcollection that should be short but large enough  with regards to its size and/or to its quality  to achieve decision. 
1 moving b asis h e u r i s t i c 
the moving basis heuristic  mbh  involves three cognitive principles: 
  parsimony: the decision maker manipulates a short  subset of aspects due to his/her short-term memory capacity  storage capacity - there is no intermediate storage in the long-term memory - and computational abilities - strategies are computed in shortterm memory -  - see  asehenbrenner and kasubek  
1  and  johnson and payne  1  -  
  reliability/wairantahility: the chosen sub-collection of aspects has to be large enough  size and/or quality  for individual or social justification - see  adelbratt and montgomery  1    de hoog and van der wittenboer  1    montgomery  1  and  ranyard and crozier  1  -  
  decidability /flexibility: the decision maker must effect a choice by appropriate changes in the subcollection until a decision is taken  he/she has to achieve decision quicklv in almost all cases  - see  huber  1    montgomery  1    svenson  1 . consequently  his/her strategies must be stable. 
　these principles  together with bounded rationality  show that the expert operator uses  at the same time  only a small amount of information. 
　we are not working in the classical expert system frame because: 
  the operator modelling and the extraction strate-gies are following these cognitive principles. the human expert uses complex strategies on a limited knowledge amount whereas expert systems use wellknown algorithms on a huge amount of information; 
  the operator is always  in the loop   even for the strategies convergence to a pertinent set of process control rules; 
  the protocol and the algorithmic techniques are spe-cific to the incremental and iterative aspect underlying the maintenance phase of a process life cycle. 
　to represent the expert's decision space  we have chosen to use a geometrical paradigm which is now described. 
1 representation space 
experts are taking their decisions among a. set x of n parameters a'  together with their related value   . we 
call the tuple a parameters setting. each parameter has its values domain  which can correspond to nominal as well as numerical  discrete or continuous  values set. 
　on the base of this parameters set ting  an expert has to take a decision  that is to say he/she has to answer the question:  what do i have to modify on the process parameters setting to obtain a good quality for my product  which is defined by the product parameters setting    . his/her answer consists of assigning a value d to the control parameter d  called decision outcome and the couple rs -  x d  is called a control situation. 
　we work in an n-dimensional space  each point of which corresponds to a parameters setting. the control situations  i.e. parameters settings which have already been examined by the expert  are labelled with the value d of the decision outcome d. 
　　as experts1 decisions are taken on a restricted subset of the available parameters that describe the process and/or the product to be manufactured  a process control rule r will have  as premises  a conjunction of a few number p of attributes aspects   i.e. subsets of parameters values domain for example a rule 
r can be: 

this means that the attributes not appearing in these preconditions can take any value without influencing the current decision process. in an n-dimensional space  a rule r can then be seen as a cylinder w for which the dimensions are all free except those corresponding to the restricted aspects of r's preconditions. this cylinder is labelled with the value of r's decision outcome. figure 
1 shows  in the 1-dimensional space .   
the cylinder corresponding to the rule 

the dimension corresponding to x1 is free  every value of x1 in v1 is valid. 
le saux  lenca  picouet  and barthelemy 	1 


figure 1: representation of a cylinder 
　the cylinder base d w  is the hypercube defined by the rule r preconditions: 

it has a dimension d w  corresponding to the number of preconditions d w  - . a set of cylinders is called a paving p. 
1 comaps algorithm 
1 three distinct phases 
the comaps tool has been divided into 1 distinct parts which correspond more or less to the 1 phases of the process life cycle: 
  the learning phase allows the extraction of an initial cylinders set p1 from a learning data set - a set of control situations that have already been examined by the expert -   called history and denoted h  using more standard but adapted machine learning - and 
especially decision tree* learning - techniques; 
  the maintenance phase takes the result 'p1 of the learning phase as well as // as inputs and it consists of an on-line update of the paving p according to new incoming control situations. this phase is the one we will further develop in this paper; 
  a conflict solving phase is called when no acceptable - for the expert or for the maintenance phase algorithm - modification is found to correctly update the current paving. this kind of conflict mostly appears when important technological changes are1 observed on the process. for more details concerning this phase  see  saunier  1 . 
　whereas the learning phase consists of an off-line process  the maintenance phase has to work at least at the pace the expert does: the algorithm is a kind of machine learning algorithm under cognitive constraints. but maintaining a paving consistent with the history to which one adds new control situations leads to face several np-complete problems. 
1 n p - c o r n p l e t e p r o b l e m s e n c o u n t e r e d 
p 1 : search for m a x i m a l cylinders 
let v1  ...  vn n finite sets and a finite set  
1 	cognitive modeling 
　is there a cylinder w  corresponding to the decision outcome j for //  i.e. w h-compatible with j     of dimension d  so that 
　searching for such a cylinder w  i.e. trying to find a cylinder covering as much control situations as possible  becomes np-complete since 
p 1 covering by a m i n i m a l number of cylinders having at most d dimensions 
let v1  ...  vn n finite sets and v = v  x ... x vn  
	  s an integer  	and 
	and 	with y = j}. 
　　does it exist a set of s cylinders w   ...  w1 so that w i is h-compatible with j  
w 	  
　the covering problem by a minimal number of cylinders which dimension does not exceed a given integer d is np-complete since d  1. 
p 1 . consistency checking p r o b l e m 
let d an integer  {w1  . ..  wm  a set of cylinders dif-
do we have 
　if we have cylinders corresponding to different decision outcome values  we will have to verify the consistency of the paving  checking their intersection is empty and this becomes a np-complete problem since d  1. 
　most of the work to tune the maintenance phase consists then in finding heuristics to bypass these npcomplete problems. 
1 	m a i n n o t i o n s 
covering notion because: 
  not every point of the space can be a real parameters setting  some values combinations being impossible or known as giving a far too bad result according to the product quality  
  we are searching for maximal cylinders but their base is bounded according to the extreme parameters values of the control situations in / /   
the cylinders space paving is not complete and thus  a control situation - i.e. a labelled point - can have several status: 
  not covered: the parameters setting doesn't fit with any of the cylinders bases. in any other case  the control situation is covered  
  bad covered: the control situation is covered but the labelling of the covering cylinder s  is not the same as its own decision outcome value  
  well covered: the control situation is covered and the covering cylinder s  has  have  the same decision outcome value. 

priority between cylinders 
as p1 is np-complete  we have decided not to guarantee a paving without any intersection. to cope with potential intersection  we have introduced a notion of priority between cylinders. we say that a cylinder w  has the priority over a cylinder w1  noted w1  if 

where a and r are thresholds either fixed with the tool configuration or adapted dynamically according to the size of h and to the proportion of each label in if. 
　two cylinders w  and w1 of different labels can thus intersect without having neither  nor and this can happen if: 
  their intersection is empty  i.e. no control situation has already been seen in this area of the space*  
  there are not enough control situations in the inter-section according to the threshold a  
  none of the two labels in competition is related to 
a. number of control situations significantly higher according to the threshold t. 
evaluation of a cylinder accuracy 
as we cannot guarantee to generate a paving with cylinders only covering control situations labelled in the same way and without any intersection of differently labelled cylinders  we need to be able to measure the  quality  of the paving and thus the  quality  of a cylinder with regards to h. 
　the quality of a cylinder  which we call cf w   is estimated by the ratio between the number of control situations it covers well and the number of control situations it covers: 

　of course  a cylinder w is too weak if cf w  is not at least equal to the proportion of control situations having d cs  = label  w . in the same way as for the priority computation  we have defined a threshold ft under which a new cylinder to be integrated to the paving can not be accepted. 
　furthermore  the global quality of the paving is defined as the average of the n constituting cylinders qualities: 

　as the aim of maintenance phase is to update the current paving  this quality evaluation is also used to determine if a possible modification has to be applied or not. the criterion is then that the quality of the rule after modification is at least as good as the old rule one. 
  w a i t and see  policy 
as the expert's rules are supposed to be stabilised  the algorithm is designed in a way that no action on the current paving is immediately tried. it waits until a sufficient number of control situations have confirmed something has to be modified. the arrival of an inconsistent  i.e. bad or not covered  control situation implies a modification only if there are enough control situations with the same decision outcome value in its neighbourhood. this neighbourhood can be defined in several ways according to the inconsistent type. for example  for a not covered control situation 
cs =  d   we define it is an hypercube which aspects are   for numerical attributes and  xi} for nominal attributes. if the control situation examined appears at the intersection of at least two rules  this neighbourhood is the intersection itself. 
	1 	the maintenance phase 
we remind that its aim is to update continuously the cylinders paving  starting with an initial paving po which is consistent with the history h of the process and taking into account  as they arrive  new control situations the expert user has just added  with regards to the following constraints  highly linked to the cognitive principles which have to be followed: 
  remaining consistent with h at each step  i.e. modifying the cylinders so that h is still correctly described by the updated rules set underlying the cylinders paving  
  keeping a small number of dimensions  at most 1 to be compatible with the expert's short-term memory abilities  in the cylinders base - a cylinder can be based on more than 1 dimensions but it should not be more than a temporary state  corresponding for example to a less common situation for the expert  during which he has to adapt a bit further his/her own rules -  
  keeping a small number of cylinders in the paving. 
	1 	c y l i n d e r s m o d i f i c a t i o n f u n c t i o n a l i t i e s 
different modification functions have been implemented that can be applied to one or several cylinders of the current paving  according to the status of the control situation to be integrated to if: 
1. generalisation of an existing cylinder by suppressing one constrained dimension: 

1. generalisation of an existing cylinder by extending the possible values over one dimension. for one i so 

1.creation a cylinder by dividing a cylinder into two: 

le saux  lenca  picouet  and barthelemy 	1 

1. creation a new cylinder  according to the current control situation cs ~  x d   by creating aspects for all the attributes1 and taking the conjunction of at most four of them to define the new cylinder base  which will have d as a label. 
1. restriction of a cylinder that is unnecessarily large by adding some constraints on one dimension: 

1. restriction of a cylinder by restricting the aspect extension on one of its dimension. for one i so that 

1. modification of the priority between the cylinders covering the current control situation by recomputing it. 
1 	functionalities use 
of course  these modifications are not used in any case. 
　if the new control situation to be treated is already well covered  the only thing we might try is the first function: as the cylinder is confirmed by the arrival of a well classified example  we can try to see if all its dimensions are needed or if it can be extended without loosing its quality  using function  i. . 
　for a control situation currently not covered  the algorithm will first try to integrate it to an existing cylinder of the same label using function  1.  and  if it doesn't work  to create a new cylinder to cover it using function 
 1. . 
　for a bad covered control situation cs  and according to the inconsistency type with regards to the cylinder s  involved - i.e. considering the  environment : number of cylinders covering cs  number of different labels  priority value s   ...- several of these seven modifications can be tried to improve the situation. but  as the expert rules are supposed to be stabilised  the order in which these functions are applied is strongly dependent on how deep the resulting modification is for the paving. 
　indeed  according to the cognitive model  cylinders must stay large - i.e. with not too constrained bases  which corresponds to short rule premises conjunction and not too numerous. 
　one of the criteria involved while sorting the functions is that they imply local or more global modifications: function  1.  - priority modification - is clearly the one that leads to the most  local modification whereas function  1.  - cylinder creation - leads to far deeper changes so it is the last one tested. 
　function  1.  is not sorted with the other ones: it  is a bit different  because it is applied only in case the current control situation is well covered by a too restricted  and thus not satisfying  cylinder - i.e. corresponding to a rule for which there are more than four aspects in the premise -. 
1
　　we don't describe hero the way these aspects are computed. 
1 	cognitive modeling 
　as the modifications implied by function  1.  - extension of an aspect values - remain local  it is the second the algorithm tests. then  the third alternative is function  1.  - cylinder division -: of course it creates a new cylinder but in an area that is already covered by a more general cylinder. 
　finally  functions  1.  and  1.  are tried  in this order  because they both imply smaller cylinders - i.e. more constrained premises for the rules -  which contradicts one of the cognitive principles. 
1 comparison with previous works in this domain 
this kind of approach  using bounded rationality and 
mbh principles as underlying cognitive principles to an anthropocentric algorithm  has already been led and validated in  barthelemy et a/.  1  and  laurent et a/.  1   the improvements we've brought for com aps are of three kinds: 
  we don't assume anymore any hypothesis on the or-der of the attributes modalities: the previous works were turning this order  which corresponds to the decision maker's attractiveness scales  to advantage because the representation space was derived from galois' lattices  but these scales are difficult to obtain without using verbalisation techniques and they are different from an expert to another; 
  the formerly defined methods were rapidly limited by the number of attributes taken into account for the computation. as for real industrial processes we often have to deal with more than 1 parameters  it was a real need to find a way to push back this limit  especially because we can not afford long computation time for an on-line control; 
  the expert is observed in his/her real decision mak-ing process: after the initial set of rules has been extracted off-line  every new control situation is given a decision outcome value on-line by the expert and is immediately treated by the algorithm. the former developments were using dynamically computed questionnaires to ask the expert its decision in a given situation but  this was not his/her normal task  and if something was changing in his/her decision rules  it could be modified in the computed rules only by starting again to answer a new set of questions. 
1 	current results and work perspectives 
in the frame of this european project  we have the possibility to test our program on three real industrial processes  in the fields of copper foil production  printed circuit boards manufacturing and brake pads production. 
1 	current results 
real data being confidential  we've been testing the algorithm through a mock up with coded data. the first tests 

have been led without the expert  dividing the coded data set into a training set for the learning phase and an incoming situations set for the maintenance phase. 
　with one of the pilot sites data  we had the possibility to test the behaviour of the maintenance phase facing a  known evolution of the process control. starting from a set of 1 institutional rules and an history of 1 cs  the rules set has been updating according to 1 new e s. 
　the results according to the quality of the rules are summarized in figure 1  the last column corresponding to the type of modification applied according to the list presented in 1. all the results have been shown to the expert and they were validated. 

figure 1: quality of the rules 
1 	work perspectives 
we still have to improve the internal model of priority between cylinders: at this time  it is represented by a boolean matrix where  and is 1 otherwise. this doesn't give any information concerning the priority status for an intersection of more than two cylinders and it's not possible to deduce it looking at the priority between every pair of cylinders involved. on the opposite  this kind of deduction could lead to a nonsense: if we have  for example  three cylinders 
and  w  d   which of them should have the priority   
　in addition  we wait for a prototype  now under development  to be installed  benchmarking in april this year  to be able to make some more tests  but this time in a real decision context and not only with a posteriori validation. 
　some comparisons between classical machine learning tools  and especially decision tree learning tools like 1  quinlan  1  and c1  quinlan  1  are also under way. 
