 
in this paper  we present a scheme of postulates for revising epistemic states by conditional beliefs. these postulates are supported mainly by following the specific  non-classical nature of conditionals  and the aim of preserving conditional beliefs is achieved by studying specific interactions between conditionals  represented properly by two relations. because one of the postulates claims propositional belief revision to be a special case of conditional belief revision  our framework also covers the work of darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1   and we show that all postulates presented there may be derived from our postulates. we state representation theorems for the principal postulates  and finally  we present a conditional belief operator obeying all of the postulates by using ordinal conditional functions as representations of epistemic states. 
1 	introduction 
 belief revision deals with the dynamics of belief how should currently held beliefs be modified in the light of new information  results in this area are mainly influenced by the so-called agm theory  named after aichourron  gardenfors and makinson who set up a framework of postulates for a reasonable change of beliefs  cf.  alchourron et a/.  1    gardenfors  1  . usually  the belief sets in agm theory are assumed to be deductively closed sets of propositional formulas  or to be represented by one single propositional formula  respectively  and the revising beliefs are taken to be propositional formulas. so the agm postulates constrain revisions of the form  the revision operator connecting two propositional formulas  and a  where represents the initial state of belief and a stands for the new information. a representation theorem  cf.  katsuno and mendelzon  1   establishes a relationship between agm revision operators and total pre-orders  on the set of possible worlds  proving the revised 
belief set  to be satisfied precisely by all minimal a- worlds. 
1 	automated reasoning 
　though belief sets representing what is known for certain are of specific interest they are only poor reflections of the complex attitudes an individual may hold. the limitation to propositional beliefs severely restricts the frame of agm theory  in particular  when iterated revision has to be performed. so belief revision should not only be concerned with the revision of propositional beliefs but also with the modification of revision strategies when new information arrives  cf.  darwiche and pearl  1    boutilier  1    boutil ier and goldszmidt  1  . these revision strategies may be taken as conditional beliefs  therefore revision should be concerned with changes in conditional beliefs and  the other way around  with the preservation of conditional beliefs. 
   darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  explicitly took conditional beliefs into account by considering epistemic states instead of belief sets  and they advanced four postulates in addition to the agm axioms to model what may be called conditional preservation under revision by propositional beliefs. 
　in the present paper  we broaden the framework for revising epistemic states presented in  darwiche and pearl  1  so as to include also the revision by conditional beliefs. thus belief revision is considered here in quite a general framework  exceeding the agm-theory in two respects: 
  we revise epistemic states; this makes it necessary to allow for the changes in conditional beliefs caused by new information. 
  the new belief a may be of a conditional nature  thus reflecting a changed or newly acquired revision policy that has to be incorporated adequately. 
we present a scheme of eight postulates appropriate to guide the revision of epistemic states by conditional beliefs. these postulates are supported mainly by following the specific  non-classical nature of conditionals  and the aim of preserving conditional beliefs is achieved by studying specific interactions between conditionals  represented properly by two relations. because one of the postulates claims propositional belief revision to be a special case of conditional belief revision  our framework also covers the topic of darwiche and pearl's work  darwiche and pearl  1   and we show that all four postu-

lates presented there may be derived from our postulates. we state representation theorems for the principal postulates  and finally  we present a conditional belief operator obeying all of the postulates by using ordinal conditional functions as representations of episternic states. 
　the organization of this paper is as follows: in section 1  we briefly summarize the results of darwiche and pearl concerning the revision of episternic states and lay down some foundations for this paper. in section 1  we describe conditionals as objects of a three-valued nature and introduce the relations  and between conditionals which play an important part for studying interactions between conditionals. section 1 presents and explains the eight postulates for conditional revision and shows correspondences to the axioms of  darwiche and pearl  1 . section 1 contains representation theorems and some consequences of the postulates. in section 1  we introduce a conditional revision operator for ordinal conditional functions that realizes the ideas of this paper  and section 1 concludes this paper with a short summary and an outlook. 
1 	revising episternic states 
an episternic state  represents the cognitive state of some individual at a given time. in particular  beside the set of beliefs bel  the individual accepts for certain   contains the revision policies the individual entertains at that time. these revision policies reflect the beliefs  b  the individual is inclined to hold if new information  .1  becomes obvious  and are adequately represented by conditionals  b   a   i.e. expressions of the form  if a then /    conjoining two propositional formulas a and b. so the conditional  b   a  is accepted in the episternic state iff revising  by a yields belief in b. this defines a fundamental relationship between conditionals and the process of revision  known as the ramsey test  cf. e.g.  boutilier and goldszmidt  1    gardenfors  1  : 
where is a revision operator  taking an episternic state and some new belief a as inputs and yielding a revised 
episternic state a as output. 
　　each episternic state  is associated with its belief set bel which is supposed to be a deductively closed set of formulas of a propositional language  the realso yields a revised belief set bel and of course  this revision should obey the standards of the agm theory. but the revision of episternic states cannot be reduced to propositional revision because two different episternic states may have equivalent belief sets bel . thus an episternic state is not described uniquely by its belief set  and revising  by new information a may result 
in different revised belief sets bel 
　example. two physicians have to make a diagnosis when confronted with a patient showing certain symptoms. they both agree that disease a is by far the most adequate diagnosis  so they both hold belief in a. moreover  as the physicians know  diseases b and c might also cause the symptoms  but here the experts disagree: one physician regards b to be a possible diagnosis  too  but excludes c  whereas the other physician is inclined to take c into consideration  but not b. 
　suppose now that a specific blood test definitely proves that the patient is not suffering from disease a. so both experts have to change their beliefs  the first physician now takes b to be the correct diagnosis  the second one takes c for granted. though initially the physicians' opinions may be described by the same belief set  they end up with different belief sets after revision. 
　it is important to note that gardenfors' famous triviality result  gardenfors  1  complaining the incompatibility of the ramsey test with some of the agmpostulates does not hold if conditional beliefs are considered essentially different from propositional beliefs  as is emphasized here and elsewhere  cf. e.g.  darwiche and 
pearl  1  . therefore obeying the difference between  makes the ramsey 
test compatible with the agm-theory for propositional belief revision: whereas  only means that both episternic states have equivalent belief sets   requires the two episternic states to be identical  i.e. to incorporate in particular the same propositional beliefs as well as the same conditional beliefs. 
　darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  consider the revision of episternic states with propositional beliefs  mainly concerned with handling iterated revisions. they generalize the agm-postulates for belief revision to the framework of revising episternic states  cf.  darwiche and pearl  1  : 
suppose 	to 	be 
considered superficially  these postulates are exact reformulations of the agm postulates  as stated in  katsuno and mendelzon  1   with belief sets replaced throughout by belief sets of episternic states. so the postulates above ensure that the revision of episternic states is in line with the agm theory as long as the revision of the corresponding belief sets is considered. the most important new aspect by contrast with propositional belief revision is given by postulate  r*1 : only identical episternic states are supposed to yield equivalent revised 
	kern-isberner 	1 

belief sets. this is a clear but adequate weakening of the corresponding agm-postulate 

which amounts to reducing the revision of epistemic states to propositional belief revision. as we explained above  such a reduction is inappropriate. 
   darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  proved a representation theorem for their postulates which parallels the corresponding theorem in agm theory  cf.  katsuno and mendelzon  1    using the notion of faithful assignments: 
definition 1   darwiche and pearl  1   let w be the set of all worlds  interpretations  of the propositional language  and consider epistemic states  the belief sets of which belong to 
   a faithful assignment is a function that maps each such epistemic state  to a total pre-order  on the worlds w satisfying the following conditions: 

theorem 1   darwiche and pearl  1   a revision operator   satisfies postulates  precisely when there exists a faithful assignment that maps each epistemic state to a total pre-order such that 
i.e. the worlds satisfying bel are precisely those worlds satisfying a that are minimal with respect to 
　this theorem shows an important connection between the ordering  associated with an epistemic state and the process of revising  by propositional beliefs. therefore  at least in the context of revision  epistemic states are properly represented as pairs i with a total pre-order  satisfying conditions  1  1  of definition 1 and the so-called smoothness condition rnin  for any satisfiable a   cf. 
e.g.  boutilier and goldszmidt  1    and such that 
mod  = min . 	using the relationship  rt  
between revision and conditionals  theorem 1 immediately yields 
l e m m a 1 a conditional  b   a  is accepted in an epistemic minimal a-worlds satisfy b  
i.e. 	mod b . 
encodes the conditional beliefs 
held in 
for two propositional formulas a  b  we define 
b iff for all  min 	we have 
1 	automated reasoning 
i.e. iff the minimal  -worlds are at least as 
plausible as the minimal b-worlds. to simplify notations  we will replace a conjunction by juxtaposition and indicate the negation of a proposition by barring  i.e. 
 using this  the lemma above 
may be reformulated as 
l e m m a 1 a conditional  b   a  is accepted in an epistemic state 
boutilier  cf. e.g.  boutilier  1   also took conditional beliefs into account. he presented in  boutilier  1  his natural revision that preserves as many conditional beliefs as possible  in accordance with the agm postulates  and he generalized this approach to deal with the revision by conditional beliefs  boutilier and goldszmidt  1 . as darwiche and pearl emphasized  however  boutilier's natural revision seems to be too restrictive in that it preserves conditional beliefs at the cost of compromising propositional beliefs  cf.  darwiche and pearl  1  . thus the question which conditional beliefs should be kept under revision turns out to be a crucial problem when revising epistemic states. in the framework of iterated revision  darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  proposed four postulates concerning the preservation of conditional beliefs under propositional revision: 

for discussion of these postulates  cf. the original paper  darwiche and pearl  1 . 
　in this paper  we present postulates for the revision of epistemic states by conditional beliefs which generalize the postulates of darwiche and pearl and support them with new conditional arguments. the rationale behind these postulates is not to minimize conditional change  as in boutilier's work  but to preserve the conditional structure of the knowledge  as far as possible  which is made obvious by studying interactions between conditionals. 
1 	conditionals 
conditionals may be given a lot of different interpretations  e.g. as counterfactuals  as indicative  subjunctive or normative conditionals etc.  cf. e.g.  nute  1    boutilier  1  . in the context of revision  a subjunctive meaning fits particularly well  in accordance with the ramsey test  rt : // a were true  b would hold  implicitly referring to a revision of the actual epistemic state by a. 
　independently of its given meaning  a conditional  b | a  is an object of a three-valued nature  partitioning the set of worlds w in three parts: those worlds satisfying a a b and thus confirming the conditional  those worlds satisfying a ~b  thus contradicting the 

conditional  and those worlds not fulfilling the premise a and so which the conditional may not be applied to at all. therefore calabrese represents a conditional as a generalized indicator function  cf.  calabrese  1   

where u means undefined. two conditionals are considered to be equivalent iff they are identical as indicator functions  i.e.  c and 
ab = cd  cf.  calabrese - 1  . 	usually  a proposition al fact a is identified with the conditional  where 	is tautological. 
for a conditional  b   a   we define the affirmative set and the contradictory set ~ of worlds 
as 
conditionals 	are equiv-
alent iff their corresponding affirmative and contradictory sets are equal  i.e. iff 
 and 
　　it is difficult to capture interactions between conditionals. in  calabrese  1   logical connectives and implications between conditionals are defined and investigated. here we will pursue a different idea of interaction. having the effects of conditionals on worlds in mind  we define two relations e and jl between conditionals by 
and 
or 
thus tional on worlds is in line with the latter one  but 
applies to fewer worlds. thus  may be called a subconditwnal 	of 	a  in this case. 	in contrast to this  the second relation 	symbolizes a kind of independency between conditionals. we have if mod c   i.e. the range of application of the conditional 	is completely contained in one of the sets 	or mod 	so for all worlds which 	may be applied to  same effect and yields no further partitioning. however  that 	is not a symmetric independence relation; 	rather expresses that  is not affected by 
   both relations may be expressed using the standard between propositional formulas: 

1 	revision by conditionals 
revising an epistemic state  by a conditional  b   a  becomes necessary if a new conditional belief resp. a new revision policy should be included in  yielding a changed epistemic state  b   a  such that 
we will use the same oper-
ator   for propositional as well as for conditional revision  thus expressing that conditional revision should extend propositional revision in accordance with the ramsey test  rt . 
　boutilier and goldszmidt  boutilier and goldszmidt  1  presented a generalized version of the natural revision operator of boutilier to perform such an adaptation to conditional beliefs; their method minimizes changes in conditional beliefs in accordance with the agm theory. 
　below  we propose several postulates a revision of an epistemic state by a conditional should satisfy. the key idea is to follow the conditionals in  as long as there is no conflict between them and the new conditional belief  and we will use and  to relate conditionals appropriately. 
postulates for conditional revision: 
postulates  cro  and  cr1  are self-evident.  cr1  postulates that  should be left unchanged precisely if it already entails the conditional.  cr1  says that the induced propositional revision operator should be in accordance with the agm postulates.  cr1  requires the result of the revision process to be independent of the syntactical representation of conditionals. 
　the next three postulates aim at preserving the conditional structure of knowledge: 
	kern-isberner 	1 

    cr1  claims that revising by a conditional should preserve all conditionals that are independent of that conditional  in the sense given by the relation  the rationale behind this postulate is the following: the validity of a conditional  b   a  in an epistemic state  depends on the relation between  some  worlds in 
mod ab  and  some  worlds in mod  cf. lemmata 1  1 . so incorporating  b | a  to may require a shift between mod ab  on one side and mod on the other side  but should leave intact any relations between worlds within mod ab   mod    or mod . these relations may be captured by conditionals not affected by  b   a y i.e. by conditionals 
    cr1  states that conditional revision should bring about no change for conditionals that are already in line with the revising conditional  and  cr1  guarantees that no conditional change contrary to the revising conditional is caused by conditional revision. 
　an idea of conditional preservation is also inherent to the postulates  c1 - c1  of darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  which we will show to be generalized by our postulates. 
theorem 1 suppose   is a conditional revision operator obeying the postulates  cr1 - cr1 . then for the induced prepositional revision operator  postulates  cl  c1  are satisfied  too. 

this theorem provides further justifications for the postulates of darwiche and pearl from within the framework of conditionals. 
1 	representation theorems 
postulates  cr1 - cr1  claim specific connections to and the revised  b   a   thus relating 
. we will elaborate this relationship in 
order to characterize those postulates by properties of the pre-orders associated with and  b   a . 
   postulate  cr1  proves to be of particular importance because it guarantees the ordering within mod  a b   mod  respectively  to be preserved: 
theorem 1 the conditional revision operator   satisfies  cr1  iff for each epistemic state  and for each conditional  b   a  it holds that: 
 i  
for all 	worlds 	mod respectively . 
as an immediate consequence   1  yields 
1 	automated reasoning 

　together with the ramsey test  rt    cr1  yields equalities of belief sets as stated in the following proposition: 
proposition 1 // the conditional revision operator   satisfies postulate  cr1   then 

for the representation theorems of postulates  c1  and  c1   we need postulate  cr1   respectively equation  1  and its consequence  lemma 1  to ensure that the property of being a minimal world in the affirmative or in the contradictory set associated with some conditionals is not touched under revision. 

1 	ordinal conditional functions 
ordinal conditional functions  rankings   as introduced by spohn  spohn  1   are functions from worlds to ordinals  i.e. to non-negative integers  such that some worlds are mapped to the minimal element 1. they are considered adequate representations of epistemic states  cf. e.g.  spohn  1    darwiche and pearl  1    inducing a total pre-order on the set w of worlds by setting  so the smaller 
is  the more plausible appears the world  and what is believed  for certain  in the epistemic state repreis described precisely by the set 
denote the revision of the ranking 
the corresponding epistemic state  respectively  by the proposition  for examples of such revision operators  cf.  spohn  1    darwiche and pearl  1  . for a conditional that is iff 

 for the connections between ordinal conditional functions and qualitative probabilistic reasoning  cf. e.g.  spohn  1    darwiche and pearl  1    goldszmidt and pearl  1  . 
　we are now going to present a conditional revision operator for ordinal conditional functions that satisfy all of the postulates  cr1 - cr1  and thus realizes the idea of conditional revision developed in this paper: 
for an ordinal conditional function k and a conditional 

　the check of the postulates is straightforward  due to the representation theorems 1 and 1. so we have 
proposition 1 the conditional revision operator defined by  1  satisfies all of the postulates  cro  -  cr1 . 
1 	concluding remarks 
we presented a scheme of postulates  cro - crt  a revision of an epistemic state by a conditional should satisfy  with propositional revision and conditionals being connected via the ramsey test  rt . these postulates are supported by arguments using the conditional structure of knowledge which can be made obvious by considering the relations  and between conditionals. we showed that our axioms cover the postulates of darwiche and pearl in  darwiche and pearl  1  and hence are of relevance for iterated belief revision  too. for the most crucial postulates  cr1 - cr1   we formulated representation theorems  and we proved that our postulates are satisfiable by presenting a suitable conditional revision operator for ordinal conditional functions. 
　in addition to the postulates  cr1 - cr1   another postulate may be worthwhile discussion: 

 cr1  clearly exceeds the paradigm of conditional preservation  in favor of imposing conditional structure as long as this does not contradict stated knowledge. the revision operator introduced in  1  satisfies  cr1   too. 
　the notion of conditional preservation is also mentioned in the area of quantified uncertain reasoning in  kern-isberner  1   within the framework of probabilistic reasoning at optimum entropy. here we introduced so-called c-adaptatwns which adjust a prior probability distribution p to new quantified conditional information in a manner that preserves the conditional structure inherent to p  as far as possible . though the axiomatization of conditional preservation given in  kern-lsberner  1  is quite complex  it is ea.sy to prove that the c-adaptations satisfy a probabilistic version of postulate  cr1 : 

