 
we present a general method for proving tractability of reasoning over disjunctions of 
jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint relations. examples of these kinds of relations are allen's temporal interval relations and their spatial counterpart  the r.cc1 relations by randell  cui  and colin. applying this method does not require detailed knowledge about the considered relations; instead  it is rather sufficient to have a subset of the considered set of relations for which path-consistency is known to decide consistency. using this method  we give a complete classification of tractability of reasoning over rcc1 by identifying two large new maximal tractable subsets and show that these two subsets together with 'h1  the already known maximal tractable subset  are the only such sets for rcc1 that contain all base relations. we also apply our method to allen's interval algebra and derive the known maximal tractable subset. 
1 	introduction 
in qualitative spatial and temporal reasoning  knowledge is often represented by specifying the relationships between spatial or temporal entities. of particular interest are disjunctions over a set of jointly exhaustive and pairwise disjoint  jepd  relations. jepd relations are also called base relations. since any two entities are related by exactly one of the base relations  they can be used to represent definite information with respect to the given level of granularity. indefinite information can be specified by disjunctions of possible base relations. 
　an important reasoning problem is deciding consistency of a set of constraints using these relations  which is in many cases np-hard. sometimes deciding consistency is tractable if only a subset of all possible disjunctions is used. if this subset contains all base relations  then instances of the np-hard consistency problem can be solved by backtracking over tractable subinstances  ladkin and reinefcld  1; nebel  1 . 
1 	constraint satisfaction larger tractable subsets often lead to more efficient solutions  cf.  renz and nebel  1  . the goal is to identify the boundary between tractable and np-hard subsets  i.e.  all maximal tractable subsets containing all base relations. 
　two examples of these1 types of relations are allen's interval algebra  allen  1  mainly used for temporal reasoning and their spatial counterpart  randell  cui  and cohn's  region connection calculus rcc-1. in the former case  the only maximal tractable subset containing all base relations has been identified  nebel and burckert  1   in the latter case  only one maximal tractable subset has been identified so far  renz and nebel  1   it was previously unknown whether there are others containing all base relations. for both subsets path-consistency is sufficient for deciding consistency. tractability and sufficiency of path-consistency have been proven by reducing the consistency problem to a tractable propositional satisfiability problem which requires very detailed knowledge about the considered set of relations and complicated proofs. 
　we present a new method for proving tractability and showing sufficiency of path-consistency for this kind of problem which does not require detailed knowledge about the considered set of relations. applying this method  we identify two large new maximal tractable subsets of rcc-1 and show that these subsets together with the already known maximal tractable subset are the only such sets for rcc-1 that contain all base relations. we consider only sets containing all base relations  since only these sets enable efficient backtracking algorithms. 
　the paper is structured as follows. in section 1 we introduce rcc-1. in section 1 we present the new method for proving tractability. in section 1 we identify two large subsets of rcc-1 which are candidates for maximal tractable subsets  and apply our new method in section 1 to show that both sets are tractable. in section 1 the new method is used for finding a consistent scenario. in section 1 we apply the method to allen's interval algebra after which we discuss and summarize our results. some of our proofs are computer assisted. the programs are available at http://www. informatik.uni-freiburg.de/~sppraum. 

figure 1: examples for the eight base relations of  1 the region connection calculus rcc1 
the region connection calculus rcc-1  randell et al.  
1  is a language for qualitative spatial representation and reasoning where spatial regions are regular subsets of a topological space. regions themselves do not have to be internally connected  i.e.  a region may consist  of different disconnected pieces. 
　rcc-1 contains eight jepd base relations and all 1 possible disjunctions thereof. the base relations are denoted by  
and with the meaning of d is connected  externally connected  partial overlap  tangential proper part  non-tangential proper part  and their converses. two-dimensional examples of the base relations are shown in figure 1. in the following we write sets of base relations to denote disjunctions of base relations. the disjunction of all base relations is called the universal relation . the subset of rcc-1 consisting of the eight base relations is denoted by  
　　an important reasoning problem in this framework  denoted by rsat  is deciding consistency of a set  of constraints of the form  where r is an rcc-1 relation and  are spatial variables. the domain of spatial variables is the set of all spatial regions of the considered topological space.  is consistent if it has a solution  which is an assignment of spatial regions to the spatial variables of  in a way that all constraints are satisfied. when only relations of a specific subset are used in  the corresponding reasoning problem is denoted by rsat s . rsat is np-complete in general. consistency of can be approximated by using an time path-consistency algorithm  which makes pathconsistent by eliminating all the impossible1 labels  base relations  in every subset of constraints involving three variables  mackworth  1 . if the empty relation occurs during this process  then  is inconsistent  otherwise the resulting set is path-consistent. 
　renz and nebel  identified a tractable subset of rcc-1  denoted by  containing all base relations which is maximal with respect to traetability  i.e.  if any other rcc-1 relation is added to  the consistency problem becomes np-complete. they further showed that enforcing path-consistency is sufficient for deciding  contains 1 relations  i.e.  about g1% of all rcc-1 relations. 
1 a new method for proving traetability of sets of relations 
in this section we develop a new method for proving traetability of reasoning over disjunctions of a set of binary relations over a domain  let be a finite set of  binary relations. we assume in the following that there is a relation such that . is satisfied for all id is called identity relation. the consistency problem cspsat 1  for sets  over a domain  is defined as follows  renz and nebel  1 : 
instance: a set v of variables over a domain and a 
finite set of binary constraints  where  
and  
question: is there an instantiation of all variables in such that all constraints are satisfied  
denotes the closure of s under composition intersection  and converse can be polynomially reduced to if the universal relation is contained in  renz and nebel  1 . therefore  we consider in the following only sets with  
　　before we present our new method for showing that is tractable for a set we define some terminology. a refinement of a constraint  is a constraint such that for instance  the constraint is a refinement of the constraint 
a refinement of a set of con-
straints is a set of constraints that contains a refinement of every constraint of everv solution of is also a solution of a consistent scenario of   is a refinement of such that  is consistent and contains only constraints over relations of we assume that a set of constraints  contains ordered variables 
 the following definition will be central for our new method. 
definition 1  reduction by refinement  
let  can be reduced bv refinement to  if the following two conditions are satisfied: 
1. for every relation s  s there is a relation with  
1. every path-consistent set of constraints over s can be refined to a set by replacing 
	with 	for 	such that enforcing 
path-consistency to 	does not result in an inconsistency. 
lemma 1 if path-consistency decides for a set  and s can be reduced by refinement to t  then path-consistency decides csprsat s . 
proof. let 	be a path-consistent set of constraints over 
 since 	can be reduced bv refinement to  there is 
!
note that we only refine constraints  
this is no restriction  as by enforcing path-consistency the converse constraint  will also he refined. rather it offers the possibility of refining  e.g.  converse relations to other than converse sub-relations  i.e.  if  for instance  r is refined to r  we can refine  to a relation other than r 
	renz 	1 

by definition a set  of constraints over  which is a refinement of  such that enforcing path-consistency to  does not result in an inconsistency. path-consistency 
decides  s o i s consistent  and  hence   is also consistent.  
since path-consistency can be enforced in cubic time  it is sufficient for proving tractability of cspsat 1  to show that s can be reduced by refinement to a set for which path-consistency decides cspsat note that for refining a constraint to a constraint  it is not required that is also contained in 1. thus  with respect to common relations  the two sets 1 and  are independent of each other. 
　　we will now develop a method for showing that a set of relations can be reduced by refinement to another set in order to manage the different refinements  we introduce a refinement matrix that contains for every relation s s all specified refinements. 
definition 1  refinement matrix  a refinement 
matrix boolean entries such that for 	true only if r  1. 
for example  if the relation {dc  ec po tpp} is allowed to be refined only to the relations {dc tpp} and {dc}  then m {dc  ec  po tpp}  /   is true only for r = {dc tpp} and for r = {dc} and false for all other relations  m is called the basic refinement matrix if m s  r  = true if and only if s = r. 
we propose the algorithm check-refinements  see 
figure 1  which takes as input a set of relations s and a refinement matrix m of 1. this algorithm computes all possible path-consistent triples of relations of 1  step 1  and enforces path-consistency  using a standard procedure path-consistency  to every refinement for which  = true for all  steps 1 . if one of 
these refinements results in the empty relation  the algorithm returns f a i l  step 1 . otherwise  the resultare added to m by setting  step 1 . 
this is repeated until m has reached a fixed point  step 1   i.e.  enforcing path-consistency cm any possible refinement does not result in new relations anymore. if no inconsistency is detected in this process  the algorithm returns succeed. 
　a similar algorithm  get-refinements  returns the revised refinement matrix if check-refinements returns succeed and the basic refinement matrix if check-refinements returns fail. since  is a finite set of relations  m can be changed only a finite number of times  so both algorithms always terminate. 

1 	constraint satisfaction 

1. return succeed 
figure 1: algorithm check-refinements 
proof. suppose that check-refinements 1 m  returns succeed and get-refinements s  m  returns the refinement matrix suppose further that enforcing path-consistency to results in an inconsistency which is detected first for the three variables xa xb xc. 
suppose that for every pair of variables  
 and  enforcing path-consistency to  
can be done by successively enforcing path-consistency to every triple of variables of suppose that we start with the triple we have that - true for every after enforcing path-consistency to this triple we obtain the relations  for which a  = true  otherwise check-refinements  m  would have returned fail. the same holds when we proceed with enforcing path-consistency to every triple of variables  we always end up with relations  for which = true. therefore  for all possible relations we can obtain by enforcing path-consistency to we have 
that  = true for all  
if this triple of relations were inconsistent  checkrefinements s m  would have returned fail.  
if check-refinements returns succeed and getrefinements returns  we have pre-computed all possible refinements of every path-consistent triple of variables as given in the refinement matrix  thus  applying these refinements to a path-consistent set of constraints can never result in an inconsistency when enforcing path-consistency. 
theorem 1 let  and let m be a refinement matrix of s. get-refinements returns the re-
finement matrix if for every ss there is a  with = true  then s can be reduced by refinement to t. 

proof. by the given conditions  we can refine every path-consistent set of constraints overs to a set 
of constraints over 	such that 	= true for 
every xi 	and 	 
 is a fixed point with respect to get-refinements  
i.e.  get-refinements returns thus it follows from lemma 1 that enforcing path-consistency to  does not result in an inconsistencv.  
by lemma 1 and theorem 1 we have that the procedures 
check-refinements and get-refinements can be used to prove tract ability for sets of relations. 
corollary 1 let be two sets such that pathconsistency decides and let m be a refinement matrix of s. get-refinements 
turns m'. if for every s  s there is with  = true  then path-consistency decides cspsat s . 
in the following sections we apply this method to the region connection calculus rcc-1 and to allen's interval algebra for proving certain subsets to be tractable. for rcc-1 it will help us make a complete analysis of tractability by identifying two large new maximal tractable subsets. later  it will turn out that the new method can be used for identifying the fastest possible algorithms for finding a consistent scenario. 
1 candidates for maximal tractable subsets of rcc1 
in order to identify maximal tractable subsets of a set of relations with an np-hard consistency problem  two different tasks have to be done. on the one hand  tractable subsets have to be identified. on the other hand  nphard subsets have to be identified. then  a tractable subset is maximal tractable if any superset is np-hard. if tractability has not- yet been shown for certain subsets  the np-hardness results restrict the number of different subsets that still have to be analyzed for tractability. 
in this section we present new np-hardness results for 
rcc-1 and identify those subsets that are candidates for maximal tractable subsets  i.e.  if any other relation is added to one of those candidates they become np-hard. before this  we summarize renz and nebel's  nphardness proofs that were necessary for showing that is a maximal tractable subset of rcc-1. 
lemma 1  renz and nebel  1   is np-hard if where: 

 n tpp indicates either tpp or ntpp. 
　　renz and nebel  proved maximality of  by showing that ntpp}  is np-hard and that the closure of plus any relation of  
n  contains the relation {eq  ntpp}. this np-hardness proof  however  does not make use of all relations of but only of the relations {ec  tpp} and {ec  ntpp}. 
thus  any set of rcc-1 relations that contains all base relations plus the relations {ec  tpp}  {ec  ntpp}  and {eq ntpp} is np-hard. 
　　this result rules out a lot of subsets of rcc-1 to be tractable  but still leaves the problem of tractability open for a large number of subsets. we found  however  that it is not necessary that both relations  {ec tpp} and {ec  ntpp}  must be added to {eq ntpp} in order to enforce np-hardness. it is rather sufficient for nphardness that only one of them is added to {eq  ntpp}. this is shown in the following two lemmata. they are proven by reducing 1sat  the np-hard satisfiability problem of propositional formulas that contain exactly three literals per clause  garey and johnson  1   to the respective consistency problem. both reductions are similar to the reductions given in  renz and nebel  1 : every literal as well as every literal occurrence l is reduced to a constraint where and 
- l is true iff holds and false holds.  polarity constraints1' enforce that holds iff  holds  and vice versa. 
 clause constraints  enforce that at least one literal of every clause is true. 
lemma 1 if ntpp}  {ec  ntpp}}   1  then is np-complete. 
proof sketch. transformation of 1sat to rsat s . = {eq}. polarity constraints: 
lemma 1/ 
rsat s  is hp-complete. 
proof sketch. transformation of 1sat to rsat s . 
all the above relations are contained in s.  
　using these results  four other relations can be ruled out to be contained in any tractable subset of rcc-1  since the closure of the base relations plus one of the four relations contains {eq ntpp} as well as {ec tpp}. 
definition 1 the two sets 	and 	are defined as follows: 

	renz 	1 

　lemmata 1 and 1 give us a sufficient but not necessary condition of whether a subset of  is np-hard  namely  if  contains {eq  ntpp} and one of {ec tpp} or {ec  ntpp}  rsat s  is np-hard  otherwise the complexity of rsat s  remains open. 
　we computed all subsets of  that are candidates for maximal tractable subsets with respect to the above two np-hardness proofs  i.e.  we enumerated all subsets 1  with s =  that contain all base relations and the universal relation  and checked whether they fulfilled the following two properties: 
1. s does not contain  {eq ntpp} and {ec tpp   or  {eq ntpp} and {ec  ntpp}   and 
1. the closure of s plus any relation of contains 
 {eq ntpp} and {ec ypp}  or  {eq ntpp} and {ec  ntpp} . 
to our surprise  this resulted in only three different sub-
is of course one of them. the 
is tractable  then  
proof. by computing the closure of every set containing the base relations  the universal relation  and two arbitrary rcc-1 relations  the resulting set is either contained in one of the sets  or is np-hard according to lemma 1  lemma 1  or corollary 1.  
so far we did not say anything about  tractability of or  or subsets thereof. it might be that both sets are np-hard or that there is a large number of different maximal tractable subsets that are contained in the two sets. what we obtained so far is  thus  only a restriction of the number of different subsets we have to check for tractability. however  we will see in the next section that both  and  are in fact tractable. 
1 	a complete analysis of tractability 
in  renz and nebel  1  tractability of  was shown by reducing to horn sat. this was possi-
ble because contains exactly those relations that are transformed to propositional horn formulas when using 
      the names were chosen  since all -relations not contained in contain and all not contained in  contain  
1 	constraint satisfaction 
the propositional encoding of rcc-1. this propositional horn encoding of  was also used for proving that path-consistency decides   renz and nebel  
1   by relating positive unit resolution  which is a complete decision method for propositional horn formulas  to path-consistency. the propositional encoding of  and  is neither a horn formula nor a krom formula  two literals per clause   so it is not immediately possible to reduce the consistency problem of these subsets to a tractable propositional satisfiability problem. therefore we have to find other ways of proving tractability. 
　　let us have a closer look at the relations of the two sets  and  and how they differ from  
proposition 1 for all relations that {eq}  r. for all refinements 
{eq} = b and {eq}  we have that   and  are both subsets of  so if we can prove the 
following conjecture  then both sets tire tractable: 
conjecture 1 let be a path-consistent set of constraints over  or over if is obtained from  by 
eliminating the identity relation from every constraint with then enforcing pathconsistency to does not result in an inconsistency. 
if we can prove this conjecture  then  by proposition 1   contains only constraints over  since path-
 consistency decides we then have that if is path-consistent  is consistent and  therefore  is also consistent  i.e.  path-consistency decides consistency for sets of constraints over  and over  in  gerevini and renz  1  it was shown that the relation  can always be eliminated from every constraint of a pathconsistent set of constraints over  without changing consistency of the set. this was  again  shown by applying positive unit resolution to the propositional horn encoding of  a method which is not applicable in our case. instead  we can now apply the new method developed in section 1  namely  we can check whether  and  can be reduced by refinement to  conjecture 1 gives the refinement matrix we have to check. we define this particular refinement matrix for arbitrary sets 1  of disjunctions over a set 
proposition 1 
  check-refinements retains succeed. 
  check-refinements returns succeed. 
theorem 1 path-consistency decides  as well as  
proof. it follows from proposition 1 and proposition 1 that theorem 1 can be applied with 
since path-consistency decides 	it follows 

from corollary g that path-consistency decides as well as   
together with lemma 1 it follows that  and arc the only maximal tractable subsets of rcc-1 that contain all base relations. 
theorem 1 for every subset s of rcc-1 that contains all base relations and the universal relation: rsat cs  is tractable iff  
1 	finding a consistent scenario 
gerevini and renz  gave an  time algorithm for computing a consistent scenario for a set of constraints over  their algorithm is based on first eliminating {eq} from every constraint and then successively refining constraints to constraints over base relations in a particular order and enforcing path-consistency in between. as shown in the previous section it is also possible to eliminate {eq} from all constraints over  and over  so it is possible to apply gerevini and ren/as algorithm also for  and  by applying the method developed in section 1 we can  however  improve this algorithm for all three maximal tractable subsets of rcc-1. 
lemma 1  and  can be reduced by refinement to b  the set of all rcc-1 base relations. 
this gives us the possibility of computing a consistent scenario of a path-consistent set of constraints over a tractable subset by a simple table lookup scheme  which is the fastest possible way. 
lemma 1 let s be one of for every relation r s  base r  is the following base relation: 
of a path-
consistent set 	or over  
can be computed in tune  by replacing every constraint  w i t h w h e r e r' - base r . 
1 applying the new method to allen's interval algebra 
the method developed in section 1 can also be applied to allen's interval algebra  allen  1  which consists of the 1 jepd relations before      meets  in   overlaps  o   starts  s   during  d   finishes  f   their converse relations    mi  oi  si  di  fi  and the identity relation equal  =  that describe the possible relationships between two convex intervals. the full algebra consists of the 1 possible disjunctions of the base relations and has an npcomplete consistency problem. tractable subclasses of the interval algebra for which path-consistency decides  consistency were identified by vilain et al.   the  pointisable  subclass v  about 1% of the full algebra   and by nebel and biirckert   the  ord-horn  subclass   about 1% of the full algebra  which is the only maximal tractable subclass of the interval algebra that contains all base relations. 
　since the only maximal tractable subclass of the interval algebra containing all base relations has already been identified  we cannot provide any new results on that topic. we can  however  validate the usefulness of our new method by showing that traetability of the ordhorn subclass and sufficiency of path-consistency for deciding consistency for this subclass can also be proven using our method. for this we apply the same strategy as for c1 and q1  namely  we use the identity-refinement matrix   cf.  ligozat  1  . 
proposition 1 get-refinements returns  which has the following property: for every there is an  such that = true. 
this was computed in less than 1 minutes on a sun sparc ultral. we can now apply theorem 1: 
theorem 1  can be reduced by refinement to  
not all of the 1 pointisable relations are necessary for this refinement  but only 1 of them which are obtained according to the following refinement scheme. 
and 
using this refinement scheme  every path-consistent set  of constraints over ord-horn can be refined to a pathby replacing every constraint 
with where  = point r . this can be useful for some tasks such as finding a consistent scenario  cf.  gerevini and cristani  1  . 
1 	discussion & further work 
the method we developed for proving traetability of reasoning over sets of relations is very simple  does not require detailed knowledge about the considered relations  and seems to be very powerful. the only difficulty of this method is finding an adequate refinement matrix. however  the simple heuristic of eliminating all identity relations was successful for all maximal tractable fragments of rcc-1 and allen's interval algebra which contain all base relations. this leads to an interesting question  namely  whether it is a general property of sets 
	renz 	1 

of relations containing all base relations for which pathconsistency decides consistency that the identity relation can be eliminated from all constraints of a pathconsistent set without making the set inconsistent. 
　the complete analysis of tractability for rcc-1 gives the possibility to develop more efficient algorithms for deciding consistency. as renz and nebel  have shown in an empirical study  running different strategies in parallel is very effective; almost all apparently hard instances of the phase-transition region up to a certain size were solved in a few seconds. the two maximal tractable subsets of rcc-1 identified in this paper suggest several new strategies that should be empirically studied. both subsets are larger than h1  but their average branching factor is higher  c1: 1  q1: 1  h1: 1 . 
1 	summary 
we developed a general method for proving sufficiency of path-consistency for deciding consistency of disjunctions over a set of jepd relations. we applied this method to the region connection calculus rcc-1 and identified two large new maximal tractable subsets. together with 
h1  the already known maximal tractable subset  these are the only such sets for rcc-1 that contain all base relations and can  hence  be used to increase efficiency of backtracking algorithms for reasoning over np-hard subsets. we also applied our method to allen's interval algebra which resulted in a simple proof of tractability of reasoning in the ord-horn subclass. 
acknowledgments 
this research was supported by dfg as part of the project fast-qual-spack  which is part of the dfg special research effort on  spatial cognition . 1 want to thank christoph dornheim and bernhard nebel for their helpful comments. 
