 
we discuss the types of functional knowledge about an environment an agent can use in order to act effectively. we demonstrate  1  the use of structural regularities for acting efficiently  and  1  the use of physical regularities for designing effective sensors. these ideas are described in the context of an everyday task: grocery store 
shopping. we discuss how shopper  a program  uses regularities of grocery stores in order to act appropriately and sense efficiently in groceryworld  a simulated grocery store. 
1 	introduction 
much of the useful knowledge people employ in everyday life is often implicitly understood to be common knowledge that everyone possesses. for example  getting a drink of water in someone else's home involves many assumptions: the kitchen is located on the first floor  there are no major obstructions to getting there  a faucet over a sink will be in the kitchen  clean glasses will be in the cupboards  the glasses will be near the faucet  etc. people use these social rules within a shared culture to function effectively. without them  unlikely possibilities would be admitted  e.g.  the storage of clean glasses in the shed out back . none of these possibilities could be dismissed. 
　to a large extent  researchers building autonomous agents to work within a culturally rich environment have implicitly built these assumptions into their agents. for example  many robots don't explicitly avoid holes in the floor. that's because there aren't any. as pointed out in  agre  1   cultures go out of their way to make environments safe for people. 
　with the shopper project  we are studying the ways in which an agent can use the structure of the environment to its own advantage. in particular  we are identifying the useful types of knowledge an agent can use to shop in a grocery store. grocery stores are completely man-made environments in which practically everyone has to look around for the items they need. stores in 
   this work was supported in part by office of naval research grant number n1-j-1. 
1 
general are a good domain since their organization is intended to be simple enough for everyone to comprehend. this organization makes it easy for a person to go into any grocery store and shop effectively. 
　in addition to the way environments are structured  we can also simplify sensor design by taking into account the information needed from the sensor. our primary sensing is in the form of color images the agent sees in groceryworld  a simulated store. for the primary task of finding an item in an image  we consider the task in the context of a grocery store  as opposed to attempting something more general. in the section on computer vision  we describe methods shopper uses for gathering information for recognizing objects quickly and effectively. 
1 	related work 
tasks within the context of a highly structured environment have been studied before. hammond & converse  l1l  have noted that our environments are designed to aid rather than hinder activity. regularities  actively maintained  can greatly simplify a person's interactions with the world. they demonstrate the efficacy of this approach for the task of making coffee in a simulated kitchen. agre & horswill  investigate the influence of culture in toast  a program which cooks food in a simulated kitchen. they demonstrate how activity in the midst of cultural artifacts can be improvised to produce nontrivial behavior. they do this by characterizing regularities  or constraints  on cooking tools and materials. because all the necessary tools are nearby and the materials undergo straightforward transformations  they show how cooking tasks become much simpler. 
　much of the vision work described here is based on recent work done in active and purposive vision  ballard  1; aloimonos  1 . for simplifying sensor design  horswill  has noted that environments have computational properties which allow a designer to build simpler sensors. by starting with a complex mechanism to compute a piece of information  successively simpler  less general mechanisms can be substituted by noting regularities an environment supports. these regularities can be used for analyzing under what conditions sensors will and won't work. horswill describes polly - a robot designed to give guided tours. polly's visual mechanisms are very simple  optimized  since they're tailored to a specific environment. 
　because conditions in the environment change  pinhanez and bobick  maintain an approximate world model for selecting appropriate visual computations. these computations have applicability conditions which must hold in the current context in order for their results to be acceptable. for example  by knowing the location of a chef who is wrapping a chicken  the appropriate hand tracking routines can be selected and instantiated. 
1 	shopping in groceryworld 
while we would like shopper to eventually function in a real store  we have opted to work with a simulator first. there are two reasons for this:  1  a real grocery store is unavailable for frequent testing  and  1  for now we want to avoid problems with real robots  like fixing broken hardware  writing motor driver code  having to transport the robot  etc. we are also able to ignore problems such as noise in sonar readings and wheel slippage; however  we intend to incorporate similar problems in the simulator. 
　the simulator we have built is called groceryworld. this  world  is a novel simulator in that it integrates some real visual data along with simulated sonar information. while being a simulation  we still wanted to address some real sensing problems: groceryworld is a videodisc-based reproduction of a local grocery store. the store has nine aisles of food items. for each aisle  four film clips were taken to provide views of each side as well as up and down the aisle. in total  the simulator provides access to over 1 images by merely moving around the store. 
　groceryworld also provides simulated range information on the relative proximity of objects to the agent. sign information is also given. when an agent is at the end of an aisle and looking down that aisle  it automatically receives the symbolic text of those signs. the signs in groceryworld are a faithful reproduction of the signs in the real grocery store. 
　in the next few sections we will illustrate the types of structural regularities shopper can use in a grocery store. next we discuss the control and visual routines which make use of structural and physical regularities. then we step through an example of shopper finding an item. in the last section we end with a discussion. 
1 	regularities in a grocery store 
any customer shopping for groceries in a store can find the necessary items in reasonable time whether or not they've been to the store before or not. yet the average store stocks around 1 items. in order to sift through all the food items available  customers are able to exploit their knowledge about the structure of the store. stores organize food items consistently so that customers can find items without too much difficulty. below we illustrate the different types of knowledge that can be used for finding goods. 
  type: stores group together items of the same type or that serve the same function. this is a most basic organization principle under which many items fall under; e.g. mcintosh apples are near rome apples; gerber baby food will be found with other baby foods; tomatoes clustered with other vegetables; an apple placed with other fruits; coffee is near tea. 
  brand: within a section of a specific type  foods made by the same company will be clustered together. for example  in a typical grocery store aisle  soups of the same brand  e.g. campbell's  progresso  will be clustered with each other. 
  counterparts: items that complement each other are sometimes grouped together. for example  salad and salad dressing  pancakes and maple syrup  pasta and tomato sauce  etc. 
  physical constraints: perishable items requiring refrigeration or bulky items requiring larger storage space. for example  orange juice  eggs  frozen entrees  charcoal  etc. 
  specialty foods: stores often have sections devoted to foods related to certain cultures  countries  dietary foods: e.g. soy sauce  curry  matzah  water cress  refried beans. 
  packaging: bulk items such as bags of oranges  apples  and potatoes will be placed separate from their individual versions. 
　these regularities are also principles under which store designers build stores  peak and peak  1 . one natural way of segmenting the space in the store is by the use of aisles. items of similar nature are placed together in the same aisle. sometimes signs are placed at the end of an aisle to indicate some contents of that aisle. 
　a person looking for an item can use regularities along with knowledge of how a store is organized to select promising areas. so if we wanted to find a box of frootloops cereal  a sign above an aisle that says  cereal  can serve as a pointer to the location of the cereal using the regularity of  type.  a sign saying  syrups  could be useful in finding mrs. butterworths pancake mix according to the  counterparts  relation. see  fu et a/.  1  for an example of shopper finding a box of pancake mix. 
1 	action and perception 
in this section we discuss the control and visual routines which make use of the regularities described earlier. 
1 	control of action and perception 
shopper uses hierarchical plans to control all decisionmaking and actions. the plan representation is a version of that used in runner  hammond et al.  1  and include ideas taken from raps  firby  1 . initially  a plan is given a permission to activate. an active plan first checks to see if its objectives  its success clause  are met. if so  it finishes. if not  it selects a method based on current context  sensor and state  information. each method will have a sequence of plans or actions. these plans and actions will then be permitted  retrieved and activated  in sequence  as successive plans succeed. 
	fu  hammond  and swain 	1 
　execution of this control mechanism behaves in a very  depth-first search  manner by permitting abstract plans which become more and more concrete depending on sensor/state conditions. the resulting  leaves  are either physical  visual  or mental actions. for example   align-body-to-head   is a physical action which orients the direction of travel to the direction the head is facing. 
 defplan  move-down-aisle-looking-for  item  
 success  or  see-verified  item  
 not  clear-space forward     
 method  context  and  see-sign  type  
 isa  item  type    
 serial  align-body-to-head  
 move-out-of-intersection  
 look-for  item    
 method  context  and  isa  item  type  
 counterpart  type  other-type  
 see-sign  other-type    
 serial  align-body-to-head  
 move-out-of-intersection  
 disable all  ;; deactivate all histograms 
;; activate histograms related to signs 
 sign-enable  
 look-for-type  type  other-type  item  
 search-vicinity  item     
figure 1: a plan to select and execute a method for finding an item in an aisle after a relevant sign is encountered. 
　in figure 1  the plan is satisfied if either the item sought has been spotted  or the end of the aisle has been reached. if not  a method is chosen. the two methods listed in figure 1 represent two different search strategies: looking for a specific item  or looking for an item's related types and then searching a local vicinity. 
1 	vision in g r o c e r y w o r l d 
the vision operations rely on the regularities discussed in the previous section as well as some simple assumptions we make about the domain: 
  the lighting comes from the ceiling. 
  items usually sit directly on shelves. 
  food items are displayed on shelves in a consistent manner  e.g. cereal boxes are upright with the front of the box facing outward. 
basing vision routines on these assumptions allows us to build a very effective ensemble which  while being very simple and easy to understand  combine to execute nontrivial visual tasks. 
　shopper uses three basic vision routines for obtaining information from the images. the routines  in order of increasing complexity  are: shelf detection  histogram intersection  and comparison of edge images using hausdorff distance. figure 1 shows the three routines in intermediate states. 
　the first routine is a shelf detector. this helps to constrain the relevant regions in an image. given that the agent is looking at a side of an aisle  we locate the shelves 
1 
by assuming that  1  light comes from above  and  1  the shelves are light in color. from these assumptions  we build a simple filter sensitive to changes from light to dark since shadows are cast beneath shelves. the detector histograms the responses and then finds maxima by partitioning the id histogram. the maxima correspond to shelf locations in the image. 
　the second routine is a histogram intersection routine  swain and ballard  1l . histogram intersection involves discretizing the pixels of a food item image into a color space histogram. intersection matches are determined by intersecting two color spaces. given a model histogram m and a sample histogram i with n color bins each  the intersection is computed as   which indicates the number of color pixels in the model which also appear in the sample. in order to obtain a fractional value  the result is normalized by the size of the model. sample histograms are taken successively across a shelf area. the sample size is exactly the same size as the original model. 
　the third routine we use is a comparison function using hausdorff distance  rucklidge  1  to compare two edge images. hausdorff distance is a measure of how close a set of model points are to a set of image points  and vice versa. 
　because each routine's speed is related to the size of the image  we sought to successively limit the size of regions of interest. so  we first constrain search to be on shelves. then  on each shelf we further bound the region using color. finally  we compute the hausdorff distance over the smallest region possible. computing the hausdorff distance is the most expensive operation. by taking into account the safe assumptions available to us  we are able to constrain areas in the image for processing. 
　from these basic routines  we create more sophisticated routines for processing images in grocery world. rather than presenting them now  we will describe them in the context of an example in the next section. 
1 	example 
in this section we illustrate an example of finding a box of frootloops cereal. these regularities apply: 
  type - frootloops is a cereal. 
  counterparts - milk is often used with cereal. 
  physical constraints - milk and cereal have different physical constraints  so milk is not likely to be very near cereal. 
　milk is not a good indicator for the presence of frootloops because of physical constraints. however  the  type  relation still holds when looking at an aisle sign. as we will demonstrate  this is correct for this particular example in groceryworld. 
　the following is an edited trace of shopper finding a box of frootloops. of the 1 primitive actions done  only illustrative ones are reported here. 
permitting  retrieve-item frootloops  
permitting  align-head  
 action:  aligning head to body   


figure 1: from top left:  a  image of cereal boxes with shelf positions drawn as solid lines. the jagged lines are made of match values of histograms taken above a shelf against a histogram of frootloops. the higher the point  the better the match. regions of interest are bounded as seen by the bigger dots on the jagged line   b  shows an edge 
image taken around a cereal box of smacks for subsequent comparison with frootloops using hausdorff distance.  c  same as in b  but with frootloops.  d  frootloops' edge image is superimposed; it's found. 

permitting  find-sign  
 action:  turning body left   
　at this point  shopper is looking down the first aisle at the entrance to the store. sign information is passed from the simulator:  aisle-1 bread cracker cookie meat frozen-entree baked-good.  
　from here  shopper executes a plan to move across aisles by first picking an open direction to move and then turning the head back toward the aisle. this way  shopper can read signs while moving across aisles. 
	 action: 	 turning body left   
 action:  turning head to look right   
permitting 	 move-across-aisles-looking-for frootloops  
 action:  moving forward   
 action:  moving forward   
　at this point  shopper keeps moving forward until a relevant sign is seen in the fourth aisle: cereal. because the sign is relevant according to the  type  relation  shopper commits to exploring this aisle. see the first method in figure 1. 
permitting  move-down-aisle-looking-for frootloops  
permitting  align-body  
 action:  aligning body to head   
permitting 	 move-out-of-intersection  
permitting  move-forward  
 action:  moving forward   
 action:  moving forward   
permitting  look-for frootloops  
	permitting 	 look-head-left  
 action:  turning head to look left   
　at this point shopper is actively searching for a box of frootloops by moving down the aisle and looking left and right. 
　for each image processed  shopper first looks for shelf locations. by taking color histograms across and above a shelf location  it can quickly tell if the box is not present if all resulting intersections are low in value. 
fu  hammond  and swain 1 
in contrast  if the intersection values are high  we bound the regions of high response and use hausdorff distance comparison by first using a precomputed edge image of frootloops and computing an edge image of the region of high response. if the edge images match well  we have verified the location of the item. if not  we consider the item to be absent from the image and continue on. 

　the information passed to plan  item-boundary  are the frootloops color histogram  the shelf height in the image  1   and the lowest histogram intersection threshold for finding boundaries for hausdorff verification. 
　shopper continues its search in this fashion until it eventually encounters frootloops: 

　shopper found a shelf at height 1 in the image  found a high intersection region  1 - 1   and verified its presence at coordinates  1  1  in the local region. this particular example was used on a second version of groceryworld using a second videodisc. because the second version was filmed with a different lens  we also search across scale as well as translation for a given model. the models we use were taken from the first videodisc. frootloops was found by scaling the model's width and height. 
　in this example  we used the type regularity in order to design more complicated routines. this merging of simpler visual routines into more sophisticated routines results in more robust performance at a smaller cost. the color histogram intersection routine could be scanned across the entire image and produce many possible locations for an object. however  by itself  it is not enough to reliably verify the existence of the object. the hausdorff distance between a model edge image and an entire image could yield the same results  but at a prohibitive time cost. since we can localize regions using 
1 
shelf detection and color histograms  the area of processing is substantially reduced. by combining routines of shelf detection  color histogramming  and hausdorff distance we are able to lessen computation time without compromising reliability. 
1 	status 
shopper currently uses four out of the six regularities outlined earlier: type  counterpart  physical constraint  and specialty foods. tests were conducted on two versions of groceryworld. 
　many of the items we tested initially were relatively small in size - about 1 pixels. the size is relevant to both the color intersection and hausdorff distance routines. for color intersection with small items  the shelf placement is critical since a vertical ten-pixel error could seriously affect the histogram intersection value when histograms are taken across a shelf. bigger items such as laundry detergent are less affected since their histograms are based on a larger set of pixels. for hausdorff distance  the edge image is computed from a subsampled greyscale image. the video is ntsc interlaced  odd scan lines are recorded  then even lines  and was filmed while the camera was moving. this results in jagged vertical edges. the problem was alleviated by sampling every other line. however  this makes the model edge image twice as small. 
　in picking items for testing  we restricted items to be of larger than normal sizes  cereals  laundry detergents  etc. . also we did not pick items whose shape is cylindrical. because cans and bottles can be rotated  the current hausdorff verification method will not suffice. it might be possible to isolate the outside shape of an object a priori and use its label in various rotations to later find the object again. however  we have not attempted this method. 
　of the twenty-five items tested on the first videodisc twenty were found  1% found   one was missed by color histogramming  false negative   one wrong item was picked  false positive  and the other three didn't match correctly using our set thresholds for hausdorff matching  false negatives . the results for two videodiscs are summarized in table 1. 
videodisc 1 videodisc 1 number items tested 
correctly found 
color errors 
hausdorff errors 
number false positives 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 table 1: summary of tests for two versions of groceryworld. 
　the second version of grocery wo rld differed from the first in a few ways. first  the transfer process of videotape to videodisc was different since the two discs were pressed at least a year apart. models appearing in the second version are more yellow. second  a different lens was used so most items appear different in size.1 
1
    the width and height of each item appearing is approximately .1 of the original model. 

also  distances to shelves while filming were not kept constant  so there is significant variation up to the size of the original model. 
　correcting the color is necessary since the yellowness of images from the second videodisc directly impinges on the effectiveness of color histogram intersection. assuming constant lighting in the store  we corrected colors in the second disc using models of known color from the first. the scale differences for edge matching were handled by loosening scale parameters in the hausdorff distance routine. we allow scale matches from 1% to 1% of the original width and heights of the models. 
　currently we only use sonar information for navigation. if the distance to an object were known  better color histogram samples  we use the original model's size  and scale parameters can be chosen since we know at what distance the original models were filmed. 
1 	discussion 
regularities are general rules of thumb - not hard and fast rules. however  they provide reference points from which we can base the search for an item  as opposed to doing exhaustive search or constructing elaborate reasons for looking in certain areas. undoubtedly  regularities will be wrong in instances. shopper works within the structure of a store maintained by managers who wish to maximize their profits  dipman  1; peak and peak  1  while still providing a pleasant shopping experience. this can lead to mistaken beliefs about the locations of objects. however  when a failure occurs  the regularities which pointed to a mistaken location can be identified and then repaired incrementally. eventually  shopper can learn and optimize plans of action over several visits. when new grocery stores are encountered  the agent can be better prepared since its knowledge of particular grocery stores serves as a field from which it can reap the benefits of past experience. 
　note that we don't need explain why  for example  most stores have their produce section on the right perimeter next to the entrance of the store; we just need to know the tendency for produce sections to be located near the entrance. explaining why produce is near the entrance does little for the typical customer while knowing where to find produce is most useful. as another example  toothpaste and nail clippers tend to be located near the front of the store. this is to reduce pilferage since cashiers  a form of store security  are also near the front. 
　from the earlier example discussed in this paper  we have demonstrated that the physical search space can be drastically reduced using functional knowledge of the domain. prom the same example we have also illustrated visual routines which speeded computation by restricting regions of interest. these optimized the basic recognition routines we had available to us  without losing effectiveness. certainly  the physical search mechanism depends on the environment  but everyday life has the same restraints. any agent working in an everyday man-made domain can use its knowledge to help facilitate its own activity. in this paper we have shown the effectiveness of such knowledge. 
