 
programming language interpreters  proving theorems of the form a = 1   abstract data types  and program optimization can all be represented by a finite set of rules called a rewrite system. in this paper  we study two fundamental concepts  uniqueness of normal forms and confluence  for nonlinear systems in the absence of termination. this is a difficult topic with only a few results so far. through a novel approach  we show that every persistent system has unique normal forms. this result is tight and a substantial generalization of previous work. in the process we derive a necessary and sufficient condition for persistence for the first time and give new classes of persistent systems. we also prove the confluence of the union  function symbols can be shared  of a nonlinear system with a left-linear system under fairly general conditions. again persistence plays a key role in this proof. we are not aware of any confluence result that allows the same level of function symbol sharing. 
1 	introduction 
two of the most challenging and important problems in rewriting are proving the unique-normal-form and church-rosser  also called confluence  properties for non-left-linear  nonlinear  for short  systems  particularly in the absence of termination. there is considerable progress on proving church-rosser theorems for left-linear systems  systems in which the left-hand sides  lhs's  of the rules contain at most one occurrence of any variable   church and rosser  1; rosen  1; o'donnell  1; huet  1 . in contrast  for nonlinear systems there are only a handful of general results and almost all of them require termination  newman  1; knuth and bendix  1: huet  1; middeldorp and toyama  1; rao  1j. we know of only four works that do not require termination  klop  1; chew  1; toyama  1; oyamaguchi and ohta  1 . 
　in 1  klop proved the church-rosser property for the disjoint sum of an orthogonal  i.e.  left-linear 
*research supported in part by nsf grant ccr-1. 
automated reasoning 
and nonoverlapping; see next section for precise definitions  combinatory reduction system and a single nonlinear rule of various specific forms  e.g.  d x x  -  x and d x x  -1 e x  . in 1  toyama proved that the disjoint-sum of two church-rosser rewrite systems is church-rosser. in 1  oyamaguchi and ohta showed the church-rosser property for non-eoverlapping right-ground  i.e.  right-hand sides contain no variables  rewrite systems. a weaker result than church-rosser  viz.  uniqueness of normal forms for strongly nonoverlapping 1 compatible systems was shown by chew in the 1 stoc   see also  klop and de vrijer  1  for some unique-normal-form results for a-calculus + specific rules . a strongly nonoverlapping system is one that remains nonoverlapping even when the variables in the lhs's are renamed to make the rules left-linear. the non-e-overlapping requirement is stronger than chew's strongly nonoverlapping requirement and is in a sense the strongest version of nonoverlapping requirement possible. 
　in this paper  we attack these two fundamental problems and prove the following results: 
　  every persistent system has the unique normal form property. roughly speaking  persistence means that no rule can be applied inside the template  non-variable part  of an lhs. persistence is a substantially weaker requirement than the strong-nonoverlap requirement  hence this result is a substantial generalization of chew's result  chew  1 .  to keep the technical details understandable we do not permit root overlaps. this generalization will be discussed in detail in the full version.  the approach used in proving this result is also novel and should be outlined. 
　we introduce the idea of constraints and their satisfiability in a rewrite system. we then characterize nonoverlaps and persistence as certain kinds of unsatisfiable constraints. we then prove that these kinds of constraints remain unsatisfiable even when certain kinds of rules are added to a persistent system and exploit this fact to first prove a slightly weaker uniquely normalization property and then the unique normal form property  un . this stepwise approach makes for easier understandability. our approach also yields a neces-
1 chew allows root overlaps provided they are compatible  
e.g.  x + 1 -  x and 1 + x -  x root overlap in 1 + 1. 

sary and sufficient condition for persistence for the first time  which we then use to give several syntacticallycheckable sufficient conditions for persistence. some of these classes are new  not known previously to be persistent. these results are significant generalizations of some of the results in  verma  1   where a sufficient condition for persistence  based on proving unique normalization  plus other technical conditions   was given. our results are interesting from another viewpoint also. 
persistence was introduced by us in a different context  verma  1   viz.  for generalizing to nonlinear systems the congruence-closure normalization algorithm of chew  chew  1   which in turn generalizes the congruenceclosure algorithm of  downey et a/.  1; kozen  1; nelson and oppen  1  to rules containing variables. recently  we showed that persistence also plays a central role in transforming certain kinds of rewrite systems into constructor-based rewrite systems  thatte  1; verma  1 . therefore  our results in this paper provide substantial new evidence for the fundamental role of persistence in rewriting. 
　  we prove that the union  generalization of disjoint sum  function symbols can be shared  of a system r1 with a left-linear system r  is confluent provided that the union is semi-terminating  no sequence containing infinite r1 reductions   persistent and rhs's of rules in r1 do not share any function symbols with lhs's of rules in r1. we are not aware of any confluence result which allows this much function sharing. the closest result is that of klop's on crs's. however  klop's proof cannot be used directly since it uses postponement of certain kinds of reductions  which does not hold for us. moreover  klop gets persistence for free because of the specificity of rules in r1. note that toyama's proof technique cannot be used since it uses the non-increasing nature of ranks of terms  which does not hold for non-disjoint sums. recently  rao  rao  1  generalizing a result of  middeldorp and toyama  1  proved a confluence result for terminating systems that allows some sharing provided that the union is a hierarchical combination and constructor-based. in particular  no sharing of defined symbols is allowed in the lhs's and only constructors can be shared between lhs of the higher system with rhs's of the lower. we note that rao's proof is somewhat easier since his conditions ensure that the union is also terminating and persistent. the full proof of our result is fairly long. we sketch the important details here and leave the rest to the full version. we then give several sufficient conditions that can be checked syntactically  which ensure that the union has the properties we need. 
　  finally  we consider the confluence of one-rule sys-tems. the motivation for studying properties of one rule systems is dauchet's interesting result: every  deterministic  turing machine can be simulated by a single leftlinear  nonoverlapping rule  dauchet  1 . we show that there is a single nonoverlapping rule that is not persistent and not confluent. the smallest previous example known to us contains 1 rules. we also state a confluence theorem for single rule persistent systems  proof omitted for space . 
verma 

automated reasoning 

verma 

automated reasoning 

verma  church and rosser  1  a. church and j.b. rosser. some properties of conversion. trans. ams  1-1.  dauchet  1  m. dauchet. simulation of turing machines a regular rewrite rule. tcs  1  1. also in rta 1.  dershowitz and jouannaud  1  n. dershowitz and j.p. jouannaud. rewrite systems. in handbook of theoretical computer science  vol. 1  ch. 1. north-holland  1. 
 dershowitz  1  n. dershowitz. termination of rewriting. journal of symbolic computation  1-1. 
 downey et al.  1  p.j. downey  r. sethi  and r.e. tarjan. variations on the common subexpression problem. jacm  1 :1  1. 
 dwork et al  1  c. dwork  p. kanellakis  and j.c. mitchell. on the sequential nature of unification. journal of logic programming  1-1  1. 
 huet  1  g. huet. confluent reductions: abstract properties and applications to term rewriting systems. jacm  1 :1  1. 
 klop and de vrijer  1  j.w. klop and r. de vrijer. unique normal forms for lambda calculus with surjective pairing. information and control  1-1  1. 
 klop  1  j.w. klop. combinatory reduction systems. phd thesis  mathematisch centrum  amsterdam  1. 
 klop  1  j.w. klop. rewrite systems. in handbook of logic in computer science. oxford  1. 
 knuth and bendix  1  d.e. knuth and p. bendix. simple word problems in universal algebra. in j. leech  editor  
computational problems in abstract algebra  pages 1-


1 	conclusions 
in this paper we have studied two fundamental concepts  uniqueness of normal forms and confluence  for nonlinear systems in the absence of termination. this is a difficult topic with only a few results so far. through a novel approach  we have shown that every persistent system has unique normal forms. this result is tight and a substantial generalization of previous work. in the process we derived a necessary and sufficient condition for persistence and gave several new classes of persistent systems. we also proved the confluence of the union of a nonlinear system with a left-linear system under fairly general conditions. again persistence plays a key role in this proof. there are several promising directions for future work. first  we note that the finiteness requirement can be weakened somewhat although it cannot be dropped completely. the proof of this is likely to be difficult but fruitful since it might lead to new techniques for dealing with unions  or decompositions  rather than disjoint sums. second  our work here suggests some natural generalizations to deal with non-persistent systems. any progress along these two lines will obviously be of considerable importance to rewriting and its applications. 
