 
the connection between vision and natural language systems in ai research relies on what is often called reference semantics. in the situation of a radio reporter for soccer games  an utterance must be perceptually anchored and coherent in order to be understandable to a listener not able to see the scene. accordingly  the speaker must be able to anticipate the listeners' understanding by means of mental images. in this paper  we demonstrate the comparison of mental images and visual perception on the level of spatial relations and show how to employ the results for cooperatively filling optional deep cases  and for controlling the use of underspecific definite descriptions. 
introduction jorg rj. schirra 
international computer science institute 
berkeley  california 1 
usa 
joerg icsi.berkeley.edu 
question of reference: can the listener of an assertion uniquely identify the contextual objects in question by means of the given noun phrases  
question of plausibility: is the listener able to integrate the newly communicated information into the present context  which thereby becomes the context for the next assertion   
　for a speaker who wants to be understood  these questions have to be considered in advance: because speakers usually try to give 'economical' descriptions  they need to check whether short but underspecific noun phrases  such as  in the 
extreme case  the proforms  uniquely identify the intended object. the speakers additionally have to consider a third communicative question  since they have a certain intention with their utterance  e.g.  to inform the listeners objectively about something perceived: 
question of correctness: does the listener's interpretation of the assertion correspond to the speaker's intention  or is it necessary to modify the assertion in order to reach the communicative goal intended  the project vltra started in 1 as part of the german special collaboration programme sfb 1  ai & knowledge-
based systems. it deals with the relations between speaking 	in the framework of these questions  we are essentially 
and seeing  and it aims at a completely operational form of reference semantics for what is visually perceived. the system soccer  cf landre et al  1   constructed in vltra demonstrates the computational link between visual perception and natural language. here  we concentrate on the interaction between the 'speaker system' soccer and its listener model antlima  cf.  schirra and stopp  1    mediated by 
the component antlima-koref. 
1 	three communicative questions 
an objective description of soccer events essentially consists of a sequence of assertions. for the listener of the description  
it is crucial to understand each assertion in its corresponding 
context. following the logical distinction between the contextually given anchor points of an utterance1 and the other interested in two particular instances.  1  can the speaker 
use anticipations of the listeners' mental images evoked by the former description in order to choose optional locative deep case fillers as modifications of assertions that otherwise would lead to a correctness problem  as in example  lb    1  can the speaker also use the anticipated mental images to extend his ability to use underspecific definite descriptions in a legitimated way  as in example  1b   
 1   a  m. attacks s. -   b  m. attacks s. near the left penalty spot. 
 1   a  b. crosses the upper side line. -   b  b. crosses the line. 
1 	a glance at soccer and antlima 
soccer generates descriptions of short soccer scenes  in german   similar to a live radio coverage  i.e.  simultaneously and 　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　in an objective manner  to an audience not able to see the game. components of the assertion which are the actually informative 
parts 1 we can distinguish the following two questions: 	the input  called the 'geometrical scene description'  consists 
of the shape and configuration of the soccer field and its parts  
'these are essentially given by the definite noun phrases and their plus  at every time quantum  the set of spatial locations and 
proforms. 	velocity vectors of each mobile object perceived  as provided 

figure 1: extended architecture of soccer 
　the core system of soccer consists of three components  cf. fig. 1  .1 first  the event recognition component analyses the incoming part of the geometrical scene description  based on graded classification functions for elementary static create mental images structurally corresponding to percepts. in generalizing grice's maxim of quality to graded concepts  cf.  grice  1    it is postulated that a listener interprets an utterance of the speaker as a description of a maximally typical occurrence of the mentioned event in the given context; deviations have to be communicated explicitly  cf.  schirra  1  chapter 1  . therefore in antlima the successful construction of a highly typical image is taken as a proof of the planned assertion's plausibility: the listeners are assumed to be able to integrate the newly communicated event within the given context. 

figure 1: graphical representation of the classification functions for 'being in front of a goal area  darkness corresponds to applicability  
spatial relations projecting spatial configurations to degrees of 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　'mental image'  which is necessary to explicitly represent the applicability e  1  1   cf. fig. 1 and  schirra  1  . the implicatures the listeners derive from the utterance  and  c  resulting propositions - describing instances of spatial relathe comparison of this anticipated understanding with the intions and spatio-temporal events  e.g.   left player-1 player-1  tended effects of the utterance and the resulting changes in and  double-pass player-  ball play er-1   - are passed to the the generation processes. the first two steps have already 
selection component. here  the continuation of the report is been described in sufficient detail elsewhere  cf.  schirra and planned by choosing some of the event propositions in ques-
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　stopp  1    schirra  1  ; we include here merely a short tion as relevant to be communicated. the criteria of relevance 　three steps of processing are distinguished:  a  the construction of a visual pseudo-percept   b  the analysis of this 

depend only on the scene perceived  e.g.  time elapsed since perception  or salience of event type; they do not consider the listeners. finally  the generation component transforms the event proposition into an appropriate utterance in german. in particular  the descriptions of the objects in question have to be determined. 
　an additional component with the particular task of improving the text of the core system concerning communicative aspects is given by the listener model antlima - an-
ticipation of the listeners' imagery  cf.  schirra  1; schirra and stopp  1; schirra  1  . it enables the system to deal with the above-mentioned questions of plausibility  correctness  and reference by anticipating the listeners' understanding of a planned statement. according to the approach of reference semantics  the listeners have reached a deep understanding of the description only if they are able to 
   1  an extension for recognizing plans and intentions of the observed agents is realized by the component replai; cf.  retzschmidt  1; 1 . 
1 	cognitive modelling 
overview. 
antlima starts with the event proposition chosen by the 
selection component to be verbalized next. following the definition of the event type in question  an equivalent temporally ordered sequence of sets of elementary spatio-temporal relations is constructed  describing the scene by consecutive snapshots. in a 'cinematographic procedure'  each of these sets is transformed to a corresponding part of a geometrical scene description depending on the proper contextual snapshot: a hill-climbing algorithm is employed to locate the mobile objects concerned at the positions most typical for the given restrictions. the degrees of applicability of the classification functions are re-interpreted as typicality values guiding the search for the optimal position  cf. fig. 1 . when an object is first mentioned  its contextual position is taken to be a standard position associated with the player's function: the goal keeper typically is in his goal area. due to the influence of the particularly given context  the resulting anticipated mental image may differ from the speaker's perception. it therefore is analyzed again in the second step by means of the classifi-

cation procedures used in the core system. these recognition 
procedures distinguish between relevant and irrelevant spatiotemporal differences by either classifying two scenes under distinct categories or putting them together under the same one. under the precondition that the event proposition under consideration was rated plausible 1 we also can assume that this event can be identified again in the image  and thus  is part of both the corresponding i- and r-context: however  the spatial details of understanding may still be different. we therefore now describe how corresponding locative propositions in the i- and r-contexts are associated to form the d-context  i.e.  the set of pairs of propositions expressing the relevant differences. 
figure 1: hill-climbing 
　in this article  we focus on the third step  which defines the task of the antlima-koref component  a-koref  for short; cf.  blocher  1  . under the precondition that the listener could construct a plausible mental image of the utterance planned  a-koref decides whether additional locative deep case fillers could enhance the report  and whether a given object may be referred to by means of an underspecific definite 
description. 	figure 1: architecture of antlima-koref 
but first  let us take a look at how the static locative propo-
1 	the component antlima-koref 	sitions are obtained. the recognition of elementary static 
the data packages used in a-koref are called 'contexts'. 	spatial relations in soccer is initiated on request only  e.g.  
we distinguish intended  realized  and difference contexts  or during event recognition in order to establish further evidence 

i-  r-  and d-contexts  cf. fig. 1 . looking at time point i when the selection component proposes an event proposition to be verbalized  we cope with one corresponding context for each of these types: i-context  i   r-context  i   and dcontext i . the i-context contains the relevant data that is delivered by soccer's core system: this set of current event propositions is sorted according to criteria like state of recognition and salience. furthermore  locative propositions describing the positions of those mobile objects that are visually focused belong to the i-context: their calculation is described below. the r-context is defined analogously to the icontext  but it evolves from antlima's re-analysis. finally  the d-context describes the difference between the i- and rcontexts  and thus  presents the relevant differences between the speaker's intention  a true description of his perception  at moment i  and the listeners' assumed understanding with respect to the proposition chosen to be communicated next. therefore  the d-context is the basis of a-koref's response: depending on this data  a modified proposition is constructed and sent to the component generation to be uttered. 
　due to restrictions of space  we concentrate in the following sections on the differences with respect to the elementary spatial relations and ignore the processing of event propositions.1 descriptions of the latter are to be found in  blocher  1  
for a particular event instance. the construction of the locative parts of i- and r-contexts therefore has to request for corresponding propositions  as well. this obviously poses a problem of efficiency: as we consider more than 1 movable objects - not to mention the static parts of the field - and about 1 static locative binary relations  excluding for the moment the non-intrinsic readings of the projective prepositions and relations like 'between' which all take three arguments   we have to face for every utterance 1 * 1 * 1  i.e.  1 as a lower bound on the number of possible propositions  the degrees of applicability of which would have to be calculated twice  for the speaker's percept and for the anticipated mental image. although the calculation is relatively fast for one such proposition  the high number calls for some intelligent reduction  cf.  blocher  1  . 
　first  we consider only 'simple' binary relations:  a  the topological relations 'in'  'at'  'close to'  and 'near'  and  b  
and  schirra  1  chapter 1 ; essentially  initiating a clarification interruption of the description in order to recover from a severe misunderstanding and changes of the priorities of the event propositions already selected  the speech plan of the selection component  are dealt with; currently  only parts are realized in the implementation of soccer. 
　1i.e.  an image with high typicality could be constructed by antlima. 
	blocher and schirra 	1 

the projective relations 'in front of  'to the right of  'behind'  and 'to the left of in their intrinsic readings. furthermore  as subject of a relation  lo - object to be localized   only those objects are considered that participate in the event proposition considered: that is  the objects used as the fillers of the corresponding obligatory deep cases. the number of these objects is usually highly restricted  three on the average . finally  merely those reference objects  ros  should be looked for that are in the same 'visual focus of attention' as the subjects of the relations  i.e.  located within a certain diameter. 
　in the cases we examined  the number of reference objects focused was five or less; thus  these strategies sum up to reduce the effort to  1 * 1 * 1  = 1 propositions to be calculated twice  and then set into relation. fig. 1 illustrates part of the resulting descriptions for the object in the circle  s1-right-defender : only the propositions printed boldly would be used in the comparison between the intended and the anticipated understanding. 
tual neighbourhood  i.e.  either 'topological'  i.e.  depending essentially on distance  or 'projective'  i.e.  depending essentially on relative direction . thus  if the i-context has high applicability for an object to be at some line in the i-context  and the r-context has high applicability for the same object to be near that same line  a-koref has detected a relevant difference  cf. fig. 1 . in this case  usually an equivalence of the third type will be found as well: if that object's being near that line is highly applicable  the corresponding proposition with 'at' must have a lower degree of applicability in the r-context. 
　the second case is particularly interesting  since it allows the system to notice 'barrier objects'  as they are called in linguistics  cf.  pribbenow  1  : an object c is a barrier object for a spatial relation concerning objects a and b if the existence of c at its location decreases the usability of that relation in a description although objects a and b have not 
changed their positions. 	* 

figure 1: example of 'focused' calculation of relevant spatial relations  only partial result  
1 comparing the intended and the anticipated understanding 
for relating the propositions forming the intended understanding with the equivalent propositions composing the anticipated effects  precisely one of three types of criteria is taken into consideration: two propositions are associated as an element of the d-context if they differ either in the relation  the reference object or the degree of applicability da  cf. table 1 . 

table 1: examples of criteria of equivalence for spatial 
relations 
　more precisely in the first case  only those propositions are associated whose relations are members of the same concep-
1 	cognitive modelling 
figure 1: ball as barrier object for ' close s1 wl   
　for example  a wall between two objects usually breaks down the applicability of 'being near' between those two objects  even if they would be rated as good examples of nearness without that wall  compare fig. 1 with fig. 1 . this is an effect of the context on the interpretation of a locative phrase  hence part of pragmatics. 

figure 1: 'at'  left  and 'near'  right  belong to the same conceptual neighbourhood  graphical representation of the corresponding classification functions  
　all pairs of associated propositions form the d-context of the utterance under consideration. they are additionally rated and ordered with respect to the relevance of the digression they express: the numerical difference between the two degrees of applicability and a measure of the 'conceptual distance' between the involved relations and ros are combined to a general ranking of the three types. those pairs exceeding a 

given threshold of difference lead to changes in the sentence finally uttered. 
1 determining optional deep case fillers 
following the general pragmatic maxim of soccer  i.e.  that all deviations from the contextually most typical instances have to be mentioned explicitly  proposition pairs with a 
sufficient degree of difference should initiate modifications of the proposition chosen. the prominent opportunity for such changes are optional deep cases  particularly the locative forms  like source  goal  or location  cf.  fillmore  1    rauh  1   and especially  marburger and wahlster  1  . in fact  those pairs of differing propositions already tell us what kind of fillers can repair the utterance's communicative problem. 
　if the soccer part of the proposition pair has a higher degree of applicability than the antlima part  then this proposition obtained by the speaker's perception must be uttered because it assumedly is not present in the mental model of the listeners after understanding the unmodified event proposition. in the other case - the proposition from the r-context has the higher degree of applicability of the pair - the proposition from the i-context should be mentioned  too. however  a correction of the location falsely deduced may be added  indicating that the speaker is aware of this contextual difficulty; e.g.   miller stands to the left of scott  not behind him.  
　thus  our example for a communicative difficulty with respect to correctness is solved; with a-koref  we can explain why and when a radio reporter may use optional locative deep cases to insure the correct understanding of his audience. however  there remains one question: is it not necessary to run the whole anticipation and test cycle again on the modified utterance  note that the anticipated understanding of the listeners  and particularly the mental image  obviously have to be modified according to the changes in the utterance: after all  it has to provide the actual context for the next utterance; that is  at least the process of image construction has to be repeated. however  a further run of the other components of antlima  including a-koref  seems unnecessary  if the modifications are compatible with all the other  correct  propositions. a complete justification of this problem has not yet been developed. an ad hoc solution to the latter problem is proposed in the course of the example in section 1. 
1 	anticipated visual focus for attribute elision 
construction and evaluation of the listeners' mental images were based on the assumption that the problem of reference mentioned in the beginning has already been solved: the listeners are able to uniquely identify the objects in question.1 the general means of referring to objects that are already mutually known to all participants of a verbal exchange are definite descriptions.1 for any such object  there is a min-
　1 without that precondition  the listeners would not be able to construct propositions to be interpreted referentially; of course  the speaker must have these propositions before he has the complete utterance; therefore  he may deal with the problem of reference after the problems of plausibility and correctness. 
　1 we here ignore reference by proper names and deictic or indexical expressions. 
imal unambiguous definite description  or even several of them   which usually consists of a set of attributes that separates this particular object from all the others of that context. sometimes  this set may be rather large; shorter descriptions  however  become ambiguous. in general  the speaker can  and should  use a definite description that is ambiguous in the discourse universe in question if the object actually meant is focused by the listener and the alternatives are not. the paradigmatic case for such a focusing occurs if the object meant has already been referred to in earlier utterances of the exchange  cf.  e.g.   jameson and wahlster  1  . 
　a-koref demonstrates a different type of focusing that does not depend on previous mentioning. it is given by the imaginative visual focus of an utterance introduced above while calculating the set of relevant spatial relations: by means of this focus  the r-context contains exactly those spatial implicatures the listener assumedly was able to derive. these implicatures  in turn  form the context of the next utterance: all objects included here are focused by the listeners as well  whether mentioned explicitly before or not. therefore  the uniqueness of the reference of a definite description need not be bound to the whole discourse universe with all the players  the ball  and the parts of the soccer field; the much smaller set of objects involved in the actual imaginative visual focus suffices to determine whether a description is ambiguous or not  and therefore shrinks the set of attributes necessary to uniquely distinguish an object from the others. as was mentioned above  this set of focused objects usually included around five objects in the cases we examined. 

figure 1: player w1 and the ball are the anchor points of the focus 
　thus  the speaker can use  for example  the expression 'the penalty area' instead of 'the left penalty area' without lack of understanding  even if the penalty area meant was never explicitly referred to before. as long as this particular penalty area is the single penalty area in the imaginative visual focus that was ascribed to the listener while determining whether the previous utterance needs some additional deep cases  cf. fig. 1   the attribute 'left' can be elided. 
1 	an example instantiation of a-koref 
the following three sentences are part of a longer example produced by soccer. the modifications initiated by antlima and a-koref are emphasized: 
	blocher and schirra 	1 

figure 1: what is seen and... figure 1: ...what is imagined 
　correspondingly  a-koref is able to construct a non-empty d-context  since the same relation  'near'  is applicable to different reference objects in the two contexts compared: 
i-context:   near w1 upper-side-line  1  
r-context:   near w1 lower-side-line  1  
this leads  as explained above  to the additional prepositional phrase  pp   near the upper side line   in the second utterance. since the mentioned side line is not part of the visual focus of the previous utterance  attribute elision cannot apply. 
　in order to be usable as the correct context for the next utterance  these modifications have now to be integrated in the anticipated understanding of the listeners. by hill-climbing  the position of the object in question is changed so that not only do the additional relation hold  but also all those relations that have already held before correctly. thus  no new difference propositions are constructed.1 
　in the example  additional to relation  near w1 upper-sideline   the relations  in w1 right-half-field  and  near w1 right-
penalty-area  are taken into account. these three relations generate the compound typicality distribution of fig. 1 and result in the revised position of player w1  shown in fig. 1. 
1 this mechanism has not yet been integrated in a-koref. 
1 	cognitive modelling 
figure 1: resulting revised position of w1 
　the position found obviously corresponds extremely well to the speaker's perception. if the two additional propositions are not taken into account  player w1 - being unmentioned and contextually unbound - would be located first in the center of the upper side line since in his standard position hill-climbing based on  near w1 upper-side-line  cannot be started  the gradient is 1 - we use the center of all given reference objects as a heuristic for such cases . from this interim position  the player would be moved by hill-climbing to the closest ' near' -location  either inside or outside the soccer field  violating at least one of the two other restrictions. 
　in the eighth utterance  the decision to use an additional locative prepositional phrase for communicating an optional deep case is motivated as above. in this case  the position of michels  wl 1  resulting from the previous understanding not his standard position - comes out to be not exactly as was observed. a-koref finds the highly relevant difference  first case of classification in table 1 : 
i-context:   close w1 left-penalty-area  1  
r-context:   at w1 left-penalty-area  1  
in the image anticipated for utterance 1  michels happens not to stand close enough to that part of the soccer field to be considered really - as in the speaker's percept - at the left penalty area  cf. fig. 1 . therefore  a corresponding modification should be added. in contrast to the former example  the analysis of the mental image constructed for the previous sentence here did focus on the reference object to be used in the additional pp  i.e.  the left penalty area; simultaneously  the alternative right penalty area was not focused. 

figure 1: focused region for utterance 1 
　correspondingly  the definite description 'the penalty area' can be assumed to be uniquely identifying in this situation the object intended  although it is ambiguous with respect to the whole discourse universe. thus  a-koref suggests for utterance 1 the additional pp 'at the penalty area'  although none of the penalty areas ever were mentioned before during the description. 
1 	conclusion 
the interaction between the core of soccer and its listener model antlima as mediated by antlima-koref allows us to demonstrate how reference semantics and the resulting conception of mental images can be used to answer some communicative questions. motivations for adding necessary locative information or reducing superfluous referential attributes can be based elegantly on a purely imagined visual focus of attention applied to the anticipated understanding of the listeners. further effects on the selection of event propositions and the initiation of self-repair were investigated but not yet realized; they have been described elsewhere  cf. fschirra  1  section 1.if.   iblocher  1  section 1.1f.  . the systems are implemented in common lisp with clos and cl1m. concerning temporal effort  the complete cycle of recognition  selection  anticipated imagination  re-analysis  comparison  and generation of the modified text  without the low-level vision parts of actions  ran for the extended version of the example sketched in section 1 with factor 1 with respect to the real time in the scene described. 
