 	1. 	molecular neurobiology 

recent studies in neurobiology have discovered that many hormones exist in the brain  and play key roles in learning and memorization. in this paper  we discuss the possible role of hormones in learning  and propose a new learning model which incorporates hormonal effects on learning. the model is a variant of reinforcement learning with modulation on learning rate and the frequency of mental rehearsal. the modulation enables the system to focus its learning on data which are evaluated as important for the system's overall performance. the experiment demonstrates that the incorporation of hormonal modulation improves behavior learning performance  and such an evaluation network can be acquired through the evolutionary mechanism. 
1. 	introduction 
recent developments in neuroscience and molecular biology have identified several neural systems which discharge hormones and neuropeptides according to emotional and other internal body status. traditionally  hormones have been thought to control the homeostasis of internal organs  but recent findings suggest that the central nervous system itself produce hormones  thereby affecting behavior and learning. in this paper  we discuss the possible role of hormones in learning  and propose a variant of reinforcement learning. the central claim in this paper is that hormonal modulation of learning  hml  enables the system  or the agent  to focus learning on important incidents for performance and survival  thus improving the total behavioral performance over learning agents without hormonal modulations. evolutionary acquisition of learning focus is essential for autonomous systems in an open dissipative environment. in such an environment  a priori acquisition of training data and a behavior evaluation function is not possible. in addition  importance of the event is not related with the frequency the event takes place. this paper discusses the use of hormoal modulation of learning for designing autonomous agents in the open dissipative environment. 
1 	connectionist models 
this section presents a brief overview of molecular neurobiology relevant to the discussions in this paper. the central issue is how signals among neurons are transmitted and modulated. in the traditional literature  neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine  glutamate  and baminobutyric acid are considered to be the sole chemical components mediating inter-neuron information processing. however  recent studies  particularly in the last decade  revealed that many chemical substances known as hormones arc playing important roles in the central nervous system. for details  refer to  hall  1; mcgaugh  1 . 
1. 	neurotransmitters 
it is well understood that chemical substances mediate signal transmission among neurons. when electric impulses  which propagate through the axon  reach a pre-synaptic site  or axon terminal   chemical substances such as acetylcholine  ach   glutamate  and 1-aminobutyric acid  gaba  are released into the synapse. ach and glutamate mediate excitory connections  and gaba mediate inhibitory connections. these neurotransmitters act on ion channels on the surface of the post-synaptic site  fig. 1-left . the ion channels then open to intake na+ which causes elevation of the action potential. this process causes fast excitatory postsynaptic potentials  fepsf . this part of the information processing has been modeled in current neural networks. however  there are other chemicals involved in the information processing. 
1. 	biogenic amines 
the second group of chemicals  the biogenic amines  include serotonin  1-hydroxytryptamine   histamine  norepinephrine  epinephrine  and dopamine. these chemicals are known as hormones  and are used by endocrine and other cells as well as by neurons. synaptic communication mediated by amines has aspects of both fast and slow transmission. typically  amines are released by paracrine discharge  which means it diffuses to nearby synapses  as opposed to specialized discharge of neuro-

transmitters which acts only at the synapse where the chemicals are discharged. this is illustrated in fig 1. 
　amines act on g protein-linked receptors  and not directly on the ion channels. the process involves the intra-cellular second messengers such as camp and pkc to open the ion channels  fig 1-right . the signal transmission through this process is slow in both onset  tens of milliseconds  and in duration  possibly a few hours . 
　amines are discharged from specialized neural systems called the a  b  and c neural systems. fig. 1 shows an example of projection from the a1 neural system. many hormone producing neurons exist in the hypothalamus and project axons throughout the neocortex. norepinephrine is discharged from a  to a1  dopamine is discharged from a1 to a1 and epinephrine is discharged from the c system. the b system dis-

figure 1: the projection of a1 neural system 
charges serotonin. amines are produced at the cell body and transported through the axon. functionally  amines affect the mental state of the human  such as emotion buck  1 . dopamine  norepinephrine  and epinephrine produces pleasure  anger  and fear  respectively. several experiments demonstrate effect on memory and learning  gold  1; hall  1 . 
1. 	neuropeptide 
the third class of chemicals are neuropepetides  also a kind of hormone. in the 1s  de wied proposed that adrenocorticotropic hormone  acth  and vasopressin  vp  modulate memory and learning by acting on the central nervous system  de wied  1; 1 . research indicated that memory is both enhanced and impaired by post-training treatment affecting the monoaminergic gold  1   cholinergic  flood and cherkin  1   and inhibitory amino acid systems  castellano and pavone  1  as well as peptide systems. including acth de wied  1   vp fde wied  1   and opioid peptide  castellano  1 . recent findings indicate that other peptides  including substance p  schlesinger et al  1   cck  flood et al.  1b . angiotensin ii  yonkov et al.  1   somatostatin  vecsei et al  1   and neuropeptide y  flood et al.. 1a . modulate memory storage. 
　in general  neuropeptides mediate slow transmissions. currently  over 1 neuropeptides have been identified in the central nervous system  and several neuropeptides were found to co-exist at one pre-synaptic site. 
1. implications for learning theory 
models of neural networks and learning theories must be revised in order to incorporate functions of biogenic amines and neuropeptides. due to the limitations of paper length  we focus on a model incorporating functions of biogenic amines. among many possible impacts  this section focuses on three aspects that have immediate impacts on learning theory. 
1. 	elevation of action potential 
with regard to the forward propagation of a signal  the current model uses equation: 

　where a; is the activation level of the neuron i  wij is a weight between neuron i and j  and h is the bias. by incorporating hormonal activity  this needs to be revised to: 
	kitano 	1 
speculating from the elevated action potential of the neurons and known neural circuits in the brain  we may be able to assume the existence of mental rehearsal and its modulation by hormones. mental rehearsal in this paper means the repeated internal exposure of patterns for memorization. this process does not have to be a conscious process. we speculate that mental rehearsal occurs through the closed loop formed by upward pro-
jections from the hippocampus to the neo-cortex and back projections from the neo-cortex to the hippocampus. with a crude abstraction  this can be schmatized as in fig. 1. short term memory  stm  represents the hippocampus  and three long term memory  ltm  discussions in the previous section lead us to propose a new model of reinforcement learning. the model is a variant of reinforcement learning  and can be applied to existing learning algorithms. a basic architecture is shown in fig. 1. the model consists of a geneticallydetermined reaction network  react   an evaluation network  also genetically determined   eval   and a policy network  policy . 
　when an input is given to an agent implementing the model  it is received by policy  eval  and react. given the input  react produces motor control reactions  eval produces reinforcement reward  reward  and 

focus  focus  which will be explained later  policy produces a motor control output. the final motor action is determined by adding outputs from react and policy. 
　in the model react. eval and policy are implemented using feed-forward neural networks whose initial connection weights are genetically determined by means of the ga process. in this experiment  we used the direct encoding method  whitley and hanson  1 . for policy  weights are modified through a learning mechanism. react and policy use a 1-1 network  and eval uses 1-1 network. for eval. there are 1 input nodes because 1 for sensory inputs and 1 for internal energy level. activation levels of two output nodes correspond to reward and focus. in this paper  we use one policy network rather than three networks. as a learning mechanism for the model  we employ a modified version 
of evolutionary reinforcement learning  erl:  ackley and littman  1  . the learning component of the erl is complementary reinforcement back propagation  crbp . fig. 1 shows the algorithm of crbp. 
　we made an extension to the original crbp to incorporate learning modulation by hormones. crbp in its original form only takes reward to change its learning behavior  and no modulation is made on the maximum number of mental rehearsals1 nor the learning rate parameter. in our model  focus produced from eval captures the level of hormonal discharge  thus affecting the learning rate and the maximum amount of back propagation allowed for learning. when focus is almost zero  almost no mental rehearsal is allowed. a high focus level allows a large number of mental rehearsals and a larger learning rate. this means that focus level determines which event is important. the existance of focus is the major extension from erl. fig 1 shows a new algorithm. revised parts are shown with underlines  focus 1. experiments 
and reward correspond to r and / in fig. 1. with this modification  a revised crbp should be able to focus 
learning on significant data. 	1. 	artificial world 

artificial world 

shows a snapshot of the world. experiments reported in this paper assume 1 food sites and 1 enemies. the agent consumes 1 unit of energy per grid unit moved. the agent will die if its energy reaches zero. each food site gives the agent 1 units of energy. when the agent is attacked by the enemy  the agent loses 1 points of energy. 
　simple sensor systems are available for the agent. it has two types of sensors for 1 directions. each sensor covers 1 degrees. one type of sensor detects food; the other type detects enemies. strength of the sensor readings corresponds to the distance to the object. 
1. 	evolution 
a genetic algorithm was used to simulate the evolutionary process. the genetic algorithm uses real value direct encoding to represent weights  whitley and hanson  1   two point crossover  an elitist reproduction strategy combined with proportional reproduction  and an adaptive mutation rate ranging from 1% to 1%. the population size for the following experiments is 1. the initial values for the weights encoded on the chromosome are distributed with a range of ＼1. after a predefined time period  1 time units   each individual is evaluated based on its energy level. if an individual has already been killed by an enemy attack  its fitness is equal to the number of time units it has survived. 
1. 	results 
a series of experiments was carried out to evaluate the new learning model. the model has been compared with several other models so that four indepdent models were tested  including: 
1. genetic reaction only  gen  
1. genetic reaction and fixed reinforcement  fix  

figure 1: experimental architectures 
1. genetic reaction and erl  erl  
1. genetic reaction and erl with hormonal modulation  hml-erl  
　fig. 1 shows the architecture for each model. first  an agent with only a genetic reaction circuit gen was evolved and tested in the artificial world. this data is used as a baseline to measure the effects of other circuits on behavior performance. next  an agent with eval and policy with pre-programmed reinforcement was tested. policy receives positive reinforcement when it eats food  and negative reinforcement when attacked by the enemy. thus  its learning behavior is based on crbp with a fixed evaluation circuit. the third experiment was carried out using the model proposed in this paper. the control experiment was carried out using the same architecture  but without modulating the learning rate or numbers of mental rehearsals. the control group is equivalent to evolutionary reinforcement learning  erl:  ackley and littman  1  . 
　the average performance of these variations are shown in figure 1. this is a typical result from 1 experiments performed on the same task. several interesting results can be discovered. first  the proposed model attained the best performance. this supports our hypothesis that hormonal modulation improves learning capability. second  the genetic-reaction-only model  gen  outperformed all other models except the proposed model  hml-erl . 
　for the model with fixed reinforcement  fix   the performance is significantly worse than the model with ge-


netic reaction alone. the problem for this model is that the evolution and behavior of the genetic reaction circuit and the learning and behavior of the policy network are not coordinated  so that two independent behavior modules are evolved and learned without interacting. this experimental result clearly demonstrates that simply adding a learning module on top of the reactive module does not necessarily improve the agent's overall performance. 
　the surprise comes with the performance of erl. it shows a significantly worse performance than the proposed model hml-erl  and equivalent to or even worse than the agent with only the genetic reaction module  gen . the only difference between the proposed model and this model is in the existence of learning rate and mental rehearsal modulation based on the signals from the evaluation module. in the original erl  reinforcement learning is triggered for every input ragardless of its importance. thus  memories of important events are scrambled by weight updates caused by a large number of unimportant and often noisy inputs. the environment in this experiment is sparse than the experiment environment in  ackley and littman  1  where agents using erl performed better than genetically-hard-coded agents. thus  the result is dependent upon the evironrnent. 
1. discussions 
1. evolution of learning control 
hml is closely related with emotion. since the discharge of hormone is associated with changes in emotional status  hml can be viewed as emotion-driven learning. emotion has already been considered as a mechanism of behavior control  toda  1; pfeifer  1 . we consider that emotion also controls learning by regulating the discharge of hormone. however  it is not clear how emotional control emerged through evolution. experiments indicate that agents with the genetical-determined behavior module  gen  perform almost as well as hml-erl. 
in some runs  gen outperformed hml-erl at the early stage of evolution. this is because an appropriate evaluation network was not acquired at the early stage of evolution for hml-erl. if several agents co-exist in the same environment  hml-erl and erl could have been extinct due to slow acquisition of an evaluation network. thus  there is a need to evolve complex agents using an incremental built-up approach. in this case  the first step is to use emotion  more precisely a hormonal discharge  as the sole mechanism of behavior control. the main question is  how was the more complex module can be created and connected to the older module. this is our major future research target. 
1. symbol grounding 
hml can be applied as a solution for the symbol grounding problem. the basic approach is to evaluate an input sequence  and decide which input to focus for learning. this means that partitioning of a signal stream may be possible. while various studies demonstrate that formation of attractors from an input stream is possible  pollack  1; tani  1   these input streams need to be partitioned. each attractor can be viewed as a symbol representing a specific pattern of the sensory input. the input sequences in these studies are either a sequence of symbols  pollack  1l   or a sequence of continuous signal with a hand-coded partitioning function  tani  1 . for example  in tani s robot navigation using dynamical systems approach  tani  1   learning is invoked only when sensory input shows a pattern of a road branching for a maneuver. without the hand-coded partitioning function  learning is always activated. in this case  attractors are not formed. this suggests that partitioning of the input stream is necessary for the self-organization of the symbols. the question is how the partitioning function emerged. our hypothesis is that a neural circuit for partitioning  which provides focus in hml  was acquired through evolution  and the first level partioning was performed using this circuit. thus  the acquisition of focusing circuits using hormonal modulation leads to the formation of a primitive set of symbols. if this hypothesis is correct  it means that hormonal modulation plays an important role in symbol grounding. 
1. concludings remarks 
in this paper  we discussed the possible role of hormones in learning  and proposed and examined a new model of reinforcement learning. the proposed model is derived from recent findings in molecular neurobiology. although the model examined and the task was a simple one  it clearly demonstrates the effectiveness of using hormonal modulation for learning. the result of this experiment has two implications. first  it shows that modeling hormonal activities enables the focus of attention for learning  thereby improving behavioral performance. this would be an important approach for autonomous agents behaving in the real world  because such an agent needs to determine what is important for its survival or task accomplishment. the proposed model enables the 
	kitano 	1 
agent to learn vital events even if they are rare events. seocnd  the result supports biological findings regarding memory modulation by hormones from computational perspectives. while there is much evidence for memory modulation by hormones  these are at either molecular level or behavioral level. no study so far has documented the role of hormonal modulation at the mesoscopic level. 
　although we used erl as a basis of the experiment and the model was proposed as a modification of erl  the basic idea can be applied to other learning algorithms. now  it is an open question whether the method proposed has universality so that it improves learning performance when applied to various learning models. if this is the case  the hormonal modulation enables the focusing of learning by evaluating learning data on the basis of the system's goal. 
　further research topics will be to incorporate the effects of neuropepetides and multiple amines for focusing. 
acknowledgments 
i would like to thank members of sony computer science 
laboratory for useful discussions  and prof. susumu tonegawa  mit  and dr. gen matsumoto  etl  for insightful comments. 
