 
the specification  design  and verification of agent-oriented systems depends upon having clear  intuitive formalisms for reasoning about the properties of such systems. in this paper  we consider agents whose state comprises the three mental attitudes of belief  desire  and intention. while the static relationships among these entities has had considerable attention  the manner in which these entities change over time has not been formalized rigourously. by considering some simple examples  we show that the formalization of some of these intuitions is problematic. we then examine these intuitions from a possible-worlds perspective and formally describe the dynamics of intention maintenance in the context of changing beliefs and desires. to solve the problems identified in the examples  and to properly capture our semantic intuitions about intention maintenance  we extend the standard logics by introducing forms for only modalities of belief  desire  and intention  along the lines of levesque's only believe operator. this allows us to formalize the process of intention maintenance. we conclude by comparing our work with other related work. 
1 	introduction 
agent-oriented systems are finding increasing application in the commercial world. one of the most successful of agent architectures is that based around the notions of belief  desire  and intention  bdi   1; 1; 1; 1; 1   representing respectively the informative  motivational  and decision components of the agent. such systems have been applied to a wide range of large-scale applications  including air traffic control  telecommunications network management  business process management  and simulation. 
　within such systems  intentions play an essential role. first  prior intentions pose problems for further deliberation; in ai terms  they specify the goals  ends  for further means-ends analysis. second  prior intentions constrain the deliberation process because they rule out options that conflict with existing intentions. under this view  the deliberation process is a continuous 
distributed ai 
resource-bounded activity rather than a one-off exhaustive decision-theoretic analysis . 
　the critical element in this view of practical reasoning is that the adoption of an intention entails some form of commitment to that intention. that is  intentions only have value if they are maintained from one time point to the next-if they are not so maintained  they can establish neither the goals for further deliberation nor the basis for ruling out conflicting options. 
　however  the specification  design  and verification of such systems depends on being able to semantically model these agents and formally describe the process of intention maintenance and the resulting agent behaviour. 
　a number of formalisms that provide the semantics of intention and its relation to the other attitudes  such as belief and desire  have been proposed in 'the literature. in providing these formalisms  various possible static relationships among belief  desire and intention have been considered. in essence  most of these reflect the intuition that one only adopts an intention to an action or proposition that is  i  desired and  ii  believed to be possible. the variations on this basic intuition concern certain special cases that one may or may not consider important  dependent on the purpose of the formalization. 
　in addition  some authors have proposed certain axioms to capture the dynamic relationships among these attitudes  particularly those concerning the maintenance of intentions. the intuition here is that an intention should be maintained as long as the object of the intention  i  is continued to be desired   ii  is continued to be believed possible  and  iii  has not yet been achieved.1 
　unfortunately  the translation of this condition into formal axioms of intention maintenance is more problematic than it first appears. in fact  it turns out that to express these dynamic properties of intention maintenance requires a more expressive logic than has been considered in the literature so far. 
　in this paper  we base our approach on a possibleworlds model developed previously  1; 1; 1 . however  the results we obtain apply more generally. 
　*in this paper we make the simplification that the object of the intention  once achieved  is no longer desired. 
1 	the problem 	1 	informal model for simplicity  let us consider the relationship between intentions and beliefs only. from the discussion above  one would expect the formalization of the maintenance condition for intentions to take something like the following form: 
where is true 
at the next time point. 
　consider a situation in which john intends to go to the beach. from the above axiom  john will maintain this intention as long as he believes it to be achievable.1 if  or when  john discovers that it is not possible to go to the beach  this intention can be dropped  and  indeed  the static constraints would force it to be dropped . this is just what we want. 
　however  let's assume that john also believes it is possible to fly to london  but has no intention of doing so. 
because we have  ntend x go-to-bcach   we also have 
 under a possible worlds model  the disjunctive intention intend x go-to-beach v go-to-london  . now  when it turns out that visiting the beach is impossible  the intention towards visiting the beach will be duly dropped. but  unfortunately  the intention towards the disjunction  go-to-beach v go-to-london  will be maintained  as the disjunct remains a possibility . from application of the static constraints  it can then be deduced that john  at the next time point  will intend to fly to london. in other words  john will be forced to adopt as new intentions any beliefs about the future he still holds! 
a similar problem arises in the the following situation. 
john intends to obtain milk from the milk bar and cereal from the supermarket. he goes to the milk bar  sees that it is closed  and thus abandons the intention of obtaining milk. as a result john also gives up his intention to have milk and cereal. however  if intentions are closed under conjunction-as they are in a possible worlds model- intending to have milk and cereal implies an intention to have milk and an intention to have cereal. while the former two can no longer hold  using the above axiom of intention maintenance  the intention to have cereal would be  incorrectly  maintained. 
　noting similar problems  konolige and pollack also considered closure under conjunction to be a problem for intentions  although in relation to static rather than dynamic properties. their solution involves representationalist approach to the modelling of intentions . 
　but what is the real problem here  is it simply that we do not want closure under conjunction  or is our simple axiomatization just not properly capturing our intuitions  while some of the undesirable symptoms of the problem are clear  the cause is not. 
　the approach we adopt here is to go back to our semantic model and understand what was really intended by the conditions of intention maintenance  and to develop axioms that properly reflect our semantic intuitions. 
   1 clearly  we need to add additional conditions to account for changing desires and the successful achievement of john's intentions. however  for simplicity  we do not consider these situations here. 
the formal and informal models of our bdi agents have been discussed elsewhere  1; 1; 1 . in this section  we briefly describe our model and then motivate the static and dynamic relationships between different entities within the model. 
　our semantic model consists of sets of possible worlds where each possible world is a branching tree structure with a single past. a particular index within a possible world is called a time point or situation. the branches within a tree structure represent different courses of action or execution paths. we model the beliefs of the agent by a set of such possible worlds  called the beliefaccessible worlds of the agent. similarly  we model the desires and intentions of the agent by a set of desireaccessible worlds and a set of intention-accessible worlds  respectively. 
　the different belief-accessible worlds represent the agent's lack of knowledge or chance inherent in the environment; that is  as far as the agent knows  the actual world could be any one of the belief-accessible worlds. within each belief world  each path represents the options or choice of action available to the agent. 
　corresponding to each belief-accessible world is a desire-accessible world and an intention-accessible world.1 these represent  respectively  the desires and intentions of the agent with respect to that particular belief world  that is  the desires and intentions the agent would have if that world was known to be the actual world . each path within the desire-accessible world represents an execution path that the agent wants to achieve  or is content to achieve   and each path within an intention-accessible world represents an execution path that the agent has decided upon  one of which  in the context of our earlier discussion  the agent is committed to bringing about . 
　now consider the static structural relationships among such a triple of belief-desire-intention worlds. while  for any such triple  we place no constraints on the relationship between the paths believed possible and the desired paths  we require that the intention paths be a subset of both  see figure 1 . this reflects the intuition that one will only intend a course of action that is both believed possible and desired.1 
　but what happens now as we move from one time point to the next  from t to v in world w as shown in figure 1   the basic intuition is that  provided the agent's beliefs and desires are not significantly changed  the agent's intentions will be maintained. more specifically  for any triple of belief-desire-intention worlds  we would like to retain any existing intention path provided it was still both believed possible and desired. any intention path that was no longer believed possible  or was no longer desired  would be pruned off the intention structure. any new belief paths  i.e.  new opportunities  shown as a dotted path with r true in the future in 
   1  we elsewhere  consider the more general case where we relax the requirement for such a one-to-one correspondence. 1 for discussion of this point  see our earlier work  1; 1 . 
	georgeff and rao 	1 
　

figure 1: an example of belief  desire  and intention revision 

distributed al 
　
the semantic constraints sci and sc1. axiom al states that any intended execution path must be believed to be possible  that is  must be believed to be an option for the agent . axiom a1 states that any inevitable belief will be intended.1 axioms a1 and a1  resulting from the constraints sci and sc1  state that any path that is intended must be desired and any inevitable desire will be intended. axiom a1  resulting from constraints sci and sc1  states that at least one of the desired execution paths is believed achievable. 
　to preserve the mapping to decision trees  ll   we make the following deterministic world assumption. this assumption requires for a given model  and all world time point pairs  that  then 1 = b'  where l is the truth assignment function. intuitively  this means that there is no additional non-determinism beyond that represented by different belief worlds. in other words  the real world is deterministic; any perceived non-determinism results from an agent's lack of knowledge of the world. similar assumptions hold for desire- and intention-accessible worlds.1 
　we refer to the above axiomatization together with the axioms relating intention and action  see our earlier work l1  for details  as the bdi-modal system. other variations to this axiomatization can be obtained by allowing the total 1 mappings /  g and h to be partial  which account for the cases that have been referred to as realism   weak-realism   and strong-realism . different structural relationships can also be adopted among b-  v-  and z-accessible worlds to obtain further variations in the axiomatizations. 
 it turns out  however  that under all these variants we need some additional expressive power to capture the notion of intention maintenance discussed above. to achieve this  we now extend the language bdictl* by introducing only forms of the modalities for beliefs  desires  and intentions. intuitively  if an agent only intends a formula then is true in all the intention-accessible worlds and the set of intention-accessible worlds includes all worlds where is true. 
  includes only the if part 
of the definition above. it is important to note that  whereas the operator intend is closed under conjunction  ointend is not. that is  we have the following theorem: 
theorem 1 the following statements are true of the ointend operator. 

　1 as discussed in our previous work  these axioms can be weakened by adopting alternative semantics constraints to that of sci and sc1. 
　1 the mappings /  g  and h are uniquely determined by the truth function assignment l  given the assumption of a deterministic world. 
　the proof is straightforward . for example  the above properties of the only intend modality entail that  if john only intends having milk and cereal for breakfast  he will not necessarily also only intend having milk and only intend having cereal. similarly  if john only intends to go to the beach  he will not necessarily also only intend to go to the beach or only to go to london. 
1 	maintenance of intentions 
now let us consider the problem of an agent maintaining its intentions as the environment changes. our aim is to specify semantic constraints on our models that will determine how the model changes from one time point to another. in so doing  we will treat the processes of belief and desire revision as given and consider how these processes determine intention revision. 
　let us assume that the agent revises its beliefs using some well-known belief revision or update procedure  l . for the purpose of this paper  we assume that the nondeterminism  chance  inherent in the beliefs of the agent remains constant over time. intuitively  this corresponds to an agent believing it is in one of a number of possible worlds  its beliefs about which can change over time  but about which it can never get sufficient information to eliminate any from consideration. it may  for example  discover that  for any particular possible world  it has different options than previously believed  but will not be able to reduce the uncertainty concerning which possible world it is actually in. 
　under this assumption  at the semantic level the belief revision function is a total 1 mapping; that is  the belief revision process maps each old belief world into a corresponding new belief world. the propositions that hold in that new belief world may be quite different from those that held in the previous belief world  but no new belief worlds are introduced nor old ones deleted. 
　although this seems restrictive  the assumption can be relaxed without too much difficulty by removing the semantic constraint sci on the functions /  g  and h. however  for the purposes of this paper  this unnecessarily complicates the picture. 
　we therefore postulate a belief revision function which maps each belief-accessible world to its revised belief-accessible world. more formally  we have: 
definition 1 for each world w and time t the belief revision 	function 	is a mapping from the set of beliefaccessible worlds at t to the set of belief-accessible worlds at the next instant v. formally  
 we postulate similar desire revision and intention revision functions for each world w and time point t  denoted by and   respectively. figure 1 shows the various functions involved in the revision process. each solid circle represents a world which is a branching tree structure. the set of belief-accessible worlds at world w and time t has a total 1 mapping to its corresponding desire-accessible  denoted by   i and intention-accessible worlds  denoted by  . the belief revision function maps each world in to its corresponding world in  and similarly for the desire and intention revision functions. the functions     and 
	georgeff and rao 	1 
　

distributed al comparison and conclusion 
cohen and levesque  define the notion of intention in 
　
　finally  it is worth considering two variations to the above model of intention maintenance:  a  what happens if the new belief-accessible world contains a new option  e.g.  a path ending in the proposition r  that was not present in the previous time point; and  b  what happens if the filtered intention-accessible world has no future options  e.g.  if the original intention-accessible world did not have the path ending only in q . 
　in the first case  intention maintenance will ensure the stability of intentions but does not allow the exploitation of new opportunities. as a result  any additional options that are part of the revised belief-accessible world will not be included in the corresponding new intentionaccessible world. this is exactly what one wants for intention maintenance. however  this does not mean that new options can never be considered-an agent with sufficient computational resources may reconsider its intentions in the light of new opportunities. this can be modelled as a separate process following the above fdtering process. 
　in the second case  no intentions will be maintained and the agent has no choice but to reconsider his available options. that is  the agent would have to deliberate anew  ll  to derive new intention-accessible worlds from its current belief- and desire-accessible worlds. 
　similar results can be expected to hold when we relax the constraints that the revision functions be total 1 mappings  together with the semantic constraint sci . however  this goes beyond the scope of this paper. terms of the other entities  such as beliefs  goals  persistent goals  and actions. in their formalism  an agent has a persistent goal or pgoal if and only if the agent currently believes has the goal to eventually make true  and maintains this goal until it either comes to believe in   or comes to believe that  is impossible. pgoal is closed under conjunction except in the special case where the agent already believes that one of the conjuncts is true or when the conjuncts hold at different time points. as neither example given in section 1 is one of these special cases  the problems identified there are also exhibited in cohen and levesque's theory. similarly  pgoal is closed under disjunction except in very special circumstances. one could rectify the problems by adopting a similar approach to that used here. 
　as mentioned earlier  konolige and pollack  claim that normal modal logics  nml  are not suitable for modelling intentions. they introduce a model of intentions that has two components:  possible worlds that represent possible future courses of events  and cognitive structures  a representation of the mental state components of an agent  . 
　they define a scenario for a proposition as the set of worlds in w that make  true  denoted by .an agent intends iff the set of scenarios for is identical to the set of scenarios for any intention in the cognitive structure of the agent. this has an interesting correlation with our definition of ointend  if one considers each of their intention worlds as a path in our branching tree structures. the primary difference between the 
	ge1eff and ra1 	1 
　
two approaches being that konolige and pollack follow a syntactic or representationalist approach and we follow a semantic approach. as a consequence  in their approach one has to explicitly conjoin formulas in the set of intentions given by the cognitive structure. our semantic approach makes this unnecessary. moreover  and perhaps more importantly  the semantic approach allows us to address the cause of the problem  not its symptoms. 
　konolige and pollack do not address the issue of belief and intention revision but do extend the notion of cognitive structures in terms of the plans of an agent. in this paper  we have explored the role of the only modalities in intention revision  but have remained silent on the important notion of plans . 
　the only modality was introduced by levesque  in the context of beliefs and non-monotonic reasoning to capture the notions of stable sets in autoepistemic logic on a semantic basis. we have used the same concept for all the mental attitudes of the agent to give semantic characterizations of intention revision. 
　the primary contribution of this paper has been to lay out a semantic story of intention maintenance in the context of changing beliefs and desires. by introducing the only modalities to exactly specify paths of execution  we have also been able to provide a sound axiomatization of the intention maintenance process. 
　of course  considerable work remains to be done. the completeness of the axiomatization needs further investigation. in addition  the restrictive conditions on the correspondence functions relating beliefs  desires  and intentions need to be removed and the proofs redone in this context. finally  we need to show clearly how all this fits equally well within a decision-theoretic framework. 
　acknowledgements: this research was supported by the cooperative research centre for intelligent decision systems under the australian government's cooperative research centres program. 
