 
interpreting spectral images requires comparing known patterns with input data  images  to identify which patterns are contained in the input data. in practice  however  it is hard to identify any pattern when the inaccuracy of input data is not slight. in this paper  we present a method for interpreting spectral images by using qualitative reasoning. first  we put forward a new concept called support coefficient function  scf  which can be used to extract  represent  and calculate qualitative correlations among data. then  we introduce an approach to determining dynamic shift intervals of inaccurate data on the basis of qualitative correlations. finally  we discuss how to use qualitative correlations as evidence of enhancing or depressing hypotheses for inaccurate data. the method has been applied to a practical system for interpreting infrared spectral images. we have fully tested the system against several hundred real spectral images. the rate of identification  ri  and the rate of correctness  rc  are near 1% and 1% respectively  and the latter is the highest among known systems. 
1 	introduction 
interpreting spectral images is a special problem of diagnosis. the problem requires comparing known patterns with input spectral images to identify which patterns may be contained by the images  anand et a/.  1; sadtler  1 . because spectral data are always inaccurate  one difficult task is to deal with uncertain evidence. 
　currently known methods and systems of spectral image interpretation are primarily based on quantitative analysis  culthup et a/.  1; sadtler  1 . the essential principle of quantitative analysis is to determine the possibility that a pattern may be contained by an image by calculating the difference between the pattern and the parts of the image. in practice  however  a critical problem of applying quantitative analysis is that it is hard to identify any pattern when the inaccuracy of input data is not slight. fuzzy logic and probability theory can partially solve the problem  duda and nilsson  
1 	action and perception 
1; zadeh  1   but they can not consider qualitative correlations among data1 which are very important and effective in spectral image interpretation. 
　we present a novel method for interpreting spectral images by using qualitative reasoning. the method draws inferences on the basis of qualitative features of spectral images  and uses qualitative correlations among data as evidence when input data are inaccurate. 
　we put forward a new concept called support coefficient function  scf . scf can be used to extract  represent  and calculate qualitative correlations among data. on the basis of qualitative correlations and dynamically obtained information  shift intervals of inaccurate data can be dynamically determined. when input data are inaccurate  qualitative correlations can provide evidence to enhance or depress hypotheses for inaccurate data  zhao and nishida  1   
　we have developed a practical system on infrared spectral image interpretation by using the method  and have fully tested the system against several hundred real spectral images. the experimental results with the system are excellent. both the rate of correctness  rc  and the rate of identification  ri  increase significantly by using the method1. 
　in the following sections  we first describe the problem of spectral image interpretation in section 1. then in section 1  we address the essentials of our method including some useful definitions. in section 1  we introduce our method for interpreting inaccurate spectral data by considering qualitative correlations among data. section 1 demonstrates the application of the method to a system on infrared spectral image interpretation  and shows the experimental results with the system. related work is discussed in section 1. our ongoing research is briefly introduced in section 1. conclusions are addressed in section 1. 
1 	motivating problem 
the primary task of spectral image interpretation is to identify what patterns a spectral image contains by inter-
1  detailed definition will be given in section 1. 
1 rc and ri are two important metrics for evaluating the solutions of infrared spectral image interpretation. we will give the detailed definitions of rc and ri  and show the experimental results of our system in section 1. 

preting the spectral image. in the rest of the paper  we limit the problem to interpreting infrared spectral images of unknown compounds to identify what partial components {pc  the unknown compounds contain without loss of generality. 
　briefly  the infrared spectral image of an unknown compound can be thresholded and represented as a set of peaks: 

where every peak consists of its frequency position  /   strength  s   and width  w  respectively: 

　the patterns of known partial components can be represented in the following form: 
is contained by a compound  then 
on the spectral image of the compound  there will be peak 
　ideally  if all peaks on spectral images are accurate  the process of interpreting infrared spectral images of unknown compounds can be simply described in the following way. 
1. select a peak from sp. retrieve all partial components whose patterns have the same peak  and put the partial components in a candidate list: cl; 
1.select a partial component    from cl. 	if 
 sp  then put the partial components in a solution list: sl; otherwise  delete the partial component from cl; 
1. goto 1 until all partial components in cl are checked; 
1. goto 1 until all peaks on sp are identified; 
1. delete conflicts  overlaps  among partial components in sl  and output sl as the solution1. 
the overview of the process is shown in figure 1. 

figure 1: overview of interpretation process 
　in practice  however  spectral data are often inaccurate due to various reasons most of which are unforeseen  
   1  we will not discuss conflict-resolving in this paper  but concentrate on the method for identifying inaccurate data. or unknown at all. therefore  the peaks created by a partial component on real spectral images are often different from the peaks described by the pattern of the partial component. 
　fuzzy logic provides mathematical fundamentals of representation and calculation of inaccurate data  bowen et a/.  1; negoita and ralescu  1; zadeh  1 . for example  peaks in the patterns of partial components may be described in a fuzzy fashion like fa  is around 
　 not is equal to and a fuzzy region may also be defined to represent the peaks like probabilistic reasoning provides a practical framework for reasoning under uncertainty and reasoning with inaccurate data  dempster  1; pearl  1 . in many systems  subjective statements are used to take the place of statistics of data or evidence when statistical samples are insufficient or absent  such as certainty factors in mycin  shortliffe  1  and prior probabilities in prospect  duda and nilsson  1 . 
　however  both fuzzy logic and probability theory are based on quantitative features  but in many cases  especially when data are seriously inaccurate  qualitative features are much more important than quantitative ones. figure 1 shows two simple cases. the quantitative difference between the two spectral images in  a  is smaller than that between the two spectral images in  b . by conventional fuzzy or probabilistic methods  the two images in  a  should be closer than those in  b . actually  the two spectral images in  b  may be created by the same partial component in some cases  while the two spectral images in  a  are definitely created by two different partial components because the number of peaks is different. here  the number of peaks on spectral images is a critical qualitative feature. 

　we propose a novel method to interpret infrared spectral images by using qualitative reasoning. the method draws inferences on the basis of qualitative features of spectral images  and uses qualitative correlations among data as confirmatory or disconfirmatory evidence when input data are inaccurate. 
　suppose p a  represents the possibility that two images in  a  are created by the same partial component  and p b  represents the possibility that two images in  b  are created by the same partial component. at the beginning  p a    p b   but with the obtaining of qualitative correlations among data  p b  will increase  and p a  will decrease. 
　by our method  the above ideal process can be briefly expressed as the following predicate calculus: 

	zhao and nishida 	1 

1 preliminaries 
1 	qualitative correlations among data 
definition 1 related data: if data d1  d1  ...  and dm describe a common phenomenon altogether  or they refer to the same behavior simultaneously  then they can be treated as related data. 
　in infrared spectral image interpretation  there are two types of related data:  1  as far as a single peak is concerned  the frequency /  strength s  and width w of the peak are related data;  1  if the pattern of a partial component is considered  all the peaks in the pattern are related data. 
definition 1 qualitative correlations among related data: if dj and dj are two related data  then the presence of d{ somewhat  qualitatively  enhances the presence of dj  and the absence of di somewhat  qualitatively  depresses the presence of dj. the above effects are called qualitative correlations among related data. 
　in infrared spectral image interpretation  if data gathered from spectral images look like  but are not exactly the same as  the data described in the patterns of partial components  considering qualitative correlations among related data can obtain qualitative evidence. for example  suppose the frequency position of a peak is different from that in a pattern  but both the strength and width of the peak are the same as described in the pattern  then the frequency position of the peak may still be identified because both of its related data support it. similarly  if peaks at low frequency sections are inaccurate  considering their related peaks at high frequency sections may help identify these peaks  and vice versa. 
1 	support coefficient function 
definition 1 support coefficient junction  scf : if there are m - 1 data related to di  then the support coefficient function of di calculates the total effects from the related data by considering the qualitative correlations between di and each of its related data. 
　suppose represents the qualitative correlation between di and dj  then the support coefficient function of di can be defined as: 

　scfi should directly depend on how many and how much related data support dt. when scfi is greater than a certain value given by domain experts  the related data tend to support di otherwise  the related data tend to depress di. 
1 evidence based on scf in section 1  we used to express that pi can 
be qualitatively identified from realizing requires to define a shift interval for 
1 	action and perception 
and then to determine the possibility of 
　the above formula is similar to that in fuzzy logic  but contains completely different meanings. the primary difference is that the shift intervals are dynamically determined by scfi.   while in fuzzy logic  the fuzzy regions are usually provided by domain experts in advance. definition 1 shift interval: shift interval is a dynamic region for inaccurate data. given a standard fuzzy region for inaccurate di  the shift interval of di varies around the standard fuzzy region on the basis of scfi. when scfi shows that the related data support di the shift interval of di becomes wider than the standard fuzzy region. on the other hand  when scfi shows that the related data do not support di  the shift interval of di becomes narrower than the standard fuzzy region. definition 1 evidence based on scf: scfi determines the shift interval of di  that is  scfi determines how widely di is allowed to shift. the wider the shift interval  the more easily di is identified. therefore  scfi provides confirmatory or disconfirmatory evidence for identifying dj. 
1 	qualitatively interpreting spectral images 
as described in section 1  there are two types of related data in infrared spectral image interpretation. first  all the features of a peak are related data. second  all the peaks created by the same partial component are also related data. for making our introduction brief  in this section  we omit the process of considering the former type of related data  and directly introduce the process of considering the latter one. 
　suppose m peaks  p1  p1  ...  pm  may be created by the same partial component  and d1 is the standard fuzzy region for real peaks  then our method can be described as the following steps. 
 step 1  defining support coefficient function 
　first  we define the qualitative correlation between two related peaks  pi and pj  as: 

where ci pj  expresses the qualitative effect of pj on pi'. ci pj =l means that pi is enhanced since its related data item pj can be identified; '  =1 means that pi is depresses since its related data item pj can not be identified. ci pj  provides dynamic information for making interpretation. the definition of ci pj  is simply based on the consideration that if a peak of a partial component has been identified  then the peak will support the coexisting peaks  related peaks  that the partial component may create at the same time. 
　based on ci pj   j = 1  1  ...    we define the support coefficient function of pi in the following way. 


	zhao and nishida 	1 

method proposed in this paper which uses scf to provide qualitative evidence for identifying inaccurate data. 
　we have tested af and af* against several hundred real infrared spectral images of organic compounds. the experimental results show that af* is significantly better than af. 
　table 1 lists part of the experimental results in which the first column shows the correct solutions; the second column indicates the solutions obtained by af  and the third column shows the solutions obtained by af*. terns on spectral images  the rate that it can identify all patterns on spectral images is low because in practice there are always some partial components whose real peaks seriously shift from the expected values. 



table 1: experimental results with af & af* 
　there are two important standard metrics for evaluating the solutions of infrared spectral image interpretation for unknown compounds: 
definition 1 rate of correctness  rc : the rate that the identified partial component set is exactly the same as the partial component set in the correct solutions. definition 1 rate of identification  ri : the rate that the partial components in the correct solutions are identified. 
　table 1 shows the comparison between af and af* with the two standard metrics. the comparison demonstrates that both the rc and the ri increase by integrating scf  and the rc increases more significantly. the reason is that although af can identify most pat-
1 	action and perception 
　so far as we know  the rc of our system is the highest among the similar systems  and the ri of our system is higher than that of many similar systems  clerc et a/.  
1; hasenoehrl et a/.  1; puskar and levine  1; sadtler  1   
1 	an example 
it is interesting to discuss the following example shown in figure 1. 

figure 1: an example of spectral image interpretation 
　figure 1 shows a spectral image of an unknown compound  anisole . the peak with an arrow is created by partial component ch1. however  the peak can not be identified by conventional methods because the peak of ch1 at this frequency position should be a strong peak  i.e.  s   1   but in this example  the strength of this peak is very weak  1   1 . so the membership degree of this peak is very close to zero  if not equal to. by using our method  the peak is identified as the peak of ch1 because the support coefficient of this peak is very high  scf = 1 . 
1 comparison with related work 
traditional methods and systems of spectral image interpretation are based on numerical analysis which identify partial components by calculating the quantitative similarity or closeness between the patterns of known partial components and the input spectral images  clerc et a/.  1; culthup et a/.  1; sadtler  1 . as we have discussed in section 1  in most cases especially when the inaccuracy of data is not slight  qualitative features of spectral images are much more important and effective than quantitative ones. in other words  the similarity/difference between two spectral images does not strictly reflect the similarity /difference between two structures. therefore  in general  the solutions of the systems based on numerical analysis are only a series of candidates from which users have to finally decide the possible ones by themselves. 
　many recently known methods and systems are based on ai techniques  anand et al  1; hasenoehrl et al  1; puskar and levines  1 . common techniques mainly include production systems  fuzzy logic and neural networks. although various reasoning and interpreting methods have been studied  the approaches to dealing with inaccurate data in this kind of methods and systems are almost the same  i.e.  reference values and fuzzy regions of inaccurate data are empirically provided in advance. thus  qualitative correlations among data and dynamic information can not be used properly. as a result  compared with our system  the limitation of this kind of methods and systems is that  generally  they are only effective for a class of compounds  or pure compounds because when image data are seriously inaccurate  many useful inferences can not be drawn. 
1 ongoing research 
the reasons causing image data inaccurate are various. however  the interaction among partial components themselves is an important factor or  in other words  the influence from coexisting partial components may be a chief reason to cause the peaks of a partial component to shift from their theoretical values. in practice  spectroscopists frequently use the knowledge like:  if c1 coexists with ch1  then the peaks of ch1 around 1 cm-l may shift.   or  if -c-o-c- has been identified  then the pattern of ch1 may change.  therefore  it is possible to update the possibilities of identified partial components by considering the interaction among them after qualitative interpretation has been made. 
　take the spectral image shown in figure 1. the image contains partial component c1-  benzene-ring   -c-oc-  ch1 and others. on the spectral image  the peak of ch1 around 1 cm 1 is seriously inaccurate due to the influence of c1- and -c-1-c-. although ch1 is identified based on qualitative correlations among related data  the possibility of ch1 being contained by the image is not high {p ch1  = 1% . 
　by bayes rules associated with subjective statements  we can get p ch1 | c1-  and p{ch1  -c-1-c-  respectively. and finally  p ch1  may be updated with p ch1 i 1   where 1 stands for all relevant observations. theoretical and experimental work on the issue is in progress. 
1 conclusions 
we have presented a novel method for interpreting spectral images on the basis of qualitative features of spectral images and qualitative correlations among related data. we first put forward a new concept called support coefficient function  scf . then we proposed an approach to determining dynamic shift intervals  and an approach to calculating possibility of identifying inaccurate data  respectively. a triple   pi  pj.  ui   is used to represent the hypothesis that pi can be accepted as pj based on qualitative evidence provided by scf. 
　we have also introduced a knowledge-based system on infrared spectral image interpretation which is developed by applying the proposed method. the system can successfully identify partial components that unknown images may contain. several hundred real spectral images have been identified  and the results of implementation are quite encouraging  the ri and the rc are about 1 and 1 respectively . 
