 
although communication is generally considered to dominate over processing cost in distributed systems  the problem of communication cost in multiagent planning has not been sufficiently addressed. one method for reducing both communication cost and planning time is the use of social laws. social laws  however  can be too restrictive  limiting soundness. flexible social laws can enable multiagent systems to reap the benefits of reduced communication cost and planning time  except in the worst case   without limiting soundness  although optimality may be degraded . by analyzing the performance  we show that this model can make multiagent planning exponentially more efficient without limiting its applicability. 
1 	introduction 
as automation of intelligent tasks increases  the need will arise for heterogeneous agents working in a common environment. as a result  agents will need to plan and coordinate plans in real time. 
　 cook  1  has described three methods of handling multiple agents: central control  distributed control  and local control  no communication . she notes that central control is effective when communication is reliable  and local control is effective if no communication is needed; otherwise  distributed control is necessary. this is the protocol generally used with multiagent systems  durfee and montgomery  1; von martial  1; gmytrasiewicz and durfee  1 . 
　unfortunately  planning is intractable  especially if plans must be coordinated: the amount of communication  worst-case  grows as the square of the search space  which is itself exponential for deliberative planning   briggs and cook  1a  . multiagent planning work so far has mostly provided mechanisms for interaction  georgeff  1; von martial  1  without attention to this problem  although  gmytrasiewicz and 
　*this research was supported in part by the national science foundation  under grant iri-1. 
1 	distributed al 

durfee  1  shows a model in which agents use decision theory to decide when to communicate  and  durfee and montgomery  1  reduces the cost of communication by sending abstract messages. previous work on social laws  moses and tennenholtz  1; 1l   that is  constraints on what actions an agent may take  has shown a method for reducing communication and planning time by reducing the options an agent has at any point.  in this paper  we relax the definition of social law to allow each agent to have a distinct set of constraints.  
　our work extends the social law paradigm  providing a specific analysis of the costs  and a way of controlling these costs without reducing the applicability of planning. 
1 	social laws 
social laws provide a way to constrain the actions of agents in multiagent systems  so as to reduce both the branching factor within an agent's search space and the chance of interaction with another agent's plan. 
　for example  consider a domain in which mobile robots must share a three-lane highway  figure 1 . one possible social law is a common traffic regulation:  drive on the right.  this law will prune a portion of the search space  since agents will not need to consider moving into other lanes. it will also reduce possible contention  since agents moving in one direction will never share a lane with those moving the opposite direction. 
　reducing possible contention over states of resources is crucial  since the detection and resolution of such interactions is the dominant communication cost in multiagent planning  briggs and cook  1a . specifically  agents need to communicate about the states of resources that their operators require  in a precondition list  or can 

provide  in a postcondition list . in figure 1  for example  each mobile robot needs to know that a section of the highway is clear before it can safely enter. 
　unfortunately  social laws can prevent us from finding a solution. figure 1 shows a roadblock in the topmost lane. if robot c is required to drive on the right  it cannot move into columns 1. 
　social laws  therefore  can limit soundness. determining if this is a possibility for any particular social law is in general np-complete  shoham and tennenholtz  1 . 
1 	flexible social laws 
previous work by the authors  briggs and cook  1b  has analyzed what may be viewed as a special case of social laws  that is  restrictions on access to resources. this work extends the analysis to a more general concept of flexible social laws. 
　in this framework  agents prefer to obey the  laws  but are able to relax them. assume a ranking of sets of social laws  from strictest to most lenient  where a more lenient set is one that allows a greater choice of 
operators. also assume a limit on the depth of search. each agent will try to generate a plan within the strictest set of laws. if this fails  the agent will try again  using the next set in the ranking. this continues until the agent has a successful plan or has failed with the most lenient set of laws. 
　flexible social laws can reduce both planning time and communication. soundness is not sacrificed  because if no solution is found within limits set  the agent plans with more flexible laws. 
　of course  when an agent finds a solution while using a social law  the solution may not be optimal. but  especially if the plan is to be used only once  the cost of plan generation may be high enough that a solution quickly found is better than an optimal one. 
　if an agent has to try two or more sets of social laws before finding a solution  some redundant planning is performed. we will find that this extra cost is not great  and  for deliberative planning at least  makes the total cost greater than the cost of planning without social laws only in the extreme worst case. 
　this model should apply to groups of homogeneous or heterogeneous agents  which share subgoals or work on their own goals exclusively. the model should also apply with varying degrees of reactivity  and to anytime planning. 
1 	an example 
mobile robots a  b  and c are to share a highway  see 
figure 1  previous page . a and b want to go right; c is to go left. there is a roadblock in the top lane. 
　within one timeslice  a robot can move forward or back  straight ahead or diagonally; or it can wait. each lane is 1 units long  and only one car can safely occupy the same unit in any timeslice. 
　here are some possible planning scenarios  using different social law schemes. in the first scenario  we will have no social laws. for the second  we attempt to reduce communication and planning costs with a strict social law. since this will not allow all agents to com-
	briggs and cook 	1 


1 	distributed al 
1 	optimality 
branching factor is necessarily monotonically increasing with   but the length  or cost  if we use operator cost  of each agent's final plan  if any is found  is necessarily monotonically decreasing with lenient social law can't possibly make a plan longer.  this is true for any domain.  
　therefore a solution for some may not be optimal. 
1 	communication 
here we calculate ber of messages used for interaction resolution between any two agents  at any iteration in the algorithm. this 
is proportional to the number of interacting pairs of operators belonging to separate agent's search spaces. 
 the maximum number of interacting pairs for any is the number of nodes in one agent's search space times the number of nodes in the other's search space. if both agents are still searching  that is  neither found a solution at a previous level   then this is . for all pairs of all  a  agents  there are in-
teracting pairs. if at most c messages are required to resolve interactions between such a pair  there will be  such messages per agent. 
　by our assumptions  if we are performing deliberative planning  at each iteration of the algorithm an agent will need to tell all the others what predicates it may be referencing  that is  the predicates in pi e   so as to know who to negotiate with. the cost per agent ai is 
this is insignificant compared to the ex-
ponential cost 
　if planning with either search the same space again  or store the space generated for  it is not enough to store the leaves of the search tree; a final solution may interleave operators 
in  with operators in 
　we have assumed that there was insufficient memory to store these search spaces; instead we will search again each time afresh  forgetting what we generated for previous values of 1. with this assumption  we will need to communicate old information for each new increasing 
savings for communication per agent  that is  the cost without any social law minus the cost using flexible so-
   1 if we use breadth-first search. if we use some variation of depth-first search  reducing our options may lead us straight to the solution; or it may make finding a solution impossible 
	brig1s and cook 	1 

1 	best- and worst-case bounds 
in the best case  each agent finds a solution with its strictest set of laws. 	for large l  

of communication without social laws. similarly  savingsplanning is approximately the cost of planning without social laws. optimality of the resulting plan may be degraded. 
　in the worst case  for all . the communication penalty for trying flexible social laws 
 per agent  is 	that is  times the cost without social laws; so we have an increase in communication linear with the number of law sets  but inversely proportional to plan length. if 
  lawsetsi   this penalty is not significant. by similar reasoning  we find a linear increase in planning time. optimality is not degraded. 
1 	reactive and anytime planning 
as agents become more reactive  we are more likely to be planning real time  so optimality may be less important. also  although the exponent l  which represents the lookahead limit  is reduced  we will see that flexible social laws can still reduce cost. since anytime planning has a smaller depth limit than deliberative planning  this discussion also applies to anytime planners. 
　let n = the length of the total plan for any agent.  it may be greater for a reactive planner than for deliberative planning  of course.  n/l is the number of plans an agent must generate and execute to accomplish the task. for a totally reactive planner  l = 1. 
　the savings for both communication and planning are n/l times the values given in the previous section; but the exponent l is now smaller  so the savings will be less. we note that deliberative planning gets a greater savings from the use of social laws than does reactive planning - but reactive planning  being closer to tractability to start with  will become tractable more quickly with decreasing 1. 
for completely reactive planning  l - 1   we find that 
saving1comm  is positive when 
 approximately . 	savingsplanning 	is positive when   approximately . 
　for large numbers of agents and law sets  then  if agents are completely reactive  problems must work out to fit our social law ranking very well  that is  to have solutions when agent use only the first of the social law sets . but for even moderately reactive agents  say  l = 1  the range is much wider 

1 	conclusions 
flexible social laws are useful in multiagent planning for limiting both communication and planning time without affecting soundness. despite redundant planning and communication  communication and planning-time savings are polynomial in the number of social law sets not 
1 	distributed ai 
considered by an agent  but with a large exponent if planning is deliberative. the tradeoff for this is a loss of optimality  and increase in communication and planning time in the worst case proportional to the number of social law sets in an agent's ranking  but inversely proportional to plan length.  for deliberative planning  this increase is only in the extreme worst case . we have shown best- and worst- case bounds  and have shown that the model is helpful for reactive and anytime planning as well as deliberative planning. 
　our current work involves finding tighter theoretical limits  and testing the performance of this model. we are also developing a more restricted model which deals only with allocation of resources  briggs and cook  1b   in real domains. another interesting area will be developing criteria for good rankings for the relaxation of social laws  like the downward refinement property  bacchus and yang  1  in hierarchical planning. * 
1 	acknowledgements 
we would like to thank qiang yang and edmund durfee for their advice and encouragement. 
