 
we demonstrate how to handle equality in the inverse method using equality elimination. in the equality elimination method  proofs consist of two parts. in the first part we try to solve equations obtaining so called solution clauses. solution clauses are obtained by a very refined strategy - basic superposition with selection function. in the second part  we perform the usual sequent proof search by the inverse method. our approach is called equality elimination because we eliminate all occurrences of equality in the first part of the proof. unlike the previous approach proposed by maslov  our method uses most general substitutions  ordering restrictions and selection functions. 
we also note that this technique is directly applicable to extension procedures  like the connection method. unlike other approaches  we 
do not require the use of rigid or mixed eunification. 
1 	the inverse method 
the inverse method of theorem proving in sequent calculi has been proposed by maslov in the 1s. the method is based on the bottom-up1 search in sequent calculi. the inverse method is completely local  maslov and mints  1; degtyarev and voronkov  1b  and can be efficiently implemented both for classical and nonclassical logics  voronkov  1 . in terms of efficiency  it is competitive with resolution1. the inverse method requires no normal forms which can be an advantage for interactive provers. 
　the introduction of equality in the inverse method has not yet received proper attention. in this paper we 
* supported by a grant from the swedish institute. 
*on leave from kiev university. t supported by a tfr grant. 
　1 bottom-up search means the search from axioms to the goal. 
　1in fact  the inverse method can be simulated by resolution using structure-preserving clause-form translation  maslov  1; boy de la tour  1 . 
consider the inverse method with equality. our approach is based on equality elimination. 
　the structure of this paper is the following. in this section we briefly discuss introduction of equality in the inverse method in general. in section 1 we introduce main definitions and notation. in section 1 we define the equality elimination method and give several examples. in section 1 we show how one can generalize our technique to the connection method. 
　the first natural generalization of the inverse method to include equality has been made by maslov  maslov  
1 . it was based on theorems proven in  kanger  1; lifschitz  1  about the specialization of proofs in the sequent calculus with equality  but without free variables! . according to these theorems  all equality reasoning steps can be moved on top of the proof so that they precede all other steps. this gives the characterization of the inverse method with equality which in fact coincides with hyperresolution  on classical logic   but with a different initial set of clauses  closed collections in maslov's terminology . while in the inverse method without equality the initial sequents correspond to axioms of the sequent calculus  in the equality case initial sequents are those derivable from axioms exclusively by equality rules.  kanger  1  called such sequents  directly demonstratable . in later papers the role of these sequents play  instantiated  equational mated sets  gallier  1  or e-complementary eq-connections  bibel  1 . we call their analog solution clauses. 
　let us come back to results on the specialization of sequent proofs. is it possible to generalize these results on proofs with free variables  metavariables in maslov's terminology   in this case equality rules become paramodulation rules. direct lifting from the ground case is now impossible without functional reflexivity axioms. as we shall show  the use of free variables is possible both for the traditional formulation of the inverse method and for the formulation proposed in our paper. 
in the original presentation of the inverse method by 
maslov  unification has been made by using arbitrary 
 not only most general  substitutions which made lifting from the ground case unnecessary1. even in the paper 
　1in terms of resolution  such a treatment of unification gives unrestricted resolution  lloyd  1  - a calculus with too high non-determinism. 




　there are many optimizations not considered in this paper. the most powerful one is subsumption that can be applied in both parts of the proof in order to prevent 

names: 
　1 according to our definitions  a clause is a set of literals  so the use of the leftmost disequation is not quite correct  but this restriction can easily be formalized using the selection mechanism  bachmair and ganzinger  1 . the prooftheoretic justification of this possibility is given in  degtyarev et a/.  1 . 
generation of unnecessary clauses. subsumption for the basic strategy has been explained in  degtyarev  1; bachmair et a/.  1 . in the sequent part of the proof we can use ordinary subsumption  or even a stronger subsumption for sequent proofs proposed in  voronkov  1 . 

	1 	conclusion 
the equality elimination method is a general method of reasoning in first-order logic with equality. it is based on the following general version of herbrand theorem  degtyarev and voronkov  1 : a formula is provable iff there is a matrix m of and a substitution such that every path through . contains an instance of a solution clause. equality elimination was originally introduced in  degtyarev and voronkov  1a  as a method of handling equality in logic programs. later  it has been applied to the tableau method  degtyarev and voronkov  1b  and the connection method  degtyanev and voronkov  1 . in  degtyarev et al  1  a combination of equality elimination and basic folding has been introduced which allows to transform equational logic programs into recursive logic programs without equality. 
