 
the study of relevance has gained considerable attention recently in areas as diverse as machine learning and knowledge representation. in this paper  we focus on one particular area  namely relevance in the context of logical theories. we are interested in answering questions like: when is a sentence  or theory  relevant to a set of propositions  or  when is one set of propositions relevant to another given some background theory  the answers are given semantically in terms of a logic of belief and syntactically in terms of prime implicates. furthermore  rather than merely adding yet another set of definitions of relevance to the many that already exist  we also show close connections to two others that were recently proposed  thus pointing to some common ground at least as far as logical relevance is concerned. 
1 	introduction 
the study of relevance has gained considerable attention recently in areas as diverse as machine learning and knowledge representation  gs1 . in this paper  we focus on one particular area  namely relevance in the context of propositional logical theories. we are interested in answering questions like: when is a sentence  or theory  relevant to a set of propositions  or  when is one set of propositions relevant to another given some background theory  
　in order to get a better feel for what we are getting at  let us consider the following example adapted from  dp1 . a =  rain o wet  a  sprinklerjon d wet . 
here r a i n   wet  and sprinklerjon stand for the propositions  it rains    the ground is wet   and ''the sprinkler is on   respectively  a clearly seems to tell us something relevant about the proposition r a i n  as well as sprinklerjon and wet . on the other hand  a seems irrelevant to anything else like jack is happy. when we look a little closer  not everything ex conveys is relevant to r a i n because the sentence contains the extraneous information  sprinklerjon   wet . on the other hand  everything a tells us is about the ground being wet and  hence  we want to call a strictly relevant to wet. 
　it also makes sense to talk about relevance between propositions relative to a background theory. for example  given a  r a i n should count as relevant to wet since the latter is true whenever the former is. on the other hand  there really is no connection between r a i n and sprinklerjon  since they are either forced to both be false by some other condition  the ground is not wet  or their truth values can vary independently of each other. therefore  r a i n and sprinklerjon are not relevant to each other given a. 
　if we view relevance with regard to what a sentence  or theory  tells us about the world  as is done in this paper  then logically equivalent formulations should not change the relevance relation. for example  given a' =  rain d wet  a r a i n   r a i n and wet are not considered relevant to each other  since a' is logically equivalent to  wet a rain . in this respect  our approach is quite different from work such as  sg1; lfs1   where relevance has a distinct syntactic flavor. 
there  r a i n is viewed as relevant to wet since r a i n is used in the syntactic derivation of wet. 
　the formalization of logical relevance chosen in this paper is based on a logic of belief developed earlier  lak1   which allows us to express that a sentence is believed about a set of proposition  also called the subject matter  and  more importantly  that a sentence is all that is known1 about a subject matter  only-knowing-about for short . with these concepts we say that a sentence a is relevant to p just in case it is impossible to know nothing about p assuming a is all that is known. going back to our initial example  a is then found to be relevant to r a i n because knowing only a implies that we know 
1
　　for the purpose of this paper the distinction between knowledge and belief is irrelevant. 
	lakemeyer 	1 
something nontrivial about rain  namely  rain   wet . note the importance of assuming that only a is believed and nothing else. for if we merely require a to be believed  we do not rule out believing wet as well  in which case  wet reduces to wet and all relevance to rain disappears. 
　given a logic of only-knowing-about  it is perhaps not surprising that we are able to express this form of relevance in such a direct manner  since the logic has a builtin primitive notion of relevance in the sense of aboutness. it is perhaps more interesting that this primitive notion suffices to provide a reasonable semantics to other varieties of relevance as well. for instance  rain is relevant to wet relative to a because what is known about rain  viewed as a sentence  is relevant to wet. 
   besides defining various forms of relevance sernantically in terms of only-knowing-about  we also provide syntactic characterizations in terms of prime implicates in each case. furthermore  rather than merely adding yet another set of definitions of relevance to the many that already exist  we also show close connections to two others that were recently proposed  dp1; lr1   thus pointing to some common ground at least as far as logical relevance is concerned. 
   the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we define the semantics of only-knowing-about  which is a variant of the semantics presented in  lak1 . section 1 contains our various definitions of relevance using the logic of the previous section. in sections 1 and 1  we compare our work to that of darwiche and pearl on the one hand and lin and reiter on the other. we end the paper with a summary and some concluding remarks. 
1 	the logic of only-knowing-about 
the logic of only-knowing-about  which was originally introduced in  lak1   extends earlier work by levesque  lev1   who formalized what it means to only know a sentence  which can be thought of as the limit-case of only-knowing-about  where the subject matter includes everything the agent has any information about. the semantic framework for all these investigations is possible-world semantics hm1 . 
1 	from only-knowing to only-knowing-about 
before introducing the semantics for  all the agent knows about x is y   we start out with the simpler case of levesque's only-knowing. there an agent knows a sentence a  denoted as l a   just in case a is true in all the worlds which the agent thinks are possible  or accessible . the reader should think of a world simply as a truth assignment for the atomic propositions.  formal definitions are deferred to section 1 below.  to define only-knowing  levesque considers another modality n  
1 	knowledge representation 
where na means that a is true in all the impossible  or inaccessible  worlds.1 while is best understood as  the agent knows at least that is true   na should be read as  the agent knows at most   with that onlyknowing   denoted as   reduces to knowing at least and at most   that is  holds just in case both and hold. 
　let us now consider how to extend these ideas to include a subject matter. since we confine ourselves to propositional logic  we define a subject matter as a finite set of atomic propositions. for each such we introduce new modal operators and   
where 	1   	is read as  the agent knows at least 	about 
　   as  the agent knows at most that  . is false about ..   and as  all the agent knows about is   as in the case of only-knowing  can be 
viewed as shorthand for 
　as for the semantics of these modalities  suppose the beliefs of the agent are given by the set of worlds m the agent thinks possible. to find out what the agent knows about we construct a set of worlds which  intu-
itively  represents what the agent knows after forgetting everything that is not relevant to with that the operators and are interpreted just like l n  and o except that we are using instead of m. for example  an agent believes a about p a t a set of worlds 
m just in case she believes a at 
   the logic is a slight variant of the one presented in  lak1j. in particular  we ignore nested modalities  which are not essential for our purposes. the operators  were not used in the previous version of 
the logic. 
1 	the language and other notation 
the primitives of the language are a countably infinite set v of atomic propositions  or atoms   the connectives and the modal operators l n 1     and for every every finite set of atomic propositions 
　with the restriction that none of the modal operators occurs within the scope of another modal operator. sentences are formed in the usual way from these primitives.1 
notation: as usual  literals are either atoms or negated atoms and clauses are disjunctions of literals. we write false as an abbreviation for   where p is some atom  and true for - false. given an atomic proposition p and and a clause c  we say that c mentions p just in case either p or . occurs in c. 
　it is often convenient to identify a clause with the set of literals occurring in the clause. a clause c is contained in a clause c'  if every literal in c occurs in c'. 
1
　　note that here impossible does not mean that these worlds are logically impossible. they are merely incompatible with the agent's knowledge. 
1
　　we will freely use other connectives like which should be understood as syntactic abbreviations of the usual kind. 


	lakemeyer 	1 

1 	knowledge representation 

	lakemeyer 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 


1 	conclusion 
in this paper we proposed various definitions of relevance within a logic of only-knowing-about. we showed that the semantic definitions have simple characterizations in terms of prime implicates. furthermore  we demonstrated tight connections between our work and that of darwiche and pearl on the one hand and lin and reiter on the other. while all three approaches evolved independently with different motivations in mind  this paper suggests that there is common ground among them. however  more work is needed to map out their exact relationships. 
　in future work  our investigations of logical relevance should be extended to the first-order case  which would require a first-order version of the logic of only-knowingabout. this would allow an even better comparison with lr's work  which is already first-order. judging from lr's experience  though  there may well be nasty surprises along the way. for example  the result of forgetting a predicate the lr way is not always first-order representable. 
a cknowledgement s 
i would like to thank adrian darwiche  adam grove  fangzhen lin  and ray reiter for discussions  which helped clarify many ideas presented in this paper. 1 am also grateful to the anonymous referees  whose suggestions helped to improve the presentation of the paper. 
