 for an invited talk 
barbara hayes-roth 
computer science department 
stanford university 
1 welch road  bldg c palo alto  ca 1 u.s.a. 

1. introduction 
intelligent computer agents are both the original goal and the ultimate goal of artificial intelligence research. in striving toward that goal  our community has followed a practical research strategy of  divide-and-conquer   with different sub-communities attacking important component functions of intelligence  such as planning  search  knowledge representation  vision  and natural language. this strategy has been almost too successful  yielding both challenging theoretical problems that have come to dominate the inquiries of many researchers and a spate of practical techniques that have enabled other researchers to move into profitable commercial enterprises. while each of these pursuits is worthy in its own right  together they have had the unfortunate sideeffect of fragmenting the field and almost completely diverting it from efforts to build intelligent agents. 
i believe that the ai community should return its attention to the science and technology of intelligent agents. taking the title of my talk metaphorically  i suggest that:  a  the renewal of interest already has begun  with agent research and applications popping up everywhere; and  b  this is the best way for us to advance the state of the technical art of ai. taking my title literally  i suggest further that:  a  we expand our purview to include a promising new class of intelligent agents-characters and actors whose performances are designed to create particular kinds of impressions on their human audiences  bates  1; bates  etal  1a; 1 ; and  b  the effective design and application of such agents will require us to expand our requirements specification for intelligent agents and to include artistic techniques among our design strategies. the following sections explain these metaphorical and literal meanings of my title and outline the remainder of my talk. 
1. the metaphorical interpretation 
the last several years have witnessed a renewed interest in intelligent agents. in his 1 book  unified theories of cognition  newell declared that we have accumulated enough component solutions to component problems and demanded that we work on integrating those solutions in a smoothly functioning whole. reinforcing newelfs position in my review of his book  hayes-roth  1b   i suggested that divideand-conquer is almost sure to fail as a strategy for creating a science and technology of intelligent agents. software engineers  and other engineers  have known for decades that it is difficult  expensive  and often impossible to integrate independently-developed components in a smoothly functioning whole. 
independently-developed components carry too many implicit and incompatible assumptions and too little shared infrastructure to support effective interoperation. why should it be any different for ai components  thus  if our goal is a science and technology of intelligent agents  our research strategy must emphasize development of comprehensive agent architectures and principles for component integration and interoperation. 
complementing this holistic rationale for a comprehensive approach to intelligent agents  during the last few years  we have seen a ground swell of academic research on a variety of intelligent agents  table 1   closely followed by the appearance of  agents  in high-profile commercial software products. references to agents have begun to appear in the popular press and agents are becoming a recognizable concept to the lay public. 
table 1. intelligent agents 
  problem-solving agents 
hayes-roth  1; newell  1 
  personal assistants 
etzioni & weld  1; kautz etal  1; 
maes  1; mitchell etal  1 
  robotic agents 
albus  1; arkin  1; brooks  1; 
firby  1; gat  1; mcdermott  1 
hayes-roth  1; laird et al  1; 
vere & bickmorc  1 
  agents for toy problems agre & chapman  1; bresina & 
drummond  1; pollack  1 
  monitoring agents hayes-roth  1 
table 1. research issues for intelligent agents 
  agent architecture 
brooks  1; firby  1; gat  1; 
hayes-roth  1; 1; 1; 1; 1; 
laird  etal  1; maes  1; nilsson  1; 
rosenschein & kaelbling  1; schoppers  
1 
  integration of perception  thought  and action 
chrisman & simmons  1; hayes-roth  
1c; washington & hayes-roth  1 
  reconfigurable components of expertise hayes-roth  etal  1a  b 
  coordination of multiple tasks and goals hayes-roth  1; 1 
  following instructions 
gans etal  1; hayes-roth  1; 1; 
huffman  1; webber etal  1 
  conversation 
grosz & sidner  1; moore  1 
  multi-agent cooperation charib-draa  1; durfee  1; gasser & 
huhns  1; lesser & corkill  1; sycara  
1 
thus  in a metaphorical sense  intelligent agents are now very much  on stage -in the research community  in the commercial software industry  and in the popular imagination. what does this mean for the ai community  
depending on one's perspective  we face either a daunting challenge or a great opportunity to design and deliver intelligent agents that fill the bill. personally  i perceive a welcome opportunity  replete with new forms and sources 
1 	invited speakers 
of resources to fuel our progress and with stimulating and gratifying applications to be 
realized with our contributions. 
more important  i view renewed work on intelligent agents as a salutary refocusing of the community's attention on a combination of old and new research issues  table 1  that will take us where we ought to go as a science. 
continuing the metaphorical sense of my title  i believe that keeping our  eye on the prize   nilsson  1  is the best way to  advance the state of the art -the state of the technical art of ai. 
1. the literal interpretation 
during the last few years  there also has been an explosion of interest in the nature and applications of human-computer interaction  hci . in my opinion  advanced hci applications beg for the services of intelligent agents. we need agents to serve behind the scenes  orchestrating successful interactions for users. but we especially need them to appear front and center- agents on stage  as characters or actors whose performances are designed to create desired intellectual  psychological  emotional  social  esthetic or other responses in their human audiences. 
table 1. expanded functional requirements 
  perceive  think  act 
greater frequency  variety  interleaving 
  follow directions 
more interpretation  initiative  autonomy  variability 
  opportunism 
more prevalent  intrinsically desirable 
  intelligence 
¡¡broader  shallower  common sense  naive psychology  social convention   life-like qualities 
variability  idiosyncrasy  motivation  emotion  personality 
  shared control 
unqualified commitment to multi-agent collaboration in achieving performance objectives 
  expertise 
process  not goal  oriented  successful  not optimal  performance 
in giving agents these new roles to play  we substantially expand the set of functional requirements they must satisfy  table 1 . we reconnect ai with its sister disciplines  including biology  cognitive science  social psychology  communications  and organization theory. and we introduce a new dimension to our work  aiming literally to  advance the state of the art of ai -the state of the artistic techniques we bring to bear in ai agents. 1. the remainder of the talk 
the remainder of my talk is organized as follows. first  i will discuss the conceptual commonalties and differences among  agents  characters  and actors  and describe potential applications for each. after that  i will focus on how we might advance the state of the art of ai characters and actors. first i will discuss  advancing the state of the technical art  and then  advancing the state of the artistic technique.  for each of these major topics  i will highlight a few key problem areas and present some approaches currently under investigation in the community. finally  i will identify major technical challenges and promising opportunities for incremental progress in our efforts to develop a science and technology of intelligent agents. 
1. 