 
intelligent information systems do not usually possess complete information about the world with which they interact. the agm paradigm has become one of the standard frameworks for modeling changes to repositories of information. its principal constructions for change operators rely on some form of underlying preference relation. the process of changing such a preference relation is known as a transmutation. spohn's conditionalization can be interpreted as a transmutation that imposes a relative minimal change. a transmutation based on an absolute minimal change is an adjustment. 
　in this paper we develop a notion of explanation using transmutations of information systems. following gardenfors lead we recast spohn's notion of reason for within the general setting of transmuta-
tions and extend this to characterize most plausible explanations. we also investigate the relationship between explanation based on abduction and spohnian reasons based on adjustments. finally  and rather surprisingly  we identify explicit conditions that characterize the various forms of explanations identified by boutilier and becher using spohnian reasons. 
	1 	introduction 
information systems use information theoretic descriptions to capture their view of the world. these descriptions are generally incomplete and evolve over time. an intelligent information system requires a mechanism for self-modification when new information about the world is acquired. 
the agm paradigm  alchourron ti ai  1; gardenfors  1; gardenfors and makinson  1  has become a standard framework for modeling information change. in particular  it provides a mechanism for the revision and contraction of information. within the agm paradigm  the family of revision functions and the family of contraction functions are constrained by rationality postulates. the logical properties of a body of information are not strong enough to uniquely determine a revision or contraction function. therefore  the principal constructions for these functions rely on some form of underlying preference relation  such as a family of selection functions  alchourron ei ai  1   a system of spheres  grove  1   a nice preorder on models  katsuno and mendelzon  1; peppas and williams  1   
1 	knowledge representation 
maurice pagnucco 
knowledge systems group 
basser department of computer science 
university of sydney  nsw 1 australia 
brailey sims 
banach astronautics group 
department of mathematics 
university of newcastle  nsw 1 australia 
or an epistemic entrenchment ordering  gardenfors and makinson  1 . in this light we consider an information system to be composed of a set of information together with a preference relation. 
　we refer to the process of changing the underlying preference relation of an information system as a transmutation. based on observations made by gardenfors  1  p1   williams  1a  generalized the conditionallzations of spohn  to more general transmutations. spohn represents an information system using ordinal conditional functions  which map possible worlds to ordinals  and argues that conditionalization  which is a constructive method for modifying an ordinal conditional function  is a reasonable procedure. williams explored conditionalization further and examined an alternative construction; an adjustment. both conditionalizations and adjustments are transmutations. intuitively  conditionalization involves a relative minimal change necessary to effect the revision or contraction  whilst adjustment involves an absolute minimal change. 
　spohn characterizes the notion of reason for in  and shows how it can be captured within his framework in  1; 1 . 
　the objective of this paper is  firstly  to recast spohn's notion of reason for in a more general setting using transmutations rather than conditionalizations  and secondly  to extend this approach to determine most plausible explanations. some preliminary work in this direction using a theory base representation can be found in  williams  1b . we also provide an intuitively appealing and transparent relationship between explanation based on abduction and spohnian reasons based on adjustments. finally and quite surprisingly  we find explicit conditions which capture the relationship between spohnian reasons and the various forms of explanation identified by boutilier and becher . 
　in section 1  we describe entrenchment rankings  while in section 1 we define transmutations of entrenchment rankings  and describe a particular type of transmutation  namely an adjustment. in section 1  we outline spohn's notion of reason for  and provide conditions which allow this notion to be defined using both arbitrary transmutations and adjustments. in the spirit of spohn we provide a notion of most plausible explanation. 
in section 1 we will illustrate some of our definitions and results with examples. in section 1 we compare our notion of explanation with one based upon the process of abductive inference. we discuss related work in section 

1 	entrenchment rankings 
spohn  introduced ordinal conditional functions  while williams  1a  introduced related structures  namely entrenchment rankings  defined below . essentially  ordinal conditional functions take possible worlds to ordinals  whereas entrenchment rankings take sentences to ordinals. both define a ranking of the respective domains which provides a response schema for all  possible consistent information   spohn  1 . 
　the higher the ordinal assigned to a sentence by an entrenchment ranking the more firmly held it is. throughout the remainder of this paper it will be understood that o is an ordinal chosen to be sufficiently large for the purpose of the discussion. 
  
an entrenchment ranking represents a well-ranked epistemic entrenchment ordering  gardenfors  1; gardenfors and makinson  1 where the higher the ordinal assigned to a sentence the more entrenched it is. the ordinal assignment can be used and viewed in two ways:  i  qualitatively  that is as a specification of a relative ordering of sentences  or  ii  quantitatively  that is as an assignment of intrinsic utility for each sentence. for a discussion of various assignment scales see  gardenfors and makinson  1 . 
 entrenchment rankings are information systems; a set of information together with a  necessarily wellordered  preference relation. we denote the family of all entrenchment rankings by s. an information set represented by an entrenchment ranking is the set of sentences whose degree of acceptance is greater than zero. formally we have the following definition  williams  1a . 
that set e  is a theory  and hence the set of beliefs are closed with respect to logical consequence. 
1 	transmutations 
peppas  introduced well-behaved revision functions and provided a construction using a well-ordered system of spheres  grove  1 . williams  1a  gives representation theorems for entrenchment rankings and well-behaved change operators. in particular  she provided conditions which characterize both wellbehaved contraction and well-behaved revision operators using an entrenchment ranking  and conversely. an extra postulate is required for the change operator to be constructed from a well-ranked preference relation. 
　the informational input for agm contraction and revision functions for theories is a sentence alone. in contrast  when modifying an entrenchment ranking we require both a sentence and an ordinal. consequently  the informational input for transmutations is a sentence a and an ordinal t. the interpretation being 
 gardenfors  1 that a represents the information to be accepted by tne information system  and i is the degree of firmness with which this information is to be incorporated into the transmuted information system. we define a transmutation schema  williams  1a  for entrenchment rankings below. 

for a contingent sentence a and an ordinal i  we say 
e* a i  is an  a  i -transmutation of e. it was shown in {williams  1a   that according to the definition above  e* a i  is an entrenchment ranking where a is assigned the degree of acceptance i  and if i is greater than zero then set e* a  i j is the well-behaved revision  set e  * constructed in tne obvious way from the epistemic entrenchment ordering derived from the relative ordering given by e. similarly  if i is zero then set e* a  i   is the well-behaved contraction  set e  ~. 
	adjustments 	 defined belcw  were introduced in 
 williams  1a . they are transmutations which adopt an absolute measure under the the principle of minimal change. in particular  an entrenchment ranking is changed or disturbed  in an absolute sense  as little as necessary to give a the degree of acceptance i. that is  each sentence is reassigned an ordinal as close as possible to its previous ordinal assignment such that the resultant structure is an entrenchment ranking. an adjustment is based on intuition similar to that used by boutilier  to specify his natural revision; namely the principle of minimal change. according to boutilier  when certain beliefs must be given up  it seems natural to try to keep not only important beliefs  but as much of the ordering as dossible . 
　

1 	knowledge representation 

　
 theorems 1 and 1 allow us to say that if a and  are both explanations for and is also an explanation for 1 then the more specific explanation a is more plausible if  this can be generalised for longer chains of explanation to yield a method for determining the preferred level of specificity. 
	1 	related work 
recently gardenfors  as well as boutilier and becher  have given related accounts of explanation. gardenfors uses changes in probability  whilst we use changes in plausibility. the relationship between boutilier and becher's work and that presented in this paper is somewhat unexpected because both approaches draw their intuitions from seemingly different directions  indeed opposite directions. in particular  our analysis focuses on changes at the preference relation level whilst boutilier and becher's analysis considers the behaviour at the informational content level. however their underlying similarity appears to stem from the committment to the principle of minimal change. 
　boutilier and becher use an explicit assumption that explanations for beliefs are beliefs  and explanations for non-beliefs are non-beliefs. by way of justification they say that observations in their framework are not accepted into an information set until some explanation is found and accepted. our idea of coherence is related to this assumption. for instance  according to it the only explanations for non-beliefs are non-beliefs. however  it does allow beliefs to have non-beliefs as explanations  a trait which is more in keeping with the usual interpretation of abductive explanations. using corollary 1 and the connections below one can show that boutilier and becher's explanations respect our idea of coherence  and therefore their assumption is stronger than that of coherence due to the restriction that only beliefs can be explanations for beliefs. 
　boutilier and becher's definition of a explains b  although restricted to the propositional case and based on the assumption above  is closely related to a is a reason for b based on adjustments. in particular  if their 
explanations are based on a well-ranked co revision model structure  boutilier  1  then we have: 

in contradistinction to reasons based on adjustments  
boutilier and becher's explanations preclude non-beliefs being explanations for accepted beliefs. in particular  according to boutilier and becher if and then a cannot explain but on our account 
a could be a reason for consequently  the notion of reason for based on adjustment is more general. 
　clearly  the connections described above may not hold if transmutations other than adjustments are used to determine reasons. in this sense  spohnian 
1 	knowledge representation 
reasons specified by  r1  are far more general than the explanations of boutilier and becher  because their notion of explanation essentially corresponds to reasons based on a particular transmutation; namely  an adjustment. 
　boutilier and becher argue that preferred explanations are those that are most plausible; they require the least change in the information set in order to be accepted. in particular  they maintain as much information as possible  including as much default information as possible. 
 their notion of plausibility is very different to the notion of plausibility advocated in this paper  where we claim that the most plausible explanation is one that is capable of increasing the degree of acceptance of the explanandum the most. for them  if a and are both beliefs and explanations for another belief then they are equally preferred. in other words  within boutilier and becher's framework factual explanations can not be ranked on the basis of plausibility. consequently  out notion of plausibility is substantially more discerning. 
　boutilier and becher highlight the desirable defeasible character of their explanations. spohnian reasons based on adjustments also exhibit this feature  and moreover they give rise to consistency preserving rational consequence relations. in particular  if we define to be a is a reason for  based on an adjustment  then |~ is consistency preserving and rational. consequently  there exists a nice preference structure  gardenfors and makinson  1 and an expectation ordering which induces reasons based on adjustments. 
 given the transparent connection between entrenchment rankings and expectation orderings  williams  1b  we can give the following intuitive interpretation of reason for in terms of expectations. we can say that a is a reason for if is strictly more expected than either and that a is a strong reason for  if in addition a and are equally expected. similar 
readings can be given for plausibility and specificity. 
　williams  1a  gives a computational model for adjustments which can be used to implement spohnian reasons  abductive  predictive  factual  hypothetical and counterfactual explanations. 
　spohn  revised his notion of reason for  and gave a condition which is equivalent  williams  1a  to the condition below  it is related to conditionalization . 

intuitively  this condition says that a is a reason lor 
 1 iff b has a higher degree of acceptance  or degree of plausibility given a rather than given   spohn  1 . however  this condition leads to counterintuitive results; sentences turn out to be reasons simply by virtue of the fact they are strictly more plausible than the explanandum. therefore we can say that reasons based on the condition above do not respect the notion of coherence introduced in section 1. 
1 	discussion 
transmutations of an information system describe not only how a set of information is revised  but how the underlying preference structure is revised. consequently  it is possible to capture spohn's notion of reason using transmutations. indeed we would obtain a different characterization of a spohnian reason for every type of transmutation. 
　an adjustment is a transmutation that involves an absolute minimal change. that is  the underlying preference relation is changed as little as necessary to effect the required change in epistemic rank. for this reason we have argued that an adjustment is an appropriate transmutation for determining explanations because in the determination of an explanation we would normally require that such a change disturb the background information system as little as necessary. the suitability of using an adjustment for spohnian reasons is further supported by its perspicuous connection with the comprehensive work of boutilier and becher. 
　we showed how an adjustment can be used to determine a most plausible explanation  by selecting an explanation that is capable of raising the epistemic rank of the explanandum the most. this notion is more discerning than that given by boutilier and becher whose method suffers from the problem of not being able to rank the plausibility of factual explanations. 
　we contrasted spohnian reasons based on adjustment with a common definition of explanation in terms of abductive reasoning. we noted that the determination of reasons based on adjustments are carried out qualitatively using the relative ordering of the background information system itself  and the associated nonmonotonic consequence relation is consistency preserving and rational. 
　future work will explore the relevance of competing explanations  gardenfors  1  and the strengths of competing explanations using the quantitative information encapsulated in an entrenchment ranking. preliminary results suggest these are promising directions to pursue. 
acknowledgements 
the authors have benefited from the helpful suggestions of peter gardenfors  abhaya nayak  eric olsson  judea pearl  pavlos peppas and hans rott. 
