*  
thomas eiter  georg gottlob 
christian doppler lab for expert systems 
   technical university of vienna paniglgasse 1  a-1 wien  austria 
 eiter|gottlob cdbai. tuwien. ac. at nicola leonet 
istituto per la sistemistica e rinformatica 
c.n.r. c/o deis - university of calabria 
1 rende  italy nik si.deis.unical.it 
abstract 
since logical knowledge representation is commonly based on nonclassical formalisms like default logic  autoepistemic logic  or circumscription  it is necessary to perform abductive reasoning from theories of nonclassical logics. in this paper  we investigate how abduction can be performed from theories in default logic. different modes of abduction are plausible  based on credulous and skeptical default reasoning; they appear useful for different applications such as diagnosis and planning. moreover  we analyze the complexity of the main abductive reasoning tasks. they are intractable in the general case; we also present known classes of default theories for which abduction is tractable. 
1 	introduction 
abductive reasoning has been recognized as an important principle of common-sense reasoning having fruitful applications in a number of areas such diverse as model-based diagnosis  poole  1   speech recognition  hobbs et al  1   maintenance of database views  kakas and mancarella  1   and vision  charniak and mcdermott  1 . until now  mainly abduction from theories of classical logic has been studied. however  logical knowledge representation is commonly based on nonclassical formalisms like default logic  autoepistemic logic  or circumscription. thus  in such situations it is necessary to perform abductive reasoning from theories  i.e. knowledge bases  of nonclassical logics. 
　since default logic is widely proposed for knowledge representation  it is important to investigate how abduction can be performed from theories  w  d  in default logic. we informally pursue this on an example. 
example 1 consider the following set of default rules  which represent knowledge about bill's skiing habits: 

   * a more elaborate version including proofs is available on email request to the authors. 
f
work carried out while visiting the christian doppler 
lab. 
1 	knowledge representation 
 the defaults intuitively state the following:  i  bill is usually not out for skiing;  ii  bill is out for skiing on weekends  if we can assume that it is not snowing;  iii  usually it is not snowing. for the certain knowledge w = {weekend}  encoding that it is saturday or sunday   the default theory t -  w  d  has one extension which contains -  snowing and skiing.bill. 
　suppose now we observe that bill is not out for skiing  which is inconsistent with the extension . abduction means to find an explanation for this observation  that is  to identify a set of facts  chosen from a set of hypotheses  whose presence in the theory at hand would entail the observation -skiing-bill  i.e.  cause that -skiing-bill is in the extension. we find such an explanation by adopting the hypothesis snowing. indeed  if we add snowing to w  the default theory t' =  { weekend  snowing  d  has a single extension  which contains -1 skiing .bill. we say that snowing is abduced from the observation -iskiing.bill  or that it is an abductive explanation of - skiing.bill. | 
observe that the description of the above situation requires the specification of some default properties that can not be represented properly in classical logic. 
　in general  as opposed to the example  a default theory may have several or even no extensions. for deductive entailment  this gives rise to credulous entailment  under which 1 is entailed from a default theory t  denoted iff belongs to at least one extension of t  and 
to skeptical entailment  under which  follows from t iff 	belongs to all extensions of t. accor-
dingly  two variants of abduction from default theories arise: credulous abduction  where entailment of an observation is based on and skeptical abduction  which is based on s in practice  the user will choose credulous or skeptical abduction on the basis of the particular application domain. 
　we argue that credulous abduction is well suited for diagnosis  while skeptical abduction is adequate for planning.  cf.  poole  1  and  eshghi  1  ng and mooney  1  for abduction in logic-based diagnosis and planning & plan recognition  respectively.  in fact  consider a system represented by a default theory  w d . if it receives some input  reflected by adding a set a of facts to w  then each extension of is a possible evolution of the system  i.e.  each extension represents a possible reaction of the system to a. 


	eiter  gottlob  and leone 	1 


1 	knowledge representation 

                                     as mentioned above  one is usually interested in minimal explanations for observations. the results in  eiter and gottlob  1  were that the complexity of abducnow consider abduction based on skeptical reasoning. tion from classical theories does not increase if minimal 
it would be useful to have a reduction of abductive reexplanations are used instead of arbitrary explanations. 
asoning to deductive reasoning which can be computed 
however  this is not true in for abduction from default 
efficiently. however  by using skeptical reasoning the ablogic. here  checking minimality of an explanation is a 
ductive reasoning tasks grow more complex  by one level source of complexity  which causes an increase in com-
of the polynomial hierarchy. this strongly suggests that plexity by one level of the polynomial hierarchy. 
such an efficient reduction is not possible. 
consider first credulous explanations. checking mi-
we first consider the problem of recognizing skeptinimality of an explanation e has complementary com-
cal solutions. clearly  this reduces to deciding if a cerplexity of checking the explanation property. notice 
tain default theory has a consistent extension  which is 
	eiter  gottlob  and leone 	1 

that e is not minimal iff for some h e  the pdap 
   m  w  d  has a credulous solution; hence  it follows that the problem is in '.   . on the other hand  reconsider  *** . clearly  {h} is a credulous explanation; moreover  it is minimal iff h is necessary for v. thus  ilf-hardness follows. 
　note that recognizing minimal credulous explanations  which consists in checking the solution property and testing minimality  is in   and also complete for this class. thus  this problem can be transformed into recognition of skeptical explanations for a certain pdap and vice versa. due to the complexity of minimality checking  problem relevance migrates to the next level of the polynomial hierarchy. 
theorem 1 let v be a pdap based on minimal credulous explanations. then  problem relevance is complete  with hardness holding even for normal p. 
proof.  sketch  membership. a guess e for a minimal credulous explanation for v such that h e can be verified by two calls to a oracle. hence  the problem is in 
one can show that s is relevant tor a minimal credulous explanation for v iff - is valid. i 
now let us consider minimal skeptical explanations. 
testing minimality of a skeptical explanation is much more involved than of a credulous explanation. while the latter has roughly the same complexity as testing the explanation property  the former is harder by one level of the polynomial hierarchy. intuitively  this can be explained as follows. since verifying a credulous explanation e is in   it has a polynomial-size  proof  which can be checked with an np oracle in polynomial time. thus  if we ask for a smaller explanation e'  e  we can simultaneously guess e' and its proof  and check the proof in polynomial time with the np oracle. however  verifying a skeptical explanation -hard  and hence e does not have such a  proof . here  verification needs the full power of a  oracle. 
theorem 1 let v =  h m w d  be a pdap. deciding if a skeptical explanation e for v is minimal is -complete  with hardness holding even for normal v. proof.  sketch  membership. a guess for a smaller skeptical explanation e' e can be verified with two calls to i oracle  and hence deciding the existence of such an e' is in . consequently  the problem is in nf-
　hardness. we describe here a reduction from deciding whether a  is valid. let s and q be 
new atoms  and define 

check that 
is a skeptical explanation for v. moreover  e is minimal iff $ is valid. 	| 
　note that recognizing minimal skeptical explanations is in   since the complexity of deciding minimality i dominates the complexity of the solution property   only    and is also complete for this class. 
　the complexity of deciding relevance of a hypothesis increases by the same amount as testing minimality if skeptical explanations are used instead of credulous explanations. in fact  the problem resides at the fourth level of the polynomial hierarchy. 
theorem 1 let v be a pdap based on minimal skeptical explanations. then  problem relevance is complete  with hardness holding even for normal v   
proof.  sketch  membership. a guess for a minimal skeptical e x p l a n a t i o n s u c h that h  e can be verified with one call oracle. 
　hardness. we outline a reduction from deciding validity of a which is an extension to the reduction in the proof of theorem 1. let as there be s and q new atoms  and define 
where d is the same set of defaults as in the proof of 
theorem 1. 	define 	  where 
.  note that if w would be empty  
then v would be identical to the in the proof of theorem 1 . it holds that for each subset   r  the set is a skeptical explanation 
for v. moreover  it can be shown that s is relevant for a minimal skeptical explanation for  is valid. 	| 
　there is no well-known nonmonotonic logic that has similar complexity  and thus one can not take advantage of theorem provers for such logics to perform skeptical abduction from default theories. 
1 	tractable cases 
from the practical side  the results from above are discouraging  since abduction from default theories has even higher complexity than deduction  in particular for skeptical explanations. the reasoning tasks suffer from several intermingled sources of complexity  whose number is  at least  the level at the polynomial hierarchy. 
　for example  relevance for v -  h m w d  using minimal skeptical explanations  complete for  suffers from the following four  orthogonal  sources of complexity:  1.  classical deductive inference the number of extensions of  1.  the number of candidates e for a skeptical explanation  and  1.  the number of possible smaller explanations  where each number can be exponential. 
　for dealing with abduction from default theories in practice  we have to find tractable cases or cases where ood algorithms for handling hard problems like gsat selman et a/.  1  are applicable. 

1 	knowledge representation 

　an example of the latter case is credulous abduction from default theories where all propositional formulas 

	eiter  gottlob  and leone 	1 

　consequently  also relevance for minimal explanations is polynomial if m is small. 
1 	conclusion and further research 
we proposed a basic model of abduction from default theories  and analyzed its computational complexity. moreover  we have shown that credulous abduction from the previously known classes of literal-horn and krompf-normal default theories is tractable. 
　besides identifying further tractable and manageable cases of default abduction  the following issues are currently under investigation. 
the size of an explanation  cf.  peng and reggia  
1   or  more general  its cost  given by the sum of the predefined costs of its hypotheses  can be used for further pruning minimal  i.e.  nonredundant  explanations. results for abduction from classical theories  eiter and gottlob  1  suggest using such explanations  abduction from default theories yields complete problems for the c l a s f the polynomial hierarchy. 
　another issue is default logic with an underlying language richer than a plain propositional one. a generalization of our abduction model to a propositional language over atoms p t1 ...  tn  where the t{ are variables or constants  is straightforward; here  an instance of an abduction problem reduces to the propositional abduction problem obtained by replacing formulas with all ground instances. since the grounded propositional version can be exponentially larger  this leads intuitively to an exponential increase in complexity. thus  abduction from default theories in this nonground language is expected to be complete for the exponential analogues 
of 
 acknowledgment nicola leone has been partially supported by the ec-us project  deus ex machina  and by murst1% project  sistemi formali e strumenti per basi di dati evolute . 
