 
shapes such as triangles or rectangles can be defined in terms of geometric properties invariant under a group of transformations. complex shapes can be described by logic formulae with simpler shapes as the atoms. a standard technique for computing invariant properties of simple shapes is the method of moment invariants  known since the early sixties. we generalize this technique to shapes described by arbitrary monotone formulae  formulae in propositional logic without negation . our technique produces a reduced grobner basis for approximate shape descriptions. we show how to use this representation to solve decision problems related to shapes. examples include determining if a figure has a particular shape  if one description of a shape is more general than another  and whether a specific geometric property is really necessary for characterizing a shape. unlike geometry theorem proving  our approach does not require the shapes to be explicitly defined. instead  logic formulae combined with measurements performed on actual shape instances are used to compute well characterized least squares approximations to the shapes. our results provide a proof that decision problems stated in terms of these approximations can be solved in a finite number of steps. 
1 	introduction 
like many natural language terms  the intuitive notion of a shape is not easily captured by a formal definition that can be translated into a computer program. for example  in grammar school we learn that a triangle is a polygon with three sides  and this definition can be easily applied to recognize two triangles in fig. 1. yet  a computer program that implements this definition needs to determine first what is a polygon  and what is a polygon side. this appears to be much harder. 
* research partially supported by nsf grant iri-1 

figure 1: triangles and non-triangles 
   the commonly accepted formal  mathematical  definition of a shape relates the shape to properties invariant under a group of transformations. see section 1. this formal definition is independent of a language that may be used to describe the shape. section 1 describes the method of moment invariants  hu  1; reiss  1l  that gives a technique for transforming simple shape descriptions into a computer code. unfortunately  this technique can only be applied to shapes that are completely characterized by a single instance  e.g.  a triangle. in spite of its limitations the method of moment invariants was successfully used in many pattern recognition and image processing situations.  see  e.g.   hu  1; li  1; wong and hall  1  . 
　in this paper we generalize the method of moment invariants and describe a technique for computing invariants of shapes given by logic formulae. we view these invariants as shape descriptors and show how to use them in reasoning tasks. allowing shapes to be described in a language  logic in our case  enables handling shapes that cannot be characterized by a single instance.  an example is a shape described as being either a triangle or a rectangle.  our technique can be applied to arbitrary monotone formulae  formulae in propositional logic without negation . 
　when the method of moment invariants is applied in practice  approximate characterizations of simple shapes are computed from a small number of moment invariants. a straightforward approach of combining these invariants according to the relations expressed by a short monotone formula may produce a new set of invariants of size exponential in the original formula length. many of these invariants may be redundant. as described in section 1  the redundancy can often be eliminated by representing the set of invariants as a reduced grobner base  becker and weispfenning  1; buchberger  1 . this representation allows decision 

problems related to shapes to be easily solved.  the grobner base algorithm guarantees that these problems are solved in a finite number of steps.  unfortunately  it is known that there can be cases where a reduced grobner base may contain a huge number of such invariants  huynh  1   but experimental evidence   buchberger  1   seems to indicate that this does not happen too often. 
1 	preliminary definitions 
we refer to subsets of the 1d euclidean space as figures. thus  the four connected black regions in fig. 1 describe four figures. a figure can also be described by a characteristic function. the function f{x y  is a characteristic function if f{x y  = 1 for points in the figure  and f x y  = 1 for points not in the figure. for example  is the characteristic 
function of a circular disc of radius 1 centered at the origin. 
   specifying a figure in terms of its characteristic function must be done with respect to a coordinate system. therefore  a figure may  and usually does  change when a coordinate transformation is applied. a shape is a geometric property of a figure. its formal definition  see  e.g.   veblen and whitehead  1   is given in terms of properties invariant under a group of coordinate transformations. 
definition: let  be a group of coordinate transformations  e.g.  translations and rotations . the function 

for all characteristic functions f x y  and all transformations '1 e 1. 
examples: the area of a figure is invariant under translation and rotation but not under scaling. the number of polygon edges is invariant under translation  rotation  and scaling. 
definition: a shape of a figure is a pair   where i is invariant under the group of coordinate transformations . 
the two most common group transformations in the definition of shapes are translation rotation and scale  orthogonal transformations   and the general linear transformation. for example  a triangle is defined with respect to arbitrary linear transformations  but a right triangle is defined only with respect to orthogonal transformations. 
these can be approximated in the discrete case by: 

a figure is uniquely determined by its algebraic moments 
 hu  1 . therefore  instead of looking for invariants of characteristic functions one can look for invariants of moments. in practical applications only invariants of low order moments are used.  the order of the moment mvq is defined to be p + q.  moment invariants are usually specified in terms of centralized moments  i.e.  the moments measured with respect to the  center of mass : 

the above equations can be expanded to an explicit expression giving the centralized moments in terms of the ordinary moments: 

the centralized moments in equation  1  can be replaced by normalized moments  npq  to produce invariants for translation  rotation  and scale. the normalized moments are computed from the centralized moments as follows: 

the only moment invariant under general linear transformations that can be described in terms of second order moments is  hu  1; reiss  1l : 
		 1  

1 	a review of m o m e n t invariants 
the classic technique for generating invariants in terms of algebraic moments was originally proposed by hu  hu  1 . the algebraic moments of the characteristic function f x y  are defined to be: 
		 1  
　in summary  the classic method of moment invariants can be applied to geometric shapes defined in such a way that all their instances can be generated by geometric transformations  e.g.  translations  rotations  and rescaling  of a single instance. in such a case  moment invariants are computed by formulae such as those given in equations  1  and  1   applied to the characteristic function of a single figure with the desired shape. 
1 	invariants of shapes described in propositional logic 
it is often necessary to deal with shapes that are more complex than the simple shapes of section 1. suppose we are given the following shape description: 
a rectangle or  a triangle and a polygon  
since triangles are polygons this can be simplified to: a rectangle or a triangle 
this simplification cannot be obtained from purely geometric knowledge because of the logic connectives. however  it cannot be obtained directly from logic since the fact that triangles are polygons requires geometric knowledge. we also observe that in this case it is impossible to calculate moment invariants from a single example shape since the moment invariants of a rectangle clearly differ from those of a triangle. in this section we show how to calculate moment invariants of shapes described in propositional logic. 
1 moment invariants as a system of polynomial identities 
the central idea that enables the generalization of moment invariants to complex shapes is that moment invariants can also be viewed as a system of polynomial identities among the moments. thus  for example  the moment invariants in  1  can also be written as: 

　the above observation  the results of hu  hu  1  about the relation between moment invariants and algebraic invariants  and hilbert basis theorem imply the following: 
theorem: let / be a figure. there exists a finite set of polynomial identities  among moments  that hold only for figures obtained from / by:  a  translation and rotation   b  translation rotation and scale   c  arbitrary linear transformations. 
this suggests the following generalization of moment invariants: 
definition: let p = {p1 ...  pm} be a set of polynomial identities among moments. we say that p characterizes the shape s if only the figures with the shape s satisfy all the identities in p. 
1 	shapes as formulae with logic connectives 
using logic connectives  shapes can be defined in an analogous way to formulae in propositional logic: 
 i  if s1 and s1 are shapes then a figure / has the shape  1i  v  s1  if it has the shape s1 or the shape s1. 
 ii  if s1 and s1 are shapes then a figure / has the shape  s1  a  s1  if it has the shape s1 and the shape s1. 
 iii  if s is a shape then a figure / has the shape -  s  if it does not have the shape 1. 
formulae in propositional logic created without rule 
 iii  are called monotone formulae. many interesting concepts can be described by short monotone formulae  valiant  1   but it is known that some short formulae may become exponentially long when described as monotone formulae  valiant  1 . 
　the moment invariants  as a set of polynomial identities  of shapes described by monotone formulae can be computed as follows. let p = {p1 ...  pm} be the moment invariants of s1 and let q = { q 1   . . .  qn} be the moment invariants of s1 then: 
 i  the moment invariants of l   . . .   m   j = l   . . .   n } 
 ii  the moment invariants of 
this defines recursively shapes described by arbitrary monotone formulae. 
1 	the grobner basis of shape invariants 
if the system of polynomial identities describing the shape s1 contains m identities and the system of polynomial identities describing the shape s1 contains n identities  the technique of section 1 produces only m  + n polynomial identities for  s1  a  s1   but there are mn polynomial identities for  s1 v s1 . therefore  the number of polynomial identities may grow exponentially in the size of the formula. many of these invariants may be redundant; the redundancy can often be eliminated by representing the set of polynomial identities as a reduced grobner base  buchberger  1 . although it is known that there are cases where the number of polynomials in the reduced grobner base is super-exponential in the number of the original polynomials  huynh  1   this does not happen too often in practice. specifically  the grobner basis technique was applied successfully in work on automatic theorem proving  kapur  1  and robot motion planning  cox et al.  1 . both applications involve similar expressions to the ones described here. 
1 	the grobner basis algorithm 
the grobner basis algorithm is based on associating a fixed ordering on the moments  the variables of the polynomial identities  and then applying reductions between polynomials. the most common orderings are lexicographic and total degree. buchberger's algorithm for the computation of a grobner basis is based on two principal operations: 
reduction: the polynomial / can be reduced to h with respect to g if there is a constant c such that: 

where c is specified as follows: let ag be the leading monomial  with respect to the fixed ordering of variables  of g then there is a monomial aj of / such that 





under a general linear transformation  the following invariant is the complete set of polynomial identities  up to second order   hu  1; reiss  1 : 
		 1  
　a figure has n-fold rotational symmetry if rotating it by  radians around its center leaves it unchanged. the property of 1-fold rotational symmetry can be characterized by second order moment invariants as follows: 
 a has 1-fold rotational symmetry.  1  
equation  1  follows from the fact that normalized figures with 1-fold rotational symmetry must have m1 = m1- since they also have m1 = 1 it follows from equation  1  that i. 
1 m o m e n t identities of specific shapes and properties 
in this section moment identities are computed for several shapes. they are based on moment values of the specific black figures shown on the left  which were computed via equation  1   using definite integration . 
    a triangle is invariant under general linear transformations. therefore  it can be characterized in terms of the polynomial in  1 . computing the value of /1 for the triangle figure on the left gives i1 = 1. thus  the least squares approximation of a triangle by a polynomial of total degree two is characterized by the following moment identity: 
 1  
       since the shape of a right triangle is invariant under translation  rotation  and scale  it can be characterized in terms of the polynomial identities in  1 . computing the value of i1  i1 for the right triangle on the left gives . thus  the least squares 
approximation of a right triangle by a polynomial of total degree two is characterized by the following moment identities: 
		 1  
    a rectangle  actually a quadrilateral  is invariant under general linear transformations. it can be characterized in terms of the polynomial in  1 . computing the value of i1 for the rectangle on the left gives 
 hence  a least squares approximation of a rectangle  quadrilateral  by a polynomial of total degree two is given by the following moment identity: 
　a square is invariant under translation rotation and scale. therefore  it can be characterized in terms of the polynomials in  1 . computing the value i1 for the square on the left gives thus  the least squares approximation of a square by a polynomial of total degree two is given by the following moment identities: 

a rectangle or a square  and can be characterized by using equation  1  for a rectangle  equations  1  for a square  and applying the rules of section 1. this gives the following set of moment identities: 

we show in the next section that these identities can be reduced to the identity of a rectangle by using the grobner basis technique. 
　a r e a . the area of a shape is invariant under translation and rotation  and is characterized by i1. for example  a shape having an area of 1 is characterized by the following moment identity: 

　r o t a t i o n a l s y m m e t r y . the characterization of 1-fold rotational symmetry by equation 1 gives the following identity: 

1 	examples utilizing the grobner basis representation 
the identities from the previous section are now used to describe examples of the grobner basis algorithmic approach to reasoning about shapes  as described in section 1. unless otherwise stated  a reference to a shape in this section is to be understood as a reference to a least squares approximation of the shape with a polynomial of total degree 1. the examples here correspond to the problems outlined in section 1. 
to show that a rectangle with 1-fold rotational symmetry is a square we verify that the reduced grobner basis of identities  1   1  is the same as the reduced grobner basis of  1 . 

to show that a rectangle is more general than a square we show that the reduced grobner basis of  1  is the same as the reduced grobner basis created from the identities  1   1 . 


technique over geometric theorem proving  e.g.   chou  1; kapur  1   is that in our technique there is no need to explicitly describe the basic shapes. instead  their description is extracted automatically in terms of moments. for example  a theorem prover can easily deduce that a square is a special case of a rectangle if it is given the definition of a square as a rectangle with even sides. our technique does not require this information. 
the fact that our technique uses finite measurements 
 moments  means that positive conclusions  e.g.  the given figure is a rectangle  can only be verified for least squares approximations of the figure. on the other hand  negative conclusions  e.g.  the given figure is not a rect-
angle  is verified with certainty. 
