 
mereological and topological notions of connection  part  interior and complement are central to spatial reasoning and to the semantics of natural language expressions concerning locations and relative positions. while several authors have proposed axioms for these notions  no one with the exception of tarski   who based his axiomatization of mereological notions on a euclidean metric  has attempted to give them a semantics. we offer an alternative to tarski  starting with mereotopological notions that have proved useful in the semantic analysis of spatial expressions. we also give a complete axiomatization of this account of mereotopological reasoning. 
1 introduction 
mereological and topological notions of connection  part  interior and complement are central to spatial reasoning and to the natural language  nl  semantics of expressions concerning locations and relative positions. for example  reasoning about objects inside other objects or on them may involve complex inferences based on a semantics for the prepositions in and on that exploits these mereotopological notions properly . reasoning about these concepts is also present in many commonsense reasoning tasks about spatial position and navigation  1  1 . we propose here a semantics and complete axiomatization of these notions that takes the linguistic semantics of spatial expressions to be a fundamental guide to commonsense spatial and geometrical reasoning. we do this for two reasons. first we are interested in reasoning about spatial situations from linguistically given information  in particular the spatial prepositions  movement verbs  and noun phrases referring to portions of space. in such a task we must understand exactly what sort of information spatial expressions in nl convey. second  we are interested in how the narrative structure of discourse can convey spatial information . 
　when examining commonsense reasoning from this linguistic perspective  two observations become apparent. the first is the absence in nl of a natural way of referring to points without measure. such points are fundamental to the mathematical conception of topological spaces  geometry  and analysis. but they are foreign to space as it is usually expressed in narrative texts  newspaper articles and texts about how to get to a certain place  which are the sort of texts with which we have been concerned. at the very least  mathematical points are not needed to express spatial relationships within nl. furthermore  the nl expressions that 
knowledge representation 
laure vieu 
irtt  university paul sabatier 
1 route de narbonne 
1 toulouse cedex  france vieu irit.fr 
we do use to refer to  points    borders   and  surfaces  do not refer in the following examples to the mathematical notions: 
 1  the point of this pencil is actually an irregular surface with several peaks. 
 1  there is a scratch in the surface of the table. 
　mathematical points  unlike pencil points  can't be surfaces  nor can mathematical surfaces have scratches  which presuppose a depth . even the points  surfaces and boundaries of our commonsense world are three dimensionally extended objects. 
　the other observation is that agents use spatial information contained in texts even though this information does not contain any system of universal coordinates by means of which we may spatially situate the objects talked about in the text in the way we might use a coordinate system  e.g. longitude  latitude and altitude  to situate the position of a robot. nl strongly suggests that space is a relational concept as leibniz argued  not an  absolute  concept as newton thought. our conception of space is constructed from or dependent upon the relative positions of objects to each other.' 
　this is not to say that our commonsense conception of space has nothing to do with mathematical conceptions of space. commonsense reasoning approximates but simplifies the mathematical concepts  since the full power of mathematical topology  geometry or analysis  is not needed in commonsense spatial reasoning tasks. that there should be this compatibility between mathematics and commonsense seems evident to us in that  for example  we can express mathematically precise locations in nl relative to a system of coordinates-north  south  east  west  longitude and latitude  together with numerical expressions within these dimensions and the dimension of altitude. we can also when needed introduce the language of analysis. indeed  one of the accomplishments of the theory we propose below is that we make this notion of approximation between commonsense and mathematics itself formally precise. but it is clear that mathematical expressions are not always present in nl when spatially useful information is present. thus  the use of mathematically precise notions of space is not an essential part of our conception of space. 
　our aim here is to develop the foundations of a common sense geometry. in section 1  we present a language in which 
1like time which may be construted out of events only  not taking states into account   space may be constructed from material objects only. indeed  immaterial portions of space such as the space beneath the table are entities dependent of objects. 
we cannot refer to points without extension and in which there are no expressions for referring to a coordinate system. we also present in section 1 a semantics for this language. in sections 1 and 1  we present a new sound and complete theory for the topological aspects of this qualitative  relational conception of space. in section 1  we develop a modal analysis of the approximation between this commonsense conception of space and the mathematical one. 
1 structures for relational mereotopology 
our attempt to build topology and geometry out of a domain of individuals or  bodies  instead of points is inspired by whitehead   tarski  and clarke  1   as well as work in mereology . tarski is the only one we know who has presented an axiomatized and complete mereotopo logical theory besides ours  but he classified his domain of  bodies  into  spheres  and non-spheres  thus recovering topological concepts from metrical ones. our topological theory most directly exploits clarke's work which corrects a mistake of whitehead's  leading to an inconsistency. however  since clarke presents  in the russellian philosophical style  only an axiomatic calculus  we will begin by describing the formal language and the semantic structures we have found necessary for the commonsense conception of space embodied in nl. 
　to state our relational  topological theory  we use a first order language  l rt with one non logical two place relation symbol  c  and a denumerable infinity of individual nonlogical constants  a  a1  a*  b  b1  etc.  and variables  x  y  z  u  v  w  x i  etc. . c represents intuitively the notion of connection between individuals. there are intuitively two sorts  ec  external connection   in which two objects share a boundary and o  overlap  in which two objects have a common part which is an object. a further kind of contact is also needed  wcont  weak contact   in which two objects are not connected but are in some sense  vanishingly close  to each other. examples of weak contact are the relation between a glass and the table on which it is standing and the relation between the glass and the wine it contains  while an example of external connection or  strong contact  is the relation between the stem of the glass and the cup of the glass. to express this notion of vanishing closeness  it is natural to suppose that each object has surrounding it a smallest neighborhood. while wcont may be defined in terms of c it seems natural to us to think of its semantics using neighborhood. further  neighborhoods may be useful if we wish to impose constraints on smallest neighborhoods that we cannot state within lrt  for example  that for some fixed real number 1  the neighborhood of x is within 1 of x . the presence of neighborhoods is also a useful feature if we wish to incorporate principles about how properties persist over spatial regions  see for instance  . 
　besides these notions  nl semantics requires us to capture the more classical topological notions of openness and closure  for details see  . to show that the right topological notions of open and closed properties are grasped  it suffices to show that our cognitive spaces are structures built over topological spaces. the fact that our structures are based on set-theory and have points as primary entities is not in contradiction with our aims. it doesn't really matter how one chooses to express the models of a theory: once complete-
ness is proven  they are all equivalent in the sense that our language and inferential mechanisms cannot distinguish between them. moreover  there are two clear advantages of expressing our structures in terms of classical topological spaces. first  it's a practical way to compare the concepts we introduced with better-known ones  and second  it will give us the opportunity to show in section 1 that classical topology may be seen as a limit of mereotopology. 
　the domain of our structures is a subset of the power set of a topological space. every subset corresponding to the space occupied by a physical object must clearly have a nonempty interior. however  few people working on mereotopology have noticed an additional important feature of cognitive space  emphasized in qualitative spatial reasoning by  and : the subsets of a topological space corresponding to physical objects are three dimensional throughout or  regular . regularity has two defining features: for any ndimensional regular space   1  every part of the objects in that space must be also n-dimensional  smooth boundaries ; 
 1  these objects must have no  holes  of a lower dimension  full interiors . this means that subsets including a single isolated point  as well as subsets with a single interior point deleted are not in the structure. this feature has a further consequence: we must modify the union and intersection operators to ensure that they are internal composition laws on our domain of objects. to make this clear  consider this example. suppose we have the one-dimensional space   r+  {any union of open intervals} . then  clearly any open interval is  regular  but the union of  1  and  1  has a deleted point  1. the correct union operator of two regular subsets preserving  regurlarness  is  not ordinary u  but a new operator u*  introduced below. similarly its dual n* replaces set intersection. 
　this discussion leads naturally to our definition of the models 
f x  is called the  smallest  neighborhood of x  a straightforward extension of the topological notion of neighborhood of a point. it is important to note that x cannot be dense  in the sense that  open x  & open y   open z      because the notion of a minimal open set is vacuous then  since the intersection of any set of open sets may not be an open set. 
1   is a function assigning individual terms a denotation in y. the interpretation of c will be given below.  we assume the usual extension of the interpretation of constants 1 to an interpretation of terms  where g is an assignment of ob-
jects in the domain to the variables occurring free in the term.  
　of all these constraints only conditions  vii  and  viii  above have not yet been motivated. they are needed to ensure that our structure is nontrivial in the sense that it does have instances of weak contact and external connection. 
1 semantics for l 

1 axiomatization 
our axiomatization extends and corrects that of . classical mereology   as well as   contains a fusion operator for summing up any collection of individuals into a new individual. this general fusion operator is in fact unnecessary. in 
addition  removing clarke's axiom stating the existence of the fusion of any collection of individuals is a simple way of making the theory first-order  and gives a response to a criticism often given of mereology  that it is neither cognitively nor ontologically acceptable to assume the existence of individuals having as parts any collection of individuals. this change is visible in axioms  a1 . the next change is in the definition of connectedness  d1 . clarke's definition makes it impossible to have connected spaces as soon as it is split into two externally connected parts  since the sum of two interiors equals the entire space and thus is not connected according to his definition1. finally  we added wcont  and axioms that ensure that the theory is not trivially verified in any topology  because  e.g.  there is no external connection . 


1 the soundness proof 
when added to the axioms and rules for first order logic  the set of axioms we have set up for relational mereotopology  rt1  form the basis of a proof relation l-rto. a proof in rto is as usual a finite sequence of sentences of l  each one of which is either an axiom or derivable from the other lines using modus ponens or universal generalization. we now 

1 we owe this observation to carola eschenbach. 
	 	knowledge representation 

provide a class of models for rt   to show that it is sound. clarke did not do this  nor have any of the people following his work done this. this has led researchers  including clarke  to miss certain important features of the theory~e.g.  the models are not just the power sets of topological spaces with the subsets having an empty interior removed  and the difficulty of defining points within this theory  attempted in   but proved in  to be incorrect . 
 the question arises as to whether the constraints we have imposed on y and hence on rtt  though intuitively motivated  are consistent. it will suffice to show that  under the hypotheses that and   }  needed to satisfy the constraints corresponding to  al 1  and  a1  : fact 1: let x and y be as defined above for rttand suppose that }; then  the elements asserted to exist in y in clauses  i  and  iv - vi  verify the constraints on their interiors and closures imposed by clauses  ii  and  iii . 

	asher and vieu 	1 

knowledge representation 

revision never happens for an external connection  for we cannot find any object between the stem and the cup of the glass  or between one's hand and one's wrist. 
　this sort of refinement is also present in changes of granularity signified by the use of certain modals in nl. consider again  for example  the sentences  1  and  1  above in which there is arguably a shift in granularity-passing  e.g.  from the description of an object as a point to one where it is described as a surface. superficially  these descriptions are inconsistent1  so we suppose that there is some sort of shift from one model or world to another. we call this sort of shift of granularity microscopization. we can suppose that this process of refinement of granularity continues to a  limit  as follows. we suppose that we can find parts of each object in the space. next  we suppose we could find parts of those parts  and so on forming a sequence of objects decreasing in size. these sequences of objects are  mathematically speaking cauchy sequences; and if we suppose that the limits of these sequences exist  then we will have constructed dense spaces of points by partitioning the original objects of our commonsense conception of space based on middle-sized objects. 
　the use of modal adverbs like actually  in sentence  1  above  suggests that we should model this process of reflection modally  each world will reflect an increasingly finegrained view of what the parts of objects are. at the end  we pass from the notion of a physical part to a mathematical part. we can axiomatize the idea that there are worlds of commonsense mereotopology and there are refined worlds with traditional  mathematical conceptions of topology. 
 the modal extension for lrt that we envision will include a modal operator  m . to the usual clauses for a first order language  we add: if  is a formula of l rt  then is also a formula. a modal rto model is a quintuple  r  c       where w is a nonempty set  of worlds   d a function from w into a discrete   pseudotopological  structure of the sort outlined in the semantics for lrt in section 1 above; r a transitive and asymmetric alternativeness relation in w; c an injective counterpart function from d w  into d w'  for each w and w' such that wrw' such that if in w then for 
all w' such that and ii an assignment to each nonlogical constant of an appropriate intension  function from worlds to extensions . 
　the domain of each accessible world is strictly larger than its r-predecessors  it is this that allows us to capture the asymmetry of r   reflecting the refinement of the granularity size of objects. we further suppose that for each object a in w and wrw'  w' contains additional objects that are parts of a  or strictly speaking the counterpart of a . the collections of points in one world need not be the same collection in another  but an object  collection of points in one world  will always have a counterpart in each accessible world. finally  we suppose a limit to the r chains in which every object is 
the sum of points without interiors. this falsifies certain axioms of rto at the limit worlds-namely the axiom that every object has a nonempty interior. these limit worlds are clas-
1 the  points  referred to here are in effect extended objects  i.e. they have nothing to do with the abstract points in the models  but they are subject to constraints that are incompatible with those constraints that define surfaces  see  for the definitions of nl notions of point  border and surface objects in rto . 
1 related work 
qualitative spatial reasoning has in the past focussed more on reasoning about orientations than on topology. a number of authors have defined topological relations from orientational primitives  extending allen's interval calculus  to 1 dimensions  for instance    but it is easily shown that mereotopological concepts such as overlap or external connection can be correctly grasped in this case only for a quite limited domain of parallelepedic objects . 
　others such as  use a domain of points and all the power of classical topology  and euclidean geometry   on the grounds that it was the only sound theory modelling these concepts. our work shows that an alternative based on a naive conception of space as it is expressed in nl can be de-
	asher and vieu 	1 
veloped rigorously at least as far as the topology is concerned. furthermore  the full topology of r1 is a higher order concept and we have proposed a first-order and axiomatizable alternative. 
   as far as we know  the only other mereotopological approach in qualitative reasoning apart from ours has been taken by the ai group in leeds  the last version of their theory being presented in . while also based on clarke's proposal  they remove the topological definitions of interior and closure. they also change the complement definition so that it is equivalent to the two following axioms vx 1y vu  c u y  - -nntpp u x   and p x y  - vu 1v  c u v  &  c x v  - ntpp v y   . as shown in   these imply that there can be no atoms  and that it is now impossible to assert the existence of interiors-otherwise the theory is inconsistent. this last feature is one of the motivations for the change in the theory  since for them  differentiating between an individual  its closure and its interior has no cognitive support. on our point of view  it is on the contrary cognitively important to be able to view material objects as closed individuals and their complements as open ones  so that their interpretations don't share any point. indeed  we don't want the air around the glass to have a  glass boundary  belonging to it  that is why in rt1  the glass and the air are in weak contact. but in   an object and its complement are externally connected  and so in that theory the unintuitive consequence about glass boundaries seems to follow unless one does a lot of fiddling with the way we refer to objects in nl. we have two strong motivations for wanting topological operators in our theory  one being the possibility of defining strong contact and weak contact  the other being that we think it ontologically important to be able to recover classical topology as a  limit  model  which we do in the process of microscopization. note that the authors of  don't provide any soundness or completeness proofs for their theory. 
　recently  in formal ontology there has been much work done on the ontological relation between mereological con cepts and topological ones.  provides a nice description and a classification of this work. one active trend in this field is to show that mereology alone supports topology  at the cost of having domains containing both extended individuals and boundaries  1  1  1 . it seems to us important to guarantee the ontological homogeneity of the domain  in order to avoid the need to classify a priori the spatial entities we will represent in the theory  which even if metaphysically 
justifiable does not seem to us relevant to spatial reasoning tasks in ai. besides  we have already stressed the fact that no linguistically described entity corresponds to an infinitely thin mathematical object  so that considering boundaries as constructs more abstract than extended individuals  as we do  is cognitively grounded. in addition  we note that none of these authors provide a soundness or completness proofs to support their intuitions about the kind of models their theories are supposed to have. 
