 
in this paper we introduce a multi agent deontic update semantics  that builds on a logic of prescriptive obligations  norms  and a logic of descriptive obligations  normative propositions . in this preference-based logic we formalize rights as a new type of strong prescriptive permissions and duties and commitments as prescriptive obligations between agents. 
1 	introduction 
in groups of agents there is a fundamental difference between an agent creating an obligation or permission for another agent and an agent evaluating whether such deontic states hold  because the former is an act whereas the latter is an assessment. for example  a purchase contract creates an obligation for the buyer to pay the seller for the goods  when buying a cd via the internet the buyer can grant permission to the merchant to charge his credit card by sending his card number  and the city counsel can grant a permission to a person to build a house. usually deontic states are created by performing certain actions like the actual signing of a contract  instructions by a superior  and pressing an 'agree' button on a website.1 these creations of deontic states are quite different from the evaluation of deontic states where one agent assesses the deontic states of another agent  or himself  to determine which obligations  permissions and rights actually hold. for example  a seller might want to know whether he or the buyer is responsible for paying import taxes for the goods that he shipped to the buyer  and an internet consumer might want to know whether he has to pay if someone makes fraudulent use of the credit card number he gave to an internet merchant. clearly  the most difficult reasoning task concerns the interaction between creation and evaluation of deontic states. signing a sales contract is easy  but deriving all the legal implications of the contract is a task for legal experts. 

such an active action is typical for contractual obliga-
tions  but it is of course not always required. certain rights  e.g. human rights  always apply and do not have to be created for every person individually. 
¡¡in advanced applications of multi-agent systems the agents must be able to reason about the creation as well as the evaluation of deontic states  because in electronic communication the agents should be able to reason whether they commit themselves or create any liability by the messages they exchange. lack of this reasoning capacity becomes more dangerous as agents become more autonomous. in particular in electronic commerce applications there is an acute lack of adequate formalisms to enable autonomous agents to reason about the deontic states of other agents and to support electronic contracting  schmid and selz  1 . 
¡¡the most obvious formalism to reason about deontic states is deontic logic  that formalizes logical relations between obligations  permissions  rights etc. unfortunately  almost all existing deontic logics are based on modal logic and focus exclusively on the evaluation of deontic states  and their ad hoc extensions to create deontic states  as commitments in  liau  1   only indirectly show logical relations between these creations. in this paper we propose a logic to model the two fundamentally different notions of creating and evaluating deontic states in multi-agent systems by formalizing the actions of changing and assessing deontic states. in this way we formalize the logical relations between norms that create deontic states  and between normative propositions that are true or false in a deontic state. in our logic we use the notion prescriptive obligation to reason about actions that create a deontic state  and the notion descriptive obligation to reason about the obligations that actually 
hold in a particular deontic state. prescriptive obligations are motivated in part by a long-standing philosophical discussion on whether it is meaningful to ascribe truth values to norms  alchourron and bulygin  1; makinson  1; van der torre and tan  1b . the semantics of our logic also cannot be based on truth values  because actions are not true or false. instead it is based on the so-called update semantics. 
¡¡update semantics  veltman  1  is based on the notions of update action and acceptance. an update action changes the information state of a particular person and a formula is accepted by a state if the update with this formula does not change the state. in other words  since this update does not affect the information 
	van der torre and tan 	1 

state  this formula was already known by the person. similarly  in our deontic logic we do not define a notion of truth for prescriptive and descriptive obligations  but only a notion of acceptance. for example  we check whether a certain deontic creation action was performed by checking whether the corresponding prescriptive obligation is accepted in a particular deontic state  and we check whether a particular obligation holds in a state by checking whether the corresponding descriptive obligation is accepted in this state. 
¡¡this paper is organized by discussing the various elements of the update system: the language  the deontic states  the updates  the notion of acceptance and finally the validity relation. 
1 	deontic logic 
the system introduced in this paper combines deontic update semantics  dus  for prima facie obligations  van der torre and tan  1c  with hyper-rational conditional logic  hrc   weydert  1 . hrc is a nested logic for default conditionals that may be seen as an extension of the dyadic deontic logic dsdl1  hansson  1  with nested obligations. hrc and dsdl1 are traditional monotonic modal logics  in which is read as 'agent a ought to do p ' is forbidden to do p' and  is permitted to do p.' moreover  can be read as 'according to authority  ought to do p towards claimant ' if p is a propositional sentence  then  can be read as ought to see to it that p is the case ' and an ought-to-be obligation op is read as 'p ought to be the case.' the standard semantics is given in terms of valuations and preference relations over possible worlds: obligations are what hold in the best or 'most preferred' of the accessible worlds. the modal operators evaluate deontic hrc states and are therefore called descriptive operators or normative propositions. 
¡¡dus for prima facie obligations formalizes deontic operators that can be overridden by stronger operators.1 it is based on deontic dus states  possible worlds structures  w  w*  r v  where w is a set of worlds  w* a subset of w representing the agent's epistemic state  r a ranking function of ordered pairs of worlds  called links  and v a propositional valuation function. deontic operators can either refer to the so-called context of deliberation w* or the context of justification w. the first contains only states the agent considers to be possible  and implies what should be done now. the latter also considers states which were ideal but are no longer reachable  and thus also represents violations. acts of 'norming' such as commanding  permitting  and derogation change these states and are in this paper written 
as 	for the context of deliberation and as and  for the 
1
¡¡¡¡if a prima facie principle is overridden  then it can no longer turn into an absolute obligation  but it is still in force as a prima facie obligation. see  van der torre and tan  1c  for distinctions with other types of defeasible obligations. 
1 	software agents 
context of justification. the operators cannot be nested  because norms  e.g. oblige  and what is normed  e.g. p  are completely different. 
¡¡we combine dus with hr c by replacing the worlds in the deontic states by hrc models  as illustrated in figure 1 below. the dus state contains three worlds and its ranking function assigns 1 to each ordered pair of worlds. the hrc model contains four worlds which are totally ordered. the combined deontic state has as its worlds three not necessarily identical hrc models. 
	dus state 	hrc model 

combined state 
figure 1: combining dus and hrc 
¡¡the interaction between creation and evaluation of deontic states as we already mentioned the most difficult reasoning task of the combined logic - is formalized by a reduction of the combined state to a hrc model. this reduction formalizes  among others  how the agent resolves conflicts between the prima facie operators. descriptive operators that assess the thus constructed hrc model - so-called all-things-considered operators - are called for the context 
of deliberation and and for the context of justification. 
1 	deontic update semantics 
we start with the basic definitions of veltman's update semantics  veltman  1 . to define a deontic update semantics for a deontic language l  one has to specify a set of relevant deontic states  called information states in  veltman  1    and a function     that assigns to each sentence  an operation on if is a state and  a sentence  then we write to denote the result of updating o with we can write for the result of updating with the sequence of sentences 
 moreover  one of the deontic states has to be labelled as the minimal deontic state  written as 1  and another one as the absurd state  written as 1. 
¡¡in this paper we are primarily interested in ought-todo operators between agents in multi-agent systems. we 

therefore introduce sets of authorities and agents in the update system. 
definition 1   m a - d u s   a multi-agent deontic update system  consists of a set of au-
thorities or normative systems au  a set of agents a logical language l  a set of relevant deontic states e and a function that assigns to each sentence  of l an operation on contains the elements 1 and 1. 
1 	d e o n t i c language 
the base language is the language of hyper-rational conditional logic  hrc   relativised for authorities and agents. the conditional or dyadic operators are interpreted as directed obligations  and prohibitions and permissions are defined in terms of the obligations. undirected operators are defined in terms of the directed operators by  this base language is ex-
tended with dyadic prescriptive operators for obligation  permission  and for new all-things-considered tests ideal and someideal. prohibitions are again defined in terms of obligations. 
¡¡we discriminate between propositions that can be influenced by agent action  and ones that cannot. for example  we cannot control whether it will rain  and therefore it does not make sense to say that someone is obliged to see to it that it rains. this is well known from other types of reasoning about agent behavior  for example in reasoning about desires and preferences in decision theory  boutilier  1; lang  1 . the extension of this simple and ad hoc formalization of actions to a full-fledged action logic is beyond the scope of this paper. 
definition 1  deontic language  let be a set of authorities   a set of agents andand two sets of no1i-logical symbols  controllable and uncontrollable 
propositional 	atoms . 
  let be a propositional modal language based on and an with the modal operators oaa1 for and  such that the first parameter of the dyadic operator does not contain occurrences of we write 
	etc  where 	stands for any tautology. 
  a string of symbols is a sentence of if and only if either is a sentence of 
or there are and and two sentences p and q of  where p does 
	1iot 	contain 	any 	occurrences 	of an  	such 	that 
  for x = oblige  oblige*  permit  permit*  ideal  ideal*  someideal or someideal*. 

¡¡some simple examples of the deontic logic literature illustrate the expressive power of the language. the first two formulas below illustrate nested permission  richard has been permitted to permit yannis to use the copier  and nested obligation  the minister has been obliged to see to it that the mayor is obliged to declare a state of emergency if there is high water . the next two formulas show how one obligation triggers a new one  the obligation to go to a meeting creates the obligation to write this meeting in your diary  and how one permission triggers a new one  the permission to drive creates the permission to drive a car . finally  the last formula shows how contrary-to-duty obligations can be formalized  you have to pay a fine when trading drugs . 

1 	deontic states 
most conditional or dyadic logics are extensions of hansson's dsdl1  hansson  1 . it is based on models  where w is a set of w o r l d s   a binary reflexive  transitive and totally connected relation on w  and v a propositional valuation function for each world. the model satisfies  if the minimal  or preferred  q worlds satisfy p. hrc is an extension of hansson's logic with a second accessibility relation r to give meaning to nested conditionals. moreover  hrc models  also contain an explicit actual 
world wj*  the valuation function is replaced by a propositional satisfaction function for the worlds  and an additional local stopperedness condition is imposed. the model satisfies  if the minimal  or preferred  / -accessible q worlds satisfy / . the nested operators are axiomatized by the axioms and 
w  hrc models   a ranking function r on ordered pairs of worlds of w  and a satisfaction function  for hrc formulas at the worlds  at of the hrc model . 
the ranking r is a mapping of to the set of positive integers plus infinity  with infinity larger than any element of   
 the rank of a pair of worlds  wi  w1  represents the strength of the prima facie obligation that prefers world w1 to w1. if there is no such obligation then its rank is 1  and if there are several of such obligations  then its rank is the strength of the strongest of the obligations. we call an ordered pair of worlds a link. in particular  we call an ordered pair and 

       1the logic has the usual properties of rational conditionals such as the conjunction rule for the consequent and the disjunction rule for the antecedent  but it does not trivialize nested operators by for example 
	van der torre and tan 	1 

   the deontic state is extended with an epistemic state  which is a sub-state of the former. this sub-state con-
tains al;l hrc models the agent holds possible. the de-
ontic state is used for the context of justification and the epistemic state is used for the context of deliberation  see  van der torre and tan  1b . whereas in kripke semantics a unique world is singled out  called the actual world  in dus a set of worlds is singled out  called the context of deliberation. 
¡¡for the initial state we assume that everything is permitted. 
definition 1  deontic state  let be a set of authorities  ag a set of agents and a deontic language. assume a set of worlds w  hrc models  and a satisfaction function forsuch that for every interpretation of there is at least one corresponding 
 a deontic state is a tuple 	consisting of the set of worlds w  a possibly empty subset  the satisfaction function 	=hrc 	and for each combination 	of  and a1   a1 € ag an integer  or  valued ranking 	function 
	1  the minimal state  is 	and 
1  the absurd state  is 
1 	deontic updates 
the deontic updates are operations on the deontic states that either zoom in on the deontic state  for hrc sentences   or increase the ranks of links  for prescriptive operators . the prescriptive operators have the dynamic component of creating a new deontic state. the general principle is that in case of conflict later operators are stronger than earlier ones. the operator is not defined in terms of absence of and it is therefore a so-called strong permission operator. 
  for the update with the obligation there is a conflict if all the non-zero. if there is no conflict then the rank of the  links is at least 1. otherwise  their rank is higher than the minimum of the reverse  links. 
  analogously  for the permission there is a conflict if all the non-zero. if there is no conflict then the rank of the  links does not change. otherwise  their rank is the minimum of the  links. 
¡¡to evaluate all-things-considered ideal and someideal operators we reduce the deontic state to a set of hrc models. it is here that the prescriptive and descriptive logics interact. in this paper we only consider a simple reduction  in which the constructed models only contain the actual worlds of the hrc models. 
definition 1  a reduction  the reduction of  to hrc models  written as is defined as follows. 
  each element of contains all actual worlds of the hrc models of 
  the actual world of an element of is one of the actual worlds of the hrc models of 
1 	software agents 
  t h e accessibility relation r of an element 1f  is the universal relation. 
  the starting point to construct the preference or-dering is that  is preferred to 
if there is a prima facie preference 
 then the following two procedures 
are carried out. 
cycle elimination. for all cycles 
	 simultaneously 	remove 	the 
weakest links of the cycles. if all links of a cycle are equally strong then they are all removed. for example  if there are only two-step cycles then if the prima facie preference for is stronger than the preference for  i.e. 
extension. 	afterwards  take the transitive closure and construct a totally connected order. 
¡¡a cycle represents a deontic conflict: there are arguments for and against an issue. eliminating cycles is therefor the formal counterpart of conflict resolution  and taking the transitive closure of the deontic state is the formal counterpart of dealing with incomplete information . conflicts are resolved by weighing the arguments  because only the weakest links are removed. this is the obvious and most simple construction for conflict resolution. there are of course more sophisticated mechanisms  that for example eliminate cycles in some order or that do cycle elimination and taking the transitive closure simultaneously. due to lack of space we cannot discuss alternatives here  but obviously they can immediately be used in our logical framework. 
¡¡¡¡finally  von wright's contingency principle  i.e. the obligation lp ought to be  done  if q is  done ' implies the consistency of and is formalized by a test on the existence of and worlds. the operators   refer to the epistemic state or the context of deliberation w* instead of the context of justification w. 
definition 1  deontic updates  	let 
let 
if this set is non-empty  undefined otherwise. 	the update 


1 	a c c e p t a n c e 
a crucial notion of update systems is acceptance. the formula is accepted in a deontic state  written as if the update by  results in the same state. in 
that case  the information conveyed by  is already subsumed by  acceptance is the counterpart of satisfaction in standard semantics. 
d e f i n i t i o n 1  acceptance  let a be an deontic state 
and a formula of the logical language. l. if and only if 
¡¡if an update is accepted  then the deontic state usually has a specific content. for example  the following proposition is easily checked. 
p r o p o s i t i o n 1 a fact a is accepted if all the worlds of  satisfy  moreover  	an 	obligation 
oblige p  q  is accepted if the rank of all links is higher than the smallest rank of the reverse links  and a permission permit  is accepted if the rank of all  links is at least as high as the smallest rank of the reverse links. 
¡¡we end with a few properties of the operators and the relations between them. the prescriptive and descriptive operators have some properties in common. for example  they are both closed under the conjunction rule. however  they are in another sense complementary. for example  the operator oblige has strengthening of the antecedent but  not weakening of the consequent  and o vice versa. this expresses that the prescriptive obligation is applicable in all states that imply its antecedent   unless it is overridden  whereas the descriptive obligation only evaluates the state of its antecedent. 
relation can be reflexive and transitive. when it is also totally connected  as for example dsdl1 models  then counterintuitive conclusions follow  see  van der torre and tan  1a . 
	van der torre and tan 	1 

¡¡prescriptive operators are in a sense stronger than descriptive operators  because we have the following due to the check in the definition of the prescriptive updates. 

¡¡prescriptive permissions and obligations can interact  for example in the following conflict between them. 

¡¡it is shown in  van der torre and tan  1c  that more specific and conflicting obligations are only accepted if they are later than more general ones. hence  more specific and conflicting obligations are stronger than more general ones and override them. moreover  the new prescriptive permissions introduced in this paper can override obligations analogously. 

1 	conclusions 
rights  duties and commitments are important for multi agent systems. for example  in agent oriented programming  shoharn  1  commitments play an important role  though their semantics is not given. this paper contributes to their formal foundations by extending deontic logic with the following elements: 
combination. rights are formalized as prescriptive permissions between agents and duties and commitments are formalized as prescriptive obligations between agents in an update semantics. the prescriptive operators could easily be combined with standard descriptive operators and mixed all-thingsconsidered operators  because they are all defined in a preference-based framework. 
strong permissions. the framework contains strong permissions needed in multi agent environments. makinson  shows that one of the merits of prescriptive deontic logics is that they also enable natural distinctions between weak and strong permissions and various ways of relating them to obligations  but thus far no strong permission for traditional possible worlds semantics had been given. 
controllability and contexts. the framework distinguishes controllable and uncontrollable propositions to formalize actions and circumstances  and deontic and episternic states to formalize the context of justification and the context of deliberation  thomason  1 . 
acknowledgments 
thanks to emil weydert for commenting on a previous version of this paper. 
1 	software agents 
