 
this paper presents a system to support writing a survey of a specific domain. the system utilizes reference information that consists of reference relationships between papers and the information derived from the description around citations. we think the following are inevitable for writing a survey : collecting papers of the specific domain  and understanding their essence and differences among them. therefore  we firstly extract fragments of papers where the author describes the essence of a referred paper and the differences between his paper and it  we call them reference areas . then with the information of reference areas  we identify the types of reference relationships that indicate the reasons for citations we call them reference types . these types make it possible to collect papers in the same domain. the system can display the collection of the papers. it can also show abstracts and reference areas of the collected papers. with the system  we can understand the relationships between the collected papers. 
1 	introduction 
recently  scientific information explosively increases  because of the increase of the number of researchers and the ramification of research domains  and it is difficult for researchers to read all the papers that they can get. in this situation  surveys of specific domains can make it easier to grasp the outlines of the domains. however  the number of surveys we can obtain is very small  garvey  1   because it is quite time consuming to write them. 
　now we are studying towards automatic survey generation. a survey can be considered to be a summary of multiple papers  and should describe their essence and differences among them. furthermore  it is desirable that the author describes in the survey his viewpoint and what are needed to study in the domain. however  the task to generate such a survey automatically seems very difficult. 
1 	natural language processing 
　this paper presents a system to support writing a survey of a specific domain. the system utilizes reference information that consists of reference relationships between papers and the information derived from the description around citations. we think the following are inevitable for writing a survey : collecting papers of the specific domain  and understanding their essence and differences among them. therefore  we firstly extract fragments of papers where the author describes the essence of a referred paper and the differences between his paper and it we call them reference areas . then with the information of reference areas  we identify the types of reference relationships that indicate the reasons for citations. these types make it possible to collect papers in the same domain. the system can display the collection of the papers. it can also show abstracts and reference areas of the collected papers. with the system  we can understand the relationships between the collected papers. 
　in the following sections  we first explain the essential points of multi-paper summarization  and then we describe reference information and its usage for summarization. we also report some experiments of reference information extraction and show the support system for writing a survey. 
1 	multi-paper summarization 
1 	essential points of multi-paper summarization 
there have been several techniques proposed for summarizing a technical paper  kupiec et al.  1; teufel and moens  1; mani and bloedorn  1 . however  in case of multi-paper summarization  we have to perform more tasks than just extracting important fragments from each paper. first  we should take into account how to collect the target papers for summarization. second  a multi-paper summary should clearly describe the similarity and differences among papers. therefore  we can sum up the essential points of multi-paper summarization as in figure 1. 

 a  retrieval of papers in a specific domain extraction of information from papers of the domain 
 & -1 detection of important fragments from each paper 
	 1 -1 	detection of similarity among papers  
	 & -1 	detection of differences among papers 
figure 1: the essential points of multi-paper summarization 
1 	related w o r k s 
kando proposed several rules using lexical cues to analyze the functional structure of technical papers  and used the structure for paper retrieval  kando  1   a  in  bond  et al.  1  . 
 l in addition  when japanese in translated into english  the selection of appropriate determiners is problematic. 
 1 various solutions to the problems of generating articles and possessive pronouns and determining countability and number have been proposed  murata and nagao  1 .  s the differences between the way numerical expressions are realised in japanese and english has been less studied. 
 1 in this paper we propose an analysis of classifiers based on properties of both japanese and english. 
 1ur category of classifier includes both japanese josushi 'numeral classifiers' and english partitive nouns. reference area : sentences 1 ~ 1   

in figure 1 . she also pointed out that sentences that are assigned particular categories e.g.  review of relevant previous research   in the collected papers are useful for grasping the outlines of the studies in a specific domain b . similarly  we use reference information for multi-paper summarization. 
　in the field of bibliometrics or citation analysis  there have been many related researches  narin et al.  1; liu  1; white and mccain  1 . their basic idea is that the papers that jointly cite others are related to each other  and the purposes of these researches are to find an important citation from citation diagrams and to identify which papers should be included in a survey. this can be considered as the first step of our study to make the multi-paper summarization system. to realize this process  we develop the method to decide the reference types automatically. 
1 	reference information in multi-paper summarization 
1 	reference information 
consider 1 sentences in figure 1 that are extracted around the citation of the referred paper  murata and nagao  1  in the referring paper ibond  et al.  1 . 
both papers are on machine translation  and particularly deal with noun phrases including numerical expressions. sentence  1  introduces the theme of the referred paper. sentence  1  points out the problem of the referred paper. then  sentence  1  describes that the referring paper copes with the problem pointed out in sentence 
 1 . 
　by reading sentences  1   1   1   we can understand the relationships between  murata and nagao  1  and  bond  et al.  1 . we call the fragment reference area. with the information in it  we can also identify the reason for citation. we classify the reason for citation into the following three categories we call these categories reference types   based on 1 categories proposed by weinstockfweinstock  1 . 
  type b 
the references to base on other researchers' theories figure 1: the reference area of type c 
introduction of previous research description about the problem of previous research the purpose of the research in the referring paper 
figure 1: the information obtained from type c reference area 
or methods. 
  type c 
the references to compare with related works or to point out their problems. 
  type o 
the references other than types b and c. 
　we think the references of type c are more important than others  because from reference areas of type c  we can obtain information shown in figure 1. in case of the example in figure 1  sentences  1    1   and  1  correspond to and respectively. here   a  can be considered as a kind of summary of the referred paper from the author's viewpoint. can also be regarded as a fragment that describes the similarity of research topics between two papers. reading sentence  1   we can understand that the research topic of both papers is on generating articles and possessive pronouns and determining countability and number in english sentences. on the other hand  the problem of previous work and the purpose of research are described in sentences  1  and  1  respectively. these sentences can be regarded to describe differences between two papers. 
1 using reference information for multi-paper summarization 
retrieval of papers using reference information 
if we collect papers by tracing all reference relationships  many papers in other domains are also included in the 
	nanba and okumura 	1 


figure 1: similarity and difference between papers 
collection. by tracing only type c reference relationships  however  we can collect the papers in the same domain. by investigating 1 cases of type c reference relationships in the database we will explain later  we actually find that both referring and referred papers belong to the same domain in 1 cases 1% . figure 1 illustrates the target collection of papers for summarization we call the collection in the shadow oval reference graph . 
detection of similarity and difference among papers 
making correspondence of the information in type c reference area  in figure 1  to the essential points of multipaper summarization in figure 1    corresponds to  1  - 1  and  correspond to  1  - 1. therefore  extracting and displaying reference areas can be a good support for writing a survey. 
1 	support system for writing a survey 
in this section  we explain the method to realize the support system for writing a survey. 
1 analysis of reference relationships between papers 
we use as the database 1 papers in style source on computational linguistics from e-print archive1. since  has commands to write the bibliography such as ' '   c i t e   or '' bibitem''  by analyzing information in such commands  we can get the information of reference relationships among papers. for the database  we can obtain the relationships in the accuracy of 1%. 
1 	e x t r a c t i o n of reference areas 
reference areas can be considered as a succession of sentences that have a connection with the sentence including citation in the paragraph. since we think that such a connection between sentences can be indicated by 1 kinds of cue words  we use those cue words for reference 
1
 http://xxx.lanl.gov/cmp-lg/ 
1 	natural language processing 
table 1: examples of cue words for reference area extraction 
 l anaphor 	' in this. on this  such  1 negative expression but  however  although  1 lst person pronoun we  we  our  oar  us  1  1rd person pronoun they  they  their  their  them   1 adverb furthermore  additionally  still  1 other in particular  follow 
figure 1: flow chart of reference area extraction 
area extraction. examples of cue words are shown in table 1. the procedure to select cue words is as follows: 
1. create the reference area corpus by hand  
1. apply n-word gram analysis to this corpus  
1. select 1 cue words manually  by checking the list of frequently used expressions made in step 1. 
　the flow chart of reference area extraction is shown in figure 1. reference area extraction rules add to the reference area candidate one sentence before or after the candidate if it includes any cue words. 
1 	identification of reference types 
in a reference area  if a negative expression appears at the beginning of the sentence after the sentence including citation  the reference area can be considered as type c. similarly if the expression like  we adopt  or  we use  appears in the sentence including citation  the reference area can be considered as type b. therefore  we prepare a list of cue words and make a set of rules using them for reference type identification. 
　biber explicated the difference of linguistic features among standard four-part organization in medical papers: introduction  methods  results  and discussion  biber and finegan  1 . in making a list of cue words  we also pay attention to the difference among the sections. type c reference areas tend to occur in introduction  related works and discussion. on the other hand  type b reference areas tend to occur in introduction and 

table 1 examples of eve words for type c 
 although  though  	 although 	1however  however  their however  the | but the but it but they in spite of instead of but instead | table 1: examples of cue words for type b 
based mainly on bans is based on | | 	the basic used in uses of used by to use a can use that can we can we use experiment. therefore  we make a list of cue words with the following procedure: 
1. collect sentences for type b and c from corresponding sections  
1. calculate n-word gram separately  
1. apply cost criteria  kita  et al.  1   which tends to extract longer expressions  to the result of n-word gram statistics  
1. select 1 cue words for type c and 1 for type b 
manually  by checking the list of frequently used expressions made in step 1. 
examples of cue words are shown in table 1 and 1. 
then we make 1 rules for reference type identification manually. 
1 experiments of reference information extraction 
we have conducted two experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our methods. 
1 	extraction of reference areas 
for the experiment  we prepare 1 reference areas  that are manually identified from paragraphs including citation. we use 1 for making rules and 1 for evaluation. we use f-measre van rijsbergen  1  in formula l  for evaluation  where b=l. 

table 1: the accuracy of reference area extraction 
recall %  precision %  | f-measure {   	our method 
  in data for making rales  1 1 1 our method  in data for evaluation  1 1 1 1 	baseline 1 1 1 	1 	1 	baseline 1 1 	1 	  | 	1 table 1: the accuracy of reference type identification using evaluation data 
| 　reference type identified by rules |   accuracy for  each type %  c b o 1  	correct reference type c   1  
-1 1 1 b  1 1 1 1 | 1 1 | 	1 | o 1 
the accuracy of reference type 
identification in evaluation data: 1 %  
　the results are shown in table 1. to compare with the performance of our method  we calculate two baselines. 
　if we consider the whole paragraph as a reference area  all the sentences which should be extracted are extracted. in this case  the score of f-measure is 1 recall/precision: 1/1% . on the other hand  if we consider only the sentence including citation as a reference area  the extracted sentence is always correct as a sentence in the reference area. in this case  the score of f-measure is 1 recall/precision: 1/1 % . 
　as can be seen in table 1  the performance of our method is better than the baselines. 
1 	identification of reference types 
for the experiment  we prepared 1 reference areas whose reference types are manually identified. then we use 1 for making rules and 1 for evaluation. the results are shown in table 1. the sum of bold numbers in table 1 shows the number of reference areas whose reference types are correctly identified by rules. therefore  we obtain the accuracy of 1 %  and 1 %  in the data for making rules and evaluation  respectively. 
1 using the support system for writing a survey 
we show in figure 1 the process of using the support system. the process consists of two stages. one is the stage of paper retrieval  and the other is the stage of overviewing the similarity and difference among papers. 
	nanba and 1kumura 	1 


figure 1: paper retrieval system and support system for writing a survey 
　in the first stage  presri paper retrieval system using reference information  provides 1 methods of paper retrieval. one is retrieval by queries  using authors' names and/or terms in titles . the other is retrieval by using reference relationships between papers. if the paper retrieved by queries has reference relationships with other papers in the database  the graph of the reference relationships around it can be displayed. by tracing this graph  we can retrieve other papers. 
in the second stage  by clicking the button  show type 
c reference relationships  on the display  we can see the reference graph. by clicking icons of abstracts or reference areas  we can see abstracts and reference areas of the papers in the graph. 
figure 1 shows the display of the support system. 
the left window shows the reference relationships around 
 murata and nagao  1  1 . 1 papers refer it  and  bond1j  1  is darkened because three papers other than it refer  murata and nagao  1  in typec. 
the right window displays three reference areas  where 
 takeda  1  1    bond  et al.  1  1   and  bond  et al.  1   1  describe  murata and nagao  1 . in this way  by displaying several abstracts and reference areas  the sytem can assist our overview of similarity and differences among papers. therefore we think it is useful for writing a survey. now this system is fully implemented and can be used on world wide web1. 
1 	conclusion 
in this paper  as the first step towards automatic survey generation  we developed a support system for writing a survey by utilizing reference information between papers. by using the system  we can collect papers in the same domain. additionally  the system displays the important parts and the descriptions of difference between papers  which are extracted from the collection of papers. we are now studying towards automatic survey generation based on the method described in this paper. 
1 h t t p : / / g a l a g a j a k t . a c . j p : 1 1 / p u b / t o o l s / s u m 
1 	natural language processing 
acknowledgements 
the authors would like to express our gratitude to eprint archive administrators for allowing us to use the paper resources  dr. noriko kando of nacsis for her valuable suggestions of statistical analysis of cue words  and anonymous reviewers for their suggestions to improve our paper. 
