 
sqca is an implemented technique for the semi-quantitative comparative analysis of dynamical systems. it is both able to deal with incompletely specified models and make precise predictions by exploiting semi-quantitative information in the form of numerical bounds on the variables and functions occuring in the models. the technique has a solid mathematical foundation which facilitates proofs of correctness and convergence properties. 
1 	introduction 
in many situations it is important to compare the behavior of dynamical systems. a population biologist  for instance  may want to predict the consequences of the introduction of a new species into an ecosystem. for an engineer monitoring a chemical process  it may be critical to know whether a particular perturbation could explain observed deviations from the normal behavior. 
　if quantitative models and precise quantitative information about the initial conditions are available  a comparative analysis  ca  of the behaviors of the systems is straightforward. one simply compares the behaviors predicted by means of numerical simulation at the time-points of interest. often  however  the available information about the systems is incomplete. in such cases we can resort to qualitative models to describe the systems  predict behaviors from an initial qualitative state by means of qualitative simulation  kuipers  1   and use qualitative ca techniques to compare the behaviors  weld  1; neitzke and neumann  1; de jong and van raalte  1 . 
　a disadvantage of qualitative ca techniques is the imprecision of their conclusions  which hampers their upscalability. when comparing the behaviors of more complex systems  with several structural differences and differences in initial conditions  de jong and van raalte's cec* is likely to generate a large number of possible comparative behaviors. besides these ambiguities  due to the qualitative nature of the available information  it only characterizes differences as higher or lower  without giving an indication of their magnitude. 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 　in this paper we introduce sqca  a technique which arrives at more precise conclusions than qualitative ca techniques  while retaining their ability to deal with incomplete information. the technique exploits semiquantitative information about the systems  in the form of numerical bounds on the variables and functions occurring in the models. although sqca will be presented as a self-contained technique  it can also be integrated as a filter on comparative behaviors into a qualitative ca algorithm. the implementation of sqca has been used to answer ca questions involving structural differences in combination with differences in the initial conditions of the systems. 
　the presentation starts with a brief review of semiquantitative simulation  since semi-quantitative models and behaviors form the input of sqca  sec. 1 . semiquantitative ca is basically a constraint propagation process. sec. 1 describes how the requisite constraints are derivable from the models and behaviors of the systems to be compared. the sqca algorithm is given in sec. 1  together with guarantees on its correctness and convergence. in sec. 1 the results obtained by means of sqca are presented  followed by a discussion in sec. 1. 
1 	semi-quantitative simulation 
we employ the semi-quantitative simulation techniques q1+q1  which function as filters on qualitative behaviors obtained by means of qsim  kuipers  1; berleant and kuipers  1 . although other simulation techniques could have been used as well  e.g.   vescovi et a/.  1    we have chosen q1+ q1 because they produce a semi-quantitative annotation of the behaviors while preserving their underlying qualitative structure. 
　the models used for semi-quantitative simulation are semi-quantitative differential equations  sqdes   that is  qualitative differential equations  qdes  enhanced with numerical information  fig. 1 . we use a notation for qdes which emphasizes their abstraction from odes and which simplifies the propositions in later sections. besides the basic qualitative constraints in qsim  it allows the use of composite qualitative constraints  vatcheva and de jong  1 . for instance  the constraint 


figure 1: qdes for an object fired upwards in a gravitational field  where the gravitational field is  a  constant   b  height-varying and completely specified  and  c  height-varying and incompletely specified. in  b  and  c  friction is taken into account  whereas in  a  it is neglected   d  ranges and envelopes which turn the qdes into sqdes. the variable h stands for height above the earth surface  v for velocity  a for acceleration  g for gravitational constant  r for earth radius  x for distance from the center of the earth  and k for a constant dependent on the air density p  projected area a of the object in the direction of motion  object mass m  and drag coefficient c. 


the latter two being composite constraints themselves. generally speaking  we deal with constraints qv{y  = 

where / is a qualitative constraint between the variables 

　　the semi-quantitative information completing the qde takes several forms. in the first place  numerical ranges are added to landmarks. for a landmark   range is defined as an interval .. . second  envelopes can be added to monotonic function constraints in the qde. an envelope /  of a monotonic function is defined as a pair of functions   with   for all x in the domain of /.  ~ q1 is a technique which uses the ranges and envelopes of the sqde to refine a qualitative behavior tree produced by qsim. given ranges for the variables in the initial qualitative state  it builds a constraint network and propagates the initial ranges through this network. the constraint network relates the variables at each distinguished time-point through constraints on their ranges. constraint propagation is achieved by recursively evaluating the constraint expressions by means of interval arithmetic and by updating the range of a landmark through intersection of the present range and the newly calculated range. q1 either rules out qualitative behaviors or produces qualitative behaviors in which the qualitative values are annotated with numerical ranges  so-called semi-quantitative behaviors  sqbs . q1 improves upon the results obtained by means of q1 by following an approach called step-size refinement. 
first  it locates or creates a gap in a semi-quantitative behavior  that is  it takes a pair of adjacent distinguished time-points and   such that   then  it 
interpolates a new state in this gap at an auxiliary timepoint   and provides initial ranges for the qualitative value of the variables at  the newly created state adds new landmarks and constraints to the constraint network. a new round of constraint propagation by means of q1 results in a refined or refuted semi-quantitative behavior. 
　fig. 1 shows two semi-quantitative behaviors produced by qsim and q1+q1 from the models in fig. 1. both behaviors describe an object falling back to its initial height  in the first case in a constant gravitational field without friction and in the second case in a heightvarying gravitational field with friction. 

figure 1: sqbs obtained from the models in fig. 1 a  and  b   respectively. 
	vatcheva and de jong 	1 

1 rivs and riv constraints 
1 relative interval values 
consider two sqbs  either topologically equal or topologically different  weld  1j. topologically equal behaviors show the same sequence of transitions between qualitative states and the  shared  variables have the same qualitative value in the corresponding states of this sequence. 

   a comparison of the shared variables of the systems at a pair of comparison gives rise to reiative interval values  rivs . they provide an estimate of the difference  of variables x at pc =  t  t . 
def. 1 the riv of a shared variable x at a pair of comparison pc is defined as range 
　the rivs at a pair of comparison are related to each other  and to the rivs at predecessor and successor pairs of comparison. the riv constraints expressing these relations are derived from the sqbs and the sqdes of the systems which we want to compare. several types of riv constraints exist. 
1 constraints from sqbs 
a direct way to obtain a range for the difference of a variable at a pair of comparison is to examine the numerical information in the states of the sqbs. 
prop. 1 

　a special case of this proposition is the difference in the duration of the behavior fragments t and t  defined by two successive pairs of comparison  and 


	l	 :
   as a notational convention  denotes variables in the behavior of the second system. 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 
　the behaviors in fig. 1 show that the range of the acceleration in the first and second system is 
	= 	 -1 -1  and range 	= 
 -1 -1   respectively. applying prop. 1 at pco yields range 
1 	constraints from sqdes at a pair of comparison 
suppose the qualitative value of a shared variable x is constrained in the first and second system as follows: 
		 1  
where / and g represent qualitative constraints  and r and i are vectors of variables. we will allow the models of the two systems to be structurally different  so / and g as well as r and s may be different. 
　in order to derive an riv constraint from  1   / and g need to be made comparable first. this is attained by bringing / and g in the form of a single constraint  the so-called comparison constraint. let q be the vector of variables occurring both in r and s  and a a vector of newly introduced auxiliary variables with specified qualitative values  so-called comparison values. the constraints / and g are comparable through a comparison constraint h  
		 1  
under the following condition: h is satisfied iff / and g 
are satisfied for every 	given the compar-
ison values 
　in contrast with  de jong and van raalte  1   the existence of such a comparison constraint can be guaran teed. the set of basic qualitative constraints is restricted and for every pair of / and g a comparison constraint can be easily found due to the simple form of / and g. when / and g are composite  a comparison constraint is obtained by decomposing / and g into basic constraints and composing the corresponding comparison constraints into a composite comparison constraint h  vatcheva and de jong  1 . 
　the acceleration constraint from the model in fig. 1 b  can be decomposed as in  1  and the acceleration constraint in fig. 1 a  as 


prop. 1 suppose that qv x  and qv x  are con-
strained by / and g  as in  1 . let h be the comparison constraint of / and g. the rjv of x at pc ~  t i  is given by: 

proof. the constraints in  1  are abstractions of the mathematical equations 

where h is a continuously differentiable function. subtracting x t  and x i  and applying the generalized mean value theorem  one finds 
between 
 and 	
ranges for the partial derivatives of h are derived from 
interval extensions   respectively  moore  1 . it can be easily shown that such interval extensions always exist and are uniquely specified  vatcheva and de jong  1 . in this way  

similar expressions are obtained for range maj  and range 
in the example above we find at pco the riv constraint 

　　1 throughout this paper h is used to refer both to constraint and the mathematical function from which the constraint is abstracted. whenever a confusion is possible  we explicitly speak of the constraint h or the function h. 
1 constraints from sqdes between pairs of comparison 
between pairs of comparison the behavior of a shared state variable x is determined by the derivative constraints in the sqdes: 
		 1  
　derivative constraints give rise to additional riv constraints. consider the pairs of comparison 
and which define primitive behavior fragments   that is  behavior fragments 
without intermediary distinguished time-points. the intervals will usually contain auxiliary time-points 
 which have been interpolated 
during simulation  sec. 1 . 
　since in general   we will synchronize the behavior fragments first by means of a procedure which shifts the uncertainty in to and to to subsequent timepoints. the ranges of the synchronized time-points ts in the behavior fragment of the first system are defined 

of the behavior fragment of the second system is accomplished in the same way. we will henceforth assume that the behavior fragments have been synchronized already. 
　we now introduce auxiliary pairs of comparison by means of the auxiliary time-points. these pairs of comparison allow one to improve the prediction of differences at qualitatively important time-points. 
def. 1 suppose two systems are compared over primitive behavior fragments defined by and with n and m auxiliary time-points. setting 
  
　notice that we introduce auxiliary pairs of comparison only conditionally. the condition taux   i  for pcaux ensures that taux is a time-point really occurring in the  synchronized  behavior fragment of the second system. 
　fig. 1 a  shows primitive behavior fragments of an object launched upwards. q1 has interpolated three auxiliary time-points in each behavior fragment. the synchronized behavior fragments and the auxiliary pairs of comparison are shown in fig. 1 b . the pairs of comparison have been ordered with respect to the  -relation. 
　with the help of the auxiliary pairs of comparison  the riv of the shared state variable x at  can be expressed in terms of the rivs of x at auxiliary pairs of comparison between  and 
prop. 1 given the qualitative constraints  1  and a: auxiliary pairs of comparison defined by def. 1. the riv 
	vatcheva and de jong 	1 


each . hence  the riv of x at  is given by the intersection of these estimations. 
　the proof of the second part of the statement is accomplished in an analogous way. 
　in the example of fig. 1 the proposition contributes 1 riv constraints for each of the variables h and v. 
　as a special case  consider the situation that x is constant in both systems  i.e. 
       	 1  without proof we add the following proposition. 
prop. 1 suppose that  are constants  as in  1   and we compare the systems over behavior fragments determined by and . the riv of x at  is now simply range 
for example  for the gravitational constant g we have range 
	1 	redundancy of constraints 
prop. 1 relies on the mean value theorem to obtain more precise estimates of the rivs of variables at pairs of comparison. one can prove that there are situations in which the riv constraints thus defined do not improve upon the riv constraints defined by prop. 1. in particular  this occurs when the sqdes are completely specified. an sqde is completely specified when it does not contain monotonic function constraints. 
theor. 1 suppose the sqbs of two completely specified systems are compared. if range  is the riv of a variable x at pc determined by prop. 1  and range the same riv determined by prop. 1 and 1  then range 
　since the models are completely specified  h does not contain monotonic function constraints. in this case the corresponding function and its partial derivatives are real-valued rational functions with corresponding natural interval extensions. the statement is then proved by analogy of the proof of prop. 1 using basic propositions from interval arithmetic. 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

1 	sqca algorithm 
the algorithm for semi-quantitative comparative analysis takes as input two behaviors sqb sqb and the corresponding models sqde sqde of the systems  where sqde sqde are assumed to consist of basic qualitative constraints only. sqca generates rivs for all shared variables at the pairs of comparison from a set of initial rivs. the algorithm consists of the following three steps: 
1. establish the meaningful pairs of comparison implied by sqb and sqb. 
1. generate the riv constraints from sqb  sqb and sqde  sqde  and build a constraint network. 
1. resolve the constraint network for the initial rivs. 
　prop. 1 to 1 define constraint schemata which are instantiated in the second step to yield appropriate riv constraints from sqb sqb and sqde sqde* the constraints thus generated form a constraint network linking together the differences  of shared variables at the pairs of comparison. 
　in the third step the constraint network is resolved for the initial rivs by means of the propagation algorithm included in q1  sec. 1 . the result of the constraint propagation is an riv for each shared variable x at each pair of comparison pc. if some riv is   the initial rivs are not consistent with the models sqde  sqde and behaviors sqb  sqb from which the riv constraints have been derived. 
　sqca has been shown to be sound and incomplete  vatcheva and de jong  1 . call the range for shared variable x at pair of comparison pc that has been produced by sqca. we now find: 
theor. 1 sqca is sound  in that for any pair of solutions of odes consistent with the sqca input it holds that 
theor. 1 sqca is incomplete  in that for some value riv in  there may be no solutions of odes consistent with the sqca input  such that 

soundness is a consequence of the sound derivation of 
riv constraints from sqdes and sqbs  sec. 1  and the soundness of the constraint propagation algorithm. incompleteness is caused by the possibility of excess width in interval arithmetic  moore  1  and the use of the weak mean value theorem in prop. 1 and 1. 
an important property of sqca is its convergence. 
theor. 1 the rivs calculated by sqca converge to a point value as the ranges in the initial qualitative states converge to a point value and the maximum step-size in the semi-quantitative behaviors converges to 1. 
　　1 in order to obtain tighter bounds for the rivs  prop. 1 is not only applied to qualitative constraints of type  1   but also to algebraically equivalent constraints. 
　the proposition rests on the convergence of q1 and holds under the same conditions  berleant and kuipers  1 . 
1 results 
the sqca algorithm has been implemented in common lisp. the program interacts with available implementations of qsim and q1  and our own implementation of q1: it takes semi-quantitative behaviors produced by qsim and q1+q1 as input and calls q1 functions for building and resolving constraint networks. in contrast with the implementation of cec* the process of deriving propagation constraints from the sqbs and sqdes has been completely automated. this is possible due to the fact that the models in the sqca input consist of basic constraints only. 
　in the first half of the table below the results of applying sqca to the behaviors in fig. 1 are shown. the trajectory of an object fired upward in a constant gravitational field without friction is compared with that in a height-varying gravitational field with friction  fig. l ab  . although the initial height and velocity are incompletely known in both systems  with ranges  1  and 1   respectively   they are known to be equal  so that the initial rivs are both  1 . the sqca results show that one cannot predict with certainty whether the maximum height reached by the second object will be higher or lower  
i.e. . the structural dif-
ferences work in different directions  the height-varying gravitational field tending to increase and friction tending to decrease   while the uncertainty in the initial conditions is too large to distinguish between the two. the prediction of the difference in maximum height is more precise than that obtained in qualitative ca  however. 

　in the second half of the table two identical systems are compared  both described by the incompletely specified sqdes in fig. 1 c . in this case the initial rivs are  = 
 1   which work in different directions. can we tell whether the higher initial velocity compensates the lower initial height  even though our knowledge of the systems is incomplete  the results show that the maximum height is greater by  1 1  in the second system 
  so that the higher velocity compensates the lower height. in this case  cec* generates 1 comparative behaviors and does not unambiguously answer the question. after combining the comparative behaviors with the sqca output  only 1 remain. 
	vatcheva and de jong 	1 

　　omitting the riv constraints from prop. 1 does not influence the results in the first example. however  for the incompletely specified models in the second example sqca gets worse results without these constraints: =  -1 1  instead of 
　　　　　　　　=  -1 1 . in both examples we obtain worse results when the riv constraints from prop. 1 are omitted. this shows that semi-quantitative ca cannot be reduced to the trivial approach of subtracting simulation values at pairs of comparison  prop. 1 . 
　sqca has been tested on a number of examples  including brittle fracture systems in fracture mechanics and prey-predator systems in population ecology. it successfully answers ca questions involving structural differences in combination with differences in the initial conditions of the systems. 
1 	discussion and related work 
sqca borrows ideas from both semi-quantitative simulation and qualitative comparative analysis. as in q1+ q1  the problem is reduced to a constraint propagation problem. however  sqca employs constraints dealing with ranges of value differences instead of ranges of values. the constraints are derived from a pair of models instead of a single model  with the additional complication that sqde  sqde may be structurally different and fragments of sqb  sqb unsynchronized. 
　to our knowledge  only de mori and prager  have studied the semi-quantitative comparative analysis of dynamical systems  but their approach is restricted only to linear  le-invariant systemland employs semiquantitative information on a coarser level of granularity. moreover  unlike sqca their technique for qualitative perturbation analysis cannot deal with structural differences between systems and with topologically different behaviors. 
given that the sqca input is valid  the rivs produced by sqca contain the ac-
tual difference  soundness . however  they may overestimate this value due to a loss of information in the process of generating and propagating constraints  incompleteness . by using techniques for the solution of interval csps that are more powerful than the constraint propagation algorithm currently employed in sqca  e.g.   benhamou and older  1    the problem of excess width could be reduced. also  the riv constraints defined by prop. 1 can be improved by replacing in some cases the mean value theorem with explicit integration  vescovi et a/.  1 . 
　even when the predicted rivs are as tight as possible given the input  they may turn out not to be precise enough. the convergence theorem shows that by interpolating additional auxiliary time-points in the sqbs  and thus introducing new auxiliary pairs of comparison and new riv constraints  we can improve the results of sqca. this suggests an approach in which the precision of sqca's predictions is dynamically increased by iterating between semi-quantitative simulation and com-
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis parative analysis. 
1 	conclusions and further work 
sqca is a technique for the semi-quantitative analysis of dynamical systems which is both able to deal with incompletely specified models and arrive at precise predictions by exploiting available numerical information. the technique has a solid mathematical foundation which facilitates proofs of correctness and convergence properties. sqca has been fully implemented  including the derivation of propagation constraints. 
　future work will concentrate on the improvement of the precision of the technique  along the lines mentioned in the previous section  and its integration into a system for the model-based analysis of scientific measurements  see  de jong et a/.  1  . 
