 
in robot navigation  one of the important and fundamental issues is to reconstruct positions of landmarks or vision sensors locating around the robot. this paper proposes a method for reconstructing qualitative positions of multiple vision sensors from qualitative information observed by the vision sensors  i.e.  motion directions of moving objects. the process iterates the following steps:  1  observing motion directions of moving objects from the vision sensors   1  classifying the vision sensors into spatially classified pairs   1  acquiring three point constraints  and  1  propagating the constraints. the method have been evaluated with simulations. 
1 	introduction 
in robotics and computer vision  acquisition of environment maps  which represent landmark positions and sensor positions  and their utilization are important research issues. various quantitative and qualitative methods have been proposed so far. in general  quantitative methods  which use triangulation  stereo techniques  ranging sensors and so on  are based on the accumulation of accurate metrical information. that is  they are sensitive to sensor noise and accumulate error. in contrast  qualitative methods have been expected as methods which are not seriously affected by senor noise and enable us to navigate robots in a wide environment  for example. 
　levitt and lawton reported a qualitative method for landmark-based robot navigation in an outdoor environment  levitt and lawton  1 . the robot uses a map in which precise locations of landmarks are indicated. with the map  the robot can qualitatively know the location. besides this method  several works have been reported which utilize pre-defined qualitative maps and qualitatively utilize standard geometrical maps. 
　on the other hand  acquisition of the qualitative map itself is also necessary. it is often supposed that qualitative landmark positions can be obtained from observed 1 qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

quantitative information  e.g. in the same way as triangulation . however  it is not true especially in a largescale environment  since the sensor data is noisy. a method which acquires qualitative landmark positions from more raw and stable information would be useful  however  such a method has not been proposed so far. 
　several methods have been proposed which acquire qualitative spatial representation by quantitative observations. yeap developed a method for acquiring a cognitive map based on  representation of local areas  yeap  1 . the map is supposed to be acquired with range sensors. kuipers and byun proposed a method for acquiring qualitative representation by exploration of a robot  kuipers and byun  1 . the representation consists of corridors and intersections recognized from sensory input. these methods deal with an abstraction problem from perceptual information of a real world into qualitative representation  and discuss how to arrange local representations into a total representation. 
　in this paper  we propose a method for reconstructing qualitative positions of landmarks from qualitative information acquired by visual observation. the method utilizes motion directions of moving objects in an environment observed from each landmark as shown in figure 1 a . while the object moves around in the environment  qualitative positions of the landmarks are reconstructed with several rules based on geometrical constraints. generally  we consider qualitative information is given by quantizing quantitative information. how-


figure 1: distributed vision system 
ever  the correctness of the qualitative information obviously depends on the methods used for the measurement. we use the motion direction as the qualitative information since it is often stably acquired by background subtraction and template matching. the template matching works well with a small search area  however  it is difficult to use for a wide search area. this paper supposes the template matching gives a correct motion direction with a limited small search area estimated by the background subtraction. thus  compared with the previous acquisition methods  this paper focuses on how to acquire qualitative positions of landmarks from raw  simple and stable information. 
　as an application of the method proposed in this paper  we consider a distributed vision system  dvs   ishiguro  1 . the dvs consists of multiple vision sensors embedded in an environment  called vision agents as shown in figure 1. the method can be applied to acquisition of qualitative positions of vision sensors in the dvs. however  the method is not only for the dvs. it can acquire qualitative maps of landmarks in general robot navigations. suppose the robot has an omnidirectional vision sensor  ishiguro and tsuji  1   observes motion directions of the landmarks in the omnidirectional retina and identifies the landmarks with visual features as shown in figure 1 b . the method proposed in this paper can reconstruct the qualitative positions of the landmarks with the observed qualitative motion directions. that is  the method solves one of the general and fundamental problems in robot navigation and map building. 
1 qualitative representation and qualitative observation 
1 	qualitative spatial model 
in our method  the positions of points  in the remaining sections  we call landmarks as  points'1  are represented 

figure 1: qualitative representation of positions 
with relative positions with respect to lines passing over arbitrary two points as shown in the left of figure 1. this representation is one of the most fundamental representation and various methods have been proposed in the field of qualitative spatial reasoning  forbus et a/.  1; freksa  1; latecki and rohrig  1 . especially  this representation can be used for map-based robot navigation  levitt and lawton  1 . 
　the qualitative positions as shown in the left of figure 1 are formally represented based on relations among arbitrary three points as shown in the right of figure 1. in general  the position of point  is represented as follows  schlieder  1 : 

where pj and pk are the two points connected with the lines as shown in the left of figure 1. in the case of six points as shown in figure 1  these     = 1 descriptions are needed to represent all positional relations of the points. 
　the purpose of this paper is to propose a method to acquire the qualitative spatial model formally represented as shown in the right of figure 1 by qualitative observation described in the following subsection and to evaluate it with simulations. 
1 	qualitative observation 
the qualitative spatial model is acquired by observing motion directions of moving objects from each points. in the case of figure 1 a   for example  an instant motion direction of the moving object is observed from the points a  b  c and d. when a projection of moving ob-
ject moves clockwise in the omnidirectional retina of a vision sensor  the motion is qualitatively represented as  right   and when it moves counterclockwise  it is represented as  left.  note that the same information can be also acquired by opposite observation  i.e.  when a mobile robot observes motion directions of points as shown in figure 1 b . 
　with the observed motion directions  the points are classified into a spatially classified pair  scp   which consists of a pair of point sets labeled  left  and  right.  in the case of figure 1  a scp ''{abd   {c}  is acquired by the observation. by iterating the observations  various scps are acquired except for inconsistent ones. for 
	s1  ishiguro  and ishida 	1 


figure 1: acquisition of the qualitative spatial model 
example  a scp ' is inconsistent with the configuration of the points as shown in figure 1  since there exists no line which classifies the points into such a scp. 
1 acquisition of the qualitative spatial model 
1 overview 
the scps represent geometrical constraints among points as described in the previous section. with the scps  the qualitative spatial model can be acquired. 
the process for acquiring the qualitative spatial model is as follows  see figure 1 : 
1. acquire a scp by qualitative observation. 
1. acquire three point constraints  1pcs  from the scp. 
1. classify the points into new scps based on the 
1pcs  and acquire new 1pcs  constraint propagation . 
1. transform the 1pcs into a qualitative spatial model. 
step 1  1 and 1 are discussed in the following subsections. 
1 acquisition of three point constraints 
in order to determine the qualitative positions of points  our method checks possible positions of the fourth points with respect to a triangle consisting of three points. since a triangle is the minimum component to represent closed regions  we can represent relations of all points by combining the triangles. 
　let a  b  c and x be the four points. the position of x is represented with one of the 1 regions defined with three lines ab  ac and bc and encoded as shown in figure 1. several constraints which limit possible regions where x locates are acquired from scps based on geometrical constraints. suppose a  b  c and x are classified into scps in various ways as shown in figure 1. considering positional symmetry of the points  the geometrical constraints are summarized into the following cases. 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

figure 1: three point constraints 

we call these constraints three point constraints 
 1pcs . in general  there exist six different scps with respect to arbitrary four points as shown in figure 1 a . if motion directions of objects can be completely observed from the points  the six scps are acquired by iterative observation. then  the scps are transformed into six 1pcs with respect to each point's position  see figure 1 b    which uniquely determine the region of each point. in the same way  qualitative positions among all points are determined if all possible scps are acquired by observation. 
1 	constraint propagation 
iterative observation provides various 1pcs  however  in practice there are some limitations in observation. for example  a vision sensor cannot observe an object locating in distance and over walls. in such cases  suf-

ficient 1pcs for reconstructing a complete qualitative spatial model cannot be acquired by observation. however  more 1pcs can be acquired by referring to 1pcs which are already acquired. 
　by referring to the acquired 1pcs  the points are classified into new scps. this process can be considered as constraint propagation. a simple example of the constraint propagation is as follows. suppose the positions of d and e are uniquely determined with twelve 1pcs with respect to a  b and c as shown in figure 1 a . for example  the points c  d and e are classified into the following scp with line ab: 
	{d} {ce} 	.-. 1  
furthermore  there exist four lines around the line ab which classify a and b as well as c  d and e into the following scps  the numbers correspond to the line numbers in figure 1 a  : 
		 1  
　there exist  1  = 1 lines which pass over two of a through e. each line classifies the points into scps in the same way. consequently  the following seven scps are acquired: 

example  figure 1 b  shows possible positions of b and c with respect to a  d and e acquired from the 1pcs. 
1 	formalization of the constraint propagation 
the process for acquiring new scps is as follows: 
1. acquire scps classified by the lines each of which passes over arbitrary two points  the example is the scp  1  in the previous subsection . 
1. then  acquire scps including the two points  the example is the scps  1  in the previous subsection . 
this can be formally summarized as follows. 
　suppose regions where points locate are uniquely determined with several 1pcs with respect to a  b and c. a line which passes over two of the points classifies the other points into a scp. considering positional symmetry of the points  there exist 1 kinds of selection of the two points over which the classifying line passes as shown in figure 1. in figure 1  the circles indicate selected two points  and the points x and y are classified into a scp {x}  {y} with the line. figure 1  1  corresponds to a case in which the selected points are two of a  b and c.  1  through  1  correspond to cases in which the selected points are one of a  b and c and one of the other points.  1    1  and  1  correspond to cases in which the selected points locate in the same region.  1  through  1  correspond to cases in which the selected points locate in different regions. note that no scp can be acquired in the cases of  1    1    1  and  1   and the scp is {x}   in the cases of  1    1  and  1 . 
　next  scps including the points on the classifying line are considered. suppose line ab classifies the points into a scp {x}  {y}. although a and b are not included in the scp in the above discussion  there exist four lines which classify a and b as well as x and y into the following scps  see figure 1 : 

　thus  new scps can be acquired by referring to the acquired 1pcs  and new 1pcs are acquired from these scps as described in subsection 1. in the above discussion  the constraint propagation is performed when positions of the points are uniquely determined with 1pcs. however  even if the positions of the points are not uniquely determined  actually it can be performed with the rules shown in figure 1 and 1. in the experimentations of the next section  the constraint propagation is performed under such a situation. 
1 	transforming into the qualitative 
spatial model 

then  several 1pcs are acquired from these scps. for 

the 1pcs are transformed into the qualitative spatial model. for example  if the position of x with respect to a  b and c is determined with 1pcs as shown in figure 1  then the order of bcx  x  is determined to be contrary to the order of abc  a 
	s1  ishiguro  and ishida 	1 


figure 1: classifications for the constraint propagation 
  that is  bcx = - if abc = + and bcx = + if abc = -. if the order of abc is given  then the order of bcx is uniquely determined. consequently  if six 1pcs with respect to each point's position are acquired as described in subsection 1  the components of the qualitative spatial model  an example of which is given in figure 1  are acquired. 
1 	experimental results 
1 	verification with a simple environment 
we have acquired a qualitative spatial model of positions of vision sensors by the proposed method with simulations. first  we have verified the method with a simple environment. in the environment  there exist 1 vision sensors and a moving object in a lomxlorn space as shown in figure 1. each vision sensor observes the ob-
ject in all directions at any distance and detects motions of the object as it randomly moves lm. 
　figure 1 shows the averaged number of acquired components of the qualitative spatial model over five runs. in this experimentation  the total number of the components is  = 1  and 1% of them have been acquired 
1 	qualitative reasoning and diagnosis 

figure 1: scps including the points on the classifying line 


figure 1: simple environment 
within 1 observations  and all components have been acquired within about 1 observations. the 1 observations provided 1 scps  which is equal to the number of possible scps with this configuration of the vision sensors. since identical scps are frequently acquired by the observations  the number of the provided scps is far less than that of the observations. with this experimentation  we could verify the proposed method. 
1 	application to a complex and real environment 
next  we have evaluated the method with a complex and real environment. the purpose of this experimentation is to evaluate practicality of the method. in the environment  there exist 1 vision sensors and 1 moving objects in a 1m x 1m space as shown in figure 1  this environment is similar to the real environment as shown in figure 1 . the vision sensors can acquire omnidirectional visual information. however  they cannot observe the objects at a distance of more than 1m and behind 

the walls indicated with white lines in figure 1. the objects randomly move on the road indicated with gray regions in figure 1. 
　in this experimentation  the maximum number of the components of the qualitative spatial model is  1  = 1. however  all of the components cannot be acquired  since visual range of the vision sensor is limited and the objects move only on the road. the number of components which are acquired without the constraint propagation is estimated at about 1 from the positions of the vision sensors. 
　figure 1 shows the averaged number of acquired components over five runs. with 1 observations of motions of 1 moving objects  1 components have been acquired in total without constraint propagation  which is almost equal to the estimated number of 1. with constraint propagation  1 components have been acquired in total. in other words  about 1 components which represent the positions of the vision sensors in distant locations have been given by the constraint propagation. 
　figure 1 shows qualitative positions of the vision sensors which is depicted based on the acquired 1pcs with 1 observations. the reason we have used the 1pcs in spite of the components of the qualitative spatial model is that all of the 1pcs cannot be transformed into the components and they include more constraints than the components. for obtaining figure 1  we have first located the vision sensors randomly  and then dynamically adjusted the positions with a kind of energy minimization so as to satisfy the acquired 1pcs. by comparing figure 1 with figure 1  we can find that the estimated positions are topologically correct. 
	s1  ishigur1  and ishida 	1 

1 	observation errors 
the proposed method is based on geometrical con-
straints  so that the method acquires correct positions of points as long as observed motion directions of objects are correct. the motion directions are stable against sensor noise  however  errors may crop up in a real environment. in such a case  several incorrect scps and 1pcs are acquired  and inconsistency arises among acquired point positions. however  some of them can be eliminated by a statistical method since incorrect 1pcs are acquired relatively less times than correct ones  each 1pc is acquired multiple times with iterative observation . 
　we have verified the elimination method with the same environment as figure 1. in this simulation  observation errors of directions to objects are purposely generated. the errors are less than  degrees  and motion directions are detected with a threshold of 1 degrees. on the average over five runs  1 components have been acquired with 1 observations of motion directions  and 1 incorrect components are included. by using the error elimination method  we have obtained 1 components and reduced the number of the incorrect components up to 1. thus  the method can eliminate considerable incorrect components. note that the number of acquired components without the elimination method is more than that of the experimentation in subsection 1. this is because various scps are acquired on account of observation errors. 
1 	conclusion 
this paper has proposed a method for acquiring a qualitative spatial representation from qualitative motion information of moving objects. key points of this paper are: 
  qualitative positions of landmarks are acquired from motion directions of objects  which are purely qualitative information. 
  with constraint propagation  the positions of land-marks in distant locations can be acquired if sensors are partially observable. 
we have presented that the method is actually valid with simulations of acquiring the qualitative positions of multiple vision sensors. the method solves one of general and fundamental problems in robot navigation and map building. 
　our future work includes developing a method to cope with correspondence error of objects observed from the multiple vision sensors as well as motion direction error. a statistical method is used for eliminating errors in the experimentation. on the other hand  geometrical approaches such as triangle constraints  kim  1  will be useful for more effective error elimination. 
