 
we present a new framework for reasoning about points  intervals and durations--point interval duration network  pidn . the pidn adequately handles both qualitative and quantitaive temporal information. we show that interval algebra  point algebra  tcsp  pdn and a p d n become special cases of p i d n . the underlying algebraic structure of pidn is closed under composition and intersection. determinig consistency of p i d n is np-llard. how-
ever  we identify some tractable subclasses of p i d n . we show that path consistency is not sufficient to ensure global consistency o  the tractable subclasses of pidn. we identify a subclass for which enforcing 1-consistency suffices to ensure the global consistency  and prove that this subclass is maximal for qualitative constraints. our approach is based on the geometric interpretation of the domains of temporal objects. interestingly  the classical helly s theorem of 1 is used to prove the complexity for the tractable subclass. 
1 introduction 
several formalisms for expressing and reasoning with temporal constraints have been proposed  l1j     1j  
. several classes of temporal constraint satisfaction problems  tcsp  are defined depending on the time entity that the variables can represent  namely time points  time intervals  durations and the class of constraints namely qualitative  metric or both. qualitative approaches such as allen's  l  interval algebra and villain and kautz's  point algebra have difficulties in representing metric  numerical information. on the other hand  the quantitative approach of dechter el. ai  has shortcomings in representing qualitative information. meiri   i t   proposes a combined network-based computational model for temporal reasoning that is capable of handling both qualitative and quantitative information. there have been also efforts to combine point and interval objects in a single constraint network  l l j . 
in order to encode duration information  a separate network is used which is orthogonal to the interval relationship network  e.g.  ia   l     pdn   a p d n   metric time-point and duration model   but these two networks do not function independent of each other. barber  presents a duration based temporal model with metric constraint but this model cannot handle disjunctive qualitative constraint. meiri's attempt   l l   to unify the qualitative and quantitative constraint can handle both point and interval variables but cannot handle duration information. 
　 liven a tcsp  s  one important reasoning problem is to determine whether s is consistent. consistency checking is np-hard problem for the general tcsp     while they are polynomial for pa  .1  and for some important special cases of ia and tcsp. these include a sub-algebra of interval algebra namely  ord-horn class  and simple tcsp . in a landmark paper  nebel and biirckert. show that ord-horn class form the maximal tractable class. it is also known that pdn and apdn admit polynomial algorithms for the consistency checking problem only when the constraints are simple. 
　we present a new framework for representation and reasoning about points  intervals and durations-point i n t e r v a l d u r a t i o n n e t w o r k   p i d n   . the pidn adequately handles both qualitative and quantitative temporal information. we show that existing frameworks such as interval algebra  point algebra  tcsp framework  pdn and apdn become special cases of pidn. the underlying algebraic structure of pidn is closed under composition and intersection. determining con-
sistency of the pidn is np-iiard. however  we identify some tractable subclasses of pidn. in the spirit of ordhorn class of nebel and biirkert   we characterize the maximal tractable subclass of this algebra. further  we show that path consistency is not. sufficient to ensure global consistency for the tractable class of pidn. we identify a subclass for which enforcing 1-consistency suffices to ensure the global consistency  and prove that this subclass is maximal for qualitative constraints. our approach is based on the geometric interpretation of the domain of the temporal objects and hence  provides a better insight to some of the earlier problems. it also gives a simpler analysis of ord-horn classes as the inax-
	pujari and sattar 	1 

irnal tractable classes of the interval algebra. 
1 	geometric interpretation 
we refer here to two types of temporal objects namely  points and intervals. intervals correspond to time period during which events occur and points represent the beginning and end point of some event as well as the neutral points of time. a useful representation of interval relations is in terms of regions in the euclidean plane  1; 1 . namely  an interval is defined by a pair of real numbers  such that xy .  the special case of x = y refers to an interval as a time point . hence  the set of all intervals in that sense can be identified with the half plane h defined by the in-equation x y in the -plane. let  a  1  be a fixed interval. if  a  1  imposes a constraint on an interval  then the admissible domain of is a region  not necessarily a connected region  in this half plane. 
　thus a more general way of defining a temporal constraint satisfaction problem is to specify the admissible region that one temporal object imposes on another. the variables are the 1-dimensional points in this half plane representing general temporal objects. a temporal object can be a time point or a time interval. the domain of the temporal object is h. the constraints can be viewed as admissible regions and a disjunction of constraints is the union of the regions. for a given temporal object  we denote d =  as the duration of the object. the time points correspond to the temporal objects of 1 duration. we can define the dimension of a relation as the dimension of the associated region. let us consider the well-known example here   l l   . 
 example 1: john and fred work for a company that has local and main offices in la. they usually work at the local office  in which case it takes john less than 1 minutes and fred 1 minutes to get to work. twice a week john works at the main office  in which case his commute to work takes at least 1 minutes. today john left home between 1-1:warn  and fred arrived at work between 1-1am. we also know that fred and john met at a traffic light on their way to work. 
　　there are four temporal objects  john was going to work    fred was going to work    john left home  and  fred arrived at work . and are time intervals and  and are time points with the unary constraints  x1 = y1  and  x1 = y1 . and also have other metric unary constraints which restricts their domains to regions k1  corresponding to interval  1 1  and r1 corresponding to  1  1   respectively  see figure 1 . similarly  any instantiation of imposes a restriction  qualitative  on  that both have same abscissa value and  imposes a restriction on 
that they have same ordinate value. there are unary restrictions of the duration on the admissible regions are 1*i imposes a binary qualitative constraint on for every instantiation of in this constraint defines the domain of 
 the composition of the two constraints yield abcd as the admissible region of  the admissible domain 
temporal reasoning 

figure 1: the admissible regions in h for different temporal constraints in example 1 
of  based on admissible instantiation of 1$ and the unary constraint on duration is  taking the intersection of the constraints  the admissible region of is only  this illustrates the process of intersec-
tion and composition operations when we represent the domain as regions in the half plane. it may be noted that  are 1-dimensional whereas rx and r1 are 1-dimensional  
1 	point-interval-duration network  pidn  
this study is inspired by the geometric interpretation of temporal objects  constraints and their operations. there can be different ways of encoding regions. in the present study  we consider only the tcsp's having constrained regions as convex hexagon with sides parallel to three fixed lines namely  -y-axis  y-axis  and x = y line. such regions can be described in terms of three intervals. 
1 	definitions 
a point-interval-duration network   p i d n   consists of a set of variables  having h as the domain  each representing a temporal object  interval or point . an instantiation of means mapping of to a point in h. a constraint is a disjunction of the form where each r is an ordered set the intervals 1  e and d are 
closed or open and bounded or unbounded in either side. intuitively  the intervals s  e and d represent the range of the domain of the start point  end point and the duration  respectively of the temporal object. a temporal object  is said to satisfy the constraint c  if it satisfies at least one of the disjuncts r  and it satisfies a 	following 
 and  a b  repre-
sent closed  semi-closed  open intervals  respectively.   
represents a unrestricted interval or universal constraint. 
　　a unary constraint c for a temporal object  = specifies a set of which constraints the domain of we assume that a unary constraint is always a quantitative constraint and the endpoints of s  e and d are real numbers. 

　　a binary constraint k of the form where each disjunct of ' is defined i l l terms of and  k and it constrains the domain of qj. the end points of and d are one of the following types: 
1. a nonnegative real number  say for metric informatiom. 
1. a variable  and  say  for qualitative information. 
　a binary constraint is said to be a qualitative constraint if the endpoints of 1  e and d are of the restriction that 1 takes on values only 1 or   a network is called a qualitative p i d n   if all its constraints are qualitative. 
　a solution is an instantiation of all 1 's satisfying all the constraints. the network is consistent iff at least one solution exists. 
example 1 
1. while returning from office john took longer than the time he took to reach office. 

1. we can encode a qualitative constraint involving point and duration information. fred and john take same time to reach office but they start at different time. let 

1. we can encode a disjunction of constraints on point and duration. it may not be possible to encode directly this information in pdn formalism. bob reaches office in less than 1 minutes if he start before 1am but takes at least 1 minutes due to traffic if he starts later. 

forward. if the constraints are qualitative constraints then using the fact that for any       it is possible to determine the intersection of on 
the other hand  when the constraints are quantitative binary constraints  the difficulty arises in computing intersection when the extremes of involve different variables. for example  if and then it will be hard to determine sup this situation can be handled in two different ways   i  the intersection involves two different terms with disjunction or    ii  approximate the intersection with any one of the term. 

1 	reasoning with pidn 
the most important tasks for the any tcsp   and hence for pidn  is to decide consistency; and if the network is consistent then to find a consistent instantiation of the temporal objects. 
proposition 1: the problem of deciding consistency of the pidn is np-hard. 
proof:  sketch  the qualitative temporal consistency problem based interval algebra becomes a special instance of pidn. we show this in section 1 and deciding consistency of interval tcsp is np-hard . d 
1 	tractable cases o f p i d n 

	pujari and sattar 	1 

that if   are open intervals it is not necessary that is a single interval. hence  though r% and define two convex polygonal regions in h  by loose join we only ensure that the union of these regions are connected but for a line or a point. 
　in the similar line  we can also join along s and e 
　if both the disjunct have same d and the union results in single convex region. thus for a given c  it may be possible to combine a set of disjunctions along 1  e and/or d to get a constraint having less number of disjunctions. 
　a constraint is said to be a convex constraint if it can be reduced to a disjunction-free constraint by the pro cess joining along  an pidn is said to be a convex p i d n if all its constraints are convex constraints. 

then also we can join these disjunct along s and e to obtain a single constraint as 
　a constraint is said to be a preconvex constraint if it can be written as a disjunction-free constraint by the process of loose join. a pidn is called as pre-convex p i d n if all its constraints are pre-convex. the preconvex constraints correspond to the polygonal admissible regions with finite number of linear discontinuities. proposition 1: the pre-convex pidn ts closed under composition  intersection and converse. proof:  sketch  the admissible regions defined by a convex constraint is a convex polygonal region in h. the convexity property is preserved during intersection  composition and converse operations. it is easy to see that the result holds true for pre-convex constraints too which define admissible regions as convex regions with finite number of linear discontinuities and these do not affect the three basic operations. 
1 	 -consistency in pidn 
the single most important technique of determining consistency of a temporal network is the idea of enforcing some degree of local consistency to eliminate nonfeasible instantiations. the pidn is 1-consistent if it is arc-consistent and for each triplets for any consistent instantiation of  and  i.e.  satisfying binary constraint between them  there exists an instantiation of which is consistent with the constraints 
and similarly  we can generalized the notion to define k-consistent. 
proposition 1: for a pre-convex pidn  enforcing 1consistency is sufficient to ensure consistency of the network. 
1 	temporal reasoning 

convex relations due to the fact that the instantiation can be an interior point of the admissible regions of the pre-convex relations . 
　it is well known that 1-consistency is enough to guarantee global consistency for all the tractable temporal network problems. the tractable class include simple 

tractable subclass 1-consistency is not enough to guarantee global consistency. the following counterexample 
justifies the claim. 
example 1: fred  john  bob and mary work for the company. today  mary started before fred. bob left his home after fred left. mary reached after bob. mary takes less time than john to reach office. john started after fred and reached before bob. 
there are four temporal objects 
the binary relations are the following 

one can see that there exist consistent instantiations of for the consistent instantiations of any pair of ob  op 
	the admissible 	r	e
wise non-empty intersection  but 
the pidn is inconsistent. 
determining consistency of p i d n a network can be converted to equivalent path consistent form by applying any path consistency algorithm to the network. path consistency algorithm such as pc-1 . this algorithm takes  when n is the number of nodes in the network. however  each intersection and composition operation takes 1 times more operations than the tcsp. nevertheless  the path consistency algorithm requires polynomial time. 
　the 1-consistency requires  in terms of the number of temporal objects. thus consistency checking of pre-convex pidn can be done in polynomial time. we now prove the following result. 
proposition 1: for consistency checking problem of a qualitative pidn  the maximal tractable subclass is preconvex pidn. 
proof  sketch  the proof is based on following observations. if the pidn is not pre-convex then some of its constraints define the admissible regions fall into one of the following two cases; 
 i  it is the union of pre-convex regions which are separated by a dimensional region  or   ii  it is the union 

of connected set of pre~coijjtex regions. another interesting property of the qualitative pidn is that the constraints which correspond to case i  above eventually yield case ii  in the process of transitive closure with composition and intersection. thus  if the pidn is not pre-convex then its transitive closure must contain the constraints of type  ii . since the sides of these polygonal regions are parallel to three fixed lines  there can be only 1 different non-convex corners possible and out of which 1 of them are the converse of the other six. one can make use of nebel k burckert's results here to show that for these 1 cases then consistency finding is npcomplete. these 1 cases when translated into equivalent clause algebra form include constraints of the type 

　it is interesting to note that this result need not be true for pre-convex pidn which is not qualitative. the major difference is that the transitive closure need not always contain case  ii . since  in general pidn is intractable  any complete algorithm must perform some sort of search over all possible combinations of disjunction-free labeling. 
1 	expressive power of pidn 
we show that all the major temporal constraint satisfaction problems are special cases of pidn. ia as a special case of p i d n : interesting to note that interval algebra is a special case of qualitative pidn where there is no constraint on the duration and we have only one type of temporal objects namely  time intervals. hence  without loss of generality we represent a constraint as a pair of intervals rather than a triplets of intervals. for example  
	we call such constraints as 
rectangular constraint as the admissible regions are rectangles. the 1 basic relations can be equivalently written as rectangular constraints. 
　the intuitive notion of convex and pir -convex relations can be interpreted in this context too and these are similar to the terms introduced in . it is interesting to note that the relations of ia which are equivalent to single rectangular relations are convex relations. for example  relation like  can be combined to yield a single rectangular constraint and is a convex relation. for the ia relation {p o} the equivalent pidn constraints is  the disjunction here can be loosely joined along e and hence is a pre-convex relation. the preconvex relations correspond to the nebel and biirckert's ord-hom clause class   the following observation justifies that for ia 1-consistency is sufficient for global consistency of the tractable subclasses. 
proposition 1: for a pidn with rectangular constraint  1-consistency implies global consistency. proof  sketch  the argument of proof follows the same line and is due to the fact that if the polygonal regions have sides parallel to two fixed lines then their pairwise non-empty intersection ensures that they have a common non-empty intersection. 
tcsp as a special case of p i d n : the tcsp proposed by dechter et al  can be viewed as a special case of pidn. the temporal objects are time points. a constraint is a disjunction of r's where each r is a the simple tcsp correspond to the convex subclass and the     class correspond to pre-convex class. 
however  pidn is more expressive than these tcsp's including extensions suggested by meiri  ll . 
p d n and p i d n : navarrete and marin  propose a temporal reasoning system  p d n that takes both points and durations as primitive objects and allow relative and indefinite information. pdn consists of two pa networks separately and are connected by a set of ternary constraints. one pa network represents the set of time points and the other represents duration between pairs of time points. one can visualise both networks as special cases of the pidn  the first having just the r n 1 and the second one as a pidn with r = d. however  in the proposed formalism it is possible to club the information into one network avoiding the ternary constraints linking these two networks. since the pidn also handles quantitative information like apdn which is an extension of the concept of pdn. on the other hand  pidn can handle disjunctions between point and duration which is not easily possible in pdn.  see table 1  
other 	related 	work: 	recently 	jonsson 	and 
backstrom  have proposed a unifying framework called 
disjunctive linear relations  dlrs . the dlrs is based on the linear programming paradigm. jonsson and brackstrom use karmarker's and khachiyan's algorithrn to prove that horn dlrsat  a tractable subclass of dlrs  can be solved in polynomial time.1 though these algorithms are polynomial in time  their optimal solutions are not exact as they are numerical methods. they generate solutions which have the limiting point that is optimal. therefore  the numerical stability of these methods may be questionable while applying them to the satisfiability problem. on the other hand  simplex method may be suitable in this context  but may not be polynomial. on the whole  linear programming approach  though expressive  does not take advantage of the underlying structures  e.g.  domain constraints  of temporal constraints. 
　in comparison to dlrs  the pidn is committed to the standard approach based on a temporal constraint network having binary constraints among time objects. hence  pidn has computational advantage over dlrs. 
for example  if there are 1 time intervals  dlr forms the constraints of 1 variables. at any given iteration it solves a lp of 1 variables. however  if we handle binary constraint network of 1 nodes then the path consistency algorithm will carry out the composition and intersection of 1 nodes at time in one iteration. hence pidn handles only 1 variables. it does this for a poly-

nomial time in 1. but in any iteration it handle* 1 variables. dlr also does polynomial number of iteration in 1 and in each iteration it handles 1 variables. 
1 	summary and future scope 
in the present work we propose an unified formalism which treats points  intervals and durations as temporal objects and handles quantitative and quantitative constraints  table 1 . in general  checking consistency of pidn is np-hard and the maximal tractable class for qualitative case is identified. unlike the other formalisms  for the tractable classes  the level of local consistency for guaranteeing global consistency is 1. it is shown that the all other major temporal constraint formalisms are special cases of the proposed network. 
　the aim of the present study is to establish the fact that a specific geometrical interpretation of the time domain helps in unifying the earlier diverse concepts. there are many unresolved questions remain to be answered. we outline some of the* possible future work:  i  to devise a specialized algorithm to compute intersection  composition for qualitative or for the general network;  ii  determining the maximal tractable class for the general pidn. it may be noted that the the fact that non-convex disconnected admissible regions yield connected regions by the process of composition do not hold true for the quantitative constraints. it may be possible to identify the class for which this is true;  iii  developing an efficient search algorithm for the general network  and comparing empirical performance of pidn and dlrs 

f. barber. a metric time-point and duration-based temporal model. sigart bui let me  1 :1  1. 
r dechter  i. meiri  and jl pearl. temporal constraint networks. artificial intelligence 1 -1  1. 
h. edelsbrunner. algorithms in combinatorial geometry. springer  berlin  1. 
a. gerevini and m  cristani. on finding a solution in temporal constraint satisfaction problem. proc. of ijcai'1  pages 1  1. 
p. jonsson and c. backstrom. a unifying approach to temporal constraint reasoning. artificial intelligence  1 :1  1. 
h. kautz and p. ladkin. integrating metric and qualitative temporal reasoning. proc. of aaai-1  pages 1  1. 
m. koubarakis. dense time and temporal constraints with =. proceedings of the kr*1  pages 1  1. 
g. ligozat.  corner  relations in alien's algebra. constraints  1 and 1 : 1  1. 
a. k. mackworth. consistency in network relations. artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
i. meiri. combining qualitative and quantitative constraints in temporal reasoning. artificial intelligence  1-1  1. 
i. navarrette and r. marin. qualitative temporal reasoning with points and durations. proc. ijcav1  pages 1  1. 
b. nebel and h. biirckert. reasoning about temporal relations: a maximal tractable subclass of alien's interval algebra. journal of acm  1 :1  1. 
arun k pujari. neighbourhood logic and interval algebra. technical report no. 1  united nations university  international institute of software technology  macau  1. 
e. schwalb and l. vila. temporal constraints: a survey. constraints  1 and 1 :1  1. p. van beek. reasoning about qualitative tempo-

acknowledgement 
the authors thank peter van beek for his valuable comments on an early draft of this paper. also  the first author gratefully acknowledges csir  india  research project no.1/1/emr-ii  and griffith university for supporting the research. 
