 
the classical way of encoding preferences in decision theory is by means of utility or value functions. however agents are not always able to deliver such a function directly. in this paper  we relate three different ways of specifying preferences  namely by means of a set of particular types of constraints on the utility function  by means of an ordered set of prioritized goals expressed by logical propositions  and by means of an ordered set of subsets of possible candidates reaching the same level of satisfaction. these different expression modes can be handled in a weighted logical setting  here the one of possibilistic logic. the aggregation of preferences pertaining to different criteria can then be handled by fusing sets of prioritized goals. apart from a better expressivity  the benefits of a logical representation of preferences are to put them in a suitable format for reasoning purposes  or for modifying or revising them. 
1. introduction 
in decision analysis  utility or valued functions are supposed to be available for computing the values of global objective functions and for ranking the different possible candidates under consideration. artificial intelligence methods can contribute to a more implicit specification of these functions  for instance in terms of constraints allowing for a more granular expression of preferences. this general line of research has been recently illustrated in various ways by ai researchers  e.g.  boutilier  1; lang 1%; boutilier et al. 1 . the expected benefit of the logical handling of decision problems is not only to allow for a less abstract  and thus more human-like expression of knowledge and preferences  but also to facilitate explanation capabilities for the candidates proposed by decision support systems. 
　logic and decision belong to two different traditions; the first one is concerned with consistency and inference and is oriented towards symbolic processing  while the other deals with trade-offs  and possibly with uncertainty   and is more numerically inclined. however non-classical logics are often using ordering structures  while a need is now expressed in decision analysis for more qualitative evaluations which only require ordinal scales  rather than numerical ones . 
　among weighted logics  possibilistic logic based on the conjoint use of classical logic and qualitative possibility theory  dubois and prade  1; zadeh  1  offers a framework at the meeting point of the two traditions. besides  possibilistic logic has been already shown to be convenient for handling nonmonotonic reasoning  benferhat et al.  1  1 . more recently  its framework has been used for modelling preferences  as set of prioritized goals in decision under uncertainty  dubois et al.  1 . 
　this paper provides a preliminary investigation of the potentials of possibilistic logic in decision analysis  and more specifically in the representation of preferences. indeed a possibilistic logic base can not only be seen as a set of more or less certain pieces of information  which was the original understanding when possibilistic logic was introduced and then applied to nonmonotonic reasoning . such a base can also be viewed as a layered set of propositions expressing goals having different levels of priority. the latter view can be connected with the fuzzy set representation of constraints or objective functions proposed by bellman and zadeh  1  a long time ago. indeed  a utility function can be seen as a membership function of a fuzzy set  the one expressing the more or less acceptable candidates   which gives birth to a weighted set of goals  through the level cuts of the fuzzy set . 
　section 1 presents the representation of utility functions over set of possible candidates  either in terms of set prioritized goals or in terms of subsets of possible candidates reaching the same level of satisfaction. section 1 discusses the symbolic aggregation of utility functions pertaining to different criteria. section 1 studies how constraint-based specification of preferences can lead to a 
　representation in the previous framework. section 1 briefly deals with the revision of preferences and goals. 
1. logical handling of prioritized goals 
let u be a finite set of possible candidates. a utility function  associated with some criterion c  is a mapping from u to some valuation scale. in many practical situations  a finite valuation scale is enough  first because the set of candidates is finite  and moreover humans are often only able to differentiate candidates through a rather small number of valuations. 
　then a fuzzy set can be equivalently seen as a finite family of nested level cuts  corresponding here to crisp constraints or objectives. the equivalent representation of c as a set of prioritized goal is a direct consequence of the 

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 

semantics associated to a possibilistic logic base  which is now briefly restated. 
1 . 1 . possibilistic logic semantics 
let be a possibilistic logic base 
where is a classical proposition and a level in a linearly ordered valuation set l. the semantics of k is given by the function from the set of interpretations u to l  such that all the interpretations satisfying all the propositions in k get the highest possibility degree  namely 1  and the others are ranked w.r.t. the strongest proposition that they falsify  namely we get: 
where a 1 if u is a model of p;  i.e.  an interpretation which makes it true  and vu pj  = 1 if u falsifies pj. the valuation scale l may be the unit interval  but a finite linearly ordered set can be often sufficient in practice  then just denotes the order-reversing map of l . the function is a possibility distribution which rank-orders the interpretations u. associated with are two mappings which evaluate subsets of u  namely   a possibility measure  which evaluates to what extent p is consistent with interpretations having a high degree of possibility according to  
 1  
  a dual necessity measure  which evaluates to what extent all the interpretations having high possibility degrees make p true according to  
 1  
　it is worth noticing that  1  results from the application of the minimal specificity principle to the set of constraints  dubois et al.  1  
		 1  
   indeed   1  implicitly specifies a set of possibility distributions and the minimal specificity principle consists in choosing the greatest possibility distribution satisfying the constraints. this distribution allocates the greatest possibility level to each interpretation in agreement with the constraints. in the following  the possibility degree expresses how satisfactory is the candidate u. 
1. logical representation of criteria 
let us consider the case of a unique fuzzy criterion c  the utility function is defined by its membership function 
ranging on a finite scale c is equivalently represented by the set of constraints n cai  

i.e.  the set of possible candidates having a degree of satisfaction having degree at least equal to the greater aj the smaller note that if then the c o n s t r a i n t i s redundant  aad can be ignored.  
　this can be also reinterpreted in terms of priority : the goal of picking a candidate in has priority  and the larger the a-cut  the more irtiportant the priority; in particular it is imperative that the chosen u has a non-zero degree of satisfaction  so has priority 1  n ca1  =1 . 
　　this gives birth to a possibilistic knowledge base of the form 	where denotes the proposition whose set of models is preferences ate thus expressed in terms of sets of crisp  nested  goals having different levels of priority. clearly  computed by  1  is equal to  is all the smaller as u violates goals with higher priority. decisions violating goals with priority 1 have a level of acceptability equal to 1. 
　　this representation plays the basic role in the manipulation that we may need to perform on preferences. 
1. conjunctive and disjunctive forms 
conversely  a set of crisp goals  not necessarily nested  with different levels of priority can always be represented in terms of a fuzzy set membership function as we are going to see on different examples. 
example 1: hierarchical requirements. 
in operations research  and as well as in the database setting  e.g.  lacroix and lavency  1   requirements of the following form have been considered:  c 1 should be satisfied  and among the solutions to c 1  if any  the ones satisfying c1 are preferred  and among satisfying both c1 and c1  those satisfying c1 are preferred and so on   where c1  c1  c1... are here supposed to be classical constraints thus  one wishes to express that c 1 should hold  with importance or priority = 1   and that if c1 holds  c1 holds with priority 
c1 holds with priority this can be readily expressed by the possibilistic propositional logic base 

　the semantics of k obtained by applying  1  can be put under the form 

is a weigntea mm aggregation wmen renects me iaea 
that we are completely satisfied if and c1  = 1  are completely satisfied  we are less satisfied 
=  if c1 and c1 only are satisfied  and we are even less satisfied if only is satisfied. 
　a semantically equivalent form for k can be obtained by applying the possibilistic logic resolution rule  dubois 
et al.  1    namely put under the form  1  with n = 1 and vu cj = ucj u  thus the priorities can directly reflect a hierarchy in possibilistic logic. 
　expressions  1  or  1  correspond to conjunctive normal forms  i.e.  it is a min of max . they can be turned into disjunctive normal forms  max of min  and then provide a description of the different classes of candidates ranked according to their level of preference  as seen in the example below  add the candidate in a class reaching the same level of satisfaction . 
example 1: 
let us consider the following three criteria-based evaluation:  if u satisfies a and b  u is completely satisfactory  if a is not satisfied  less satisfactory solutions should at least satisfy c . such an evaluation function can be encountered in multiple criteria problems for handling 
 special  cases  here situations where a is not satisfied  
benferhat  dubois  and prade 

coexist with a normal case  here situation where both a and b can be satisfied . it can be directly represented by the disjunctive form: 
with the reading of this expression is easy. either the candidate satisfies both a and b  or if it falsifies a  it satisfies c  which is less satisfactory. 
   this expression of  obtained as the weighted union of the different classes of more or less acceptable solutions can be transformed into an equivalent conjunctive form like  1 ; it can be checked that this conjunctive form corresponds to the base  
 where a  b  c are the sets of 
models of a  b and c respectively; this provides a logical  equivalent description of the evaluation process in terms of prioritized requirements to be satisfied by acceptable solutions. 
　it is worth noticing that the clausal form corresponding to the possibilistic logic base may be sometimes less natural for expressing the goals than the normal disjunctive form as shown by example 1 above. example 1 illustrates the converse situation. 
　the normal disjunctive form provides a logical description of the different subsets of solutions each with its level of acceptability. on the contrary  a possibilistic logic base which can always be put under the form of a conjunction of possibilistic clauses corresponds to a prioritized set of goals. 
1.basic modifications of a set of goals 
discounting and thresholding are two elementary operations that can be performed on a preference profile. indeed the discounting of a preference profile associated with a criterion c by a level of importance in a qualitative setting amounts to modifying 
into i for each u. it expresses that even if the candidate u is not at all satisfactory w.r.t. the initial criterion  the candidate is no longer completely rejected w.r.t. the discounted criterion  and receives a value which is all the greater as the level of importance of w is smaller  i.e.  as the discounting is stronger. thresholding a preference profile by in a qualitative setting amounts to modifying into if 
         in other words  as soon as the cndidate u reaches the satisfactory level w.r.t. it is regarded as fully satisfactory w.r.t. to the thresholded criterion  otherwise the satisfactory level remains unchanged. 
　these two operations are easy to perform on the representation in terms of prioritized goals. indeed    the importance weighting operation translates into the suppression of the most prioritary goals  such that when w=1 no modification occurs  while when w=1 all the goals disappear.   the thresholding operation defined by 
translates into the suppression of the least prioritary goals such that  as in the previous case  if 1 = 1  ho modification occurs  while when 1 = 1 all the goals disappear. 
　more generally  the conjunctive aggregation of fuzzy  discounted or thresholded  preference profiles can be interpreted in terms of conjunctions of crisp goals having different levels of priority  thus providing an expression of preferences in a possibilistic logic form. 
1. logical aggregation of fuzzy constraints 
the pointwise aggregation of two fuzzy preference profiles c1 and c1 defined by means of the min operation can be easily interpreted in the prioritized goals framework. it corresponds to the union of the two sets of possibilistic logic formulas  and 
this is a particular case of the 
syntactic fusion of possibilistic pieces of information  benferhat et al. 1b . 
　　aggregation operations other than min can be also accommodated in a symbolic manner. indeed reinforcement and compensation operators  such as the product and the average respectively  can also be interpreted in terms of operations on prioritized goals. let and be two crisp constraints with priorities a and and * be an increasing aggregation operator. the aggregation of and is expressed pointwisely at the semantical level by: 

which can be easily interpreted in terms of prioritized goals. as it can be checked  this aggregation symbolically denoted by  is equivalent to the  min  conjunction of the prioritized goals: 

the ones of a and b. indeed  provided that * is an is greater or 
equal to 	if * = min  the third weighted clause is redundant w.r.t. the two others. 
　this can be generalized to fuzzy preference profiles a and b. it can be shown that a * b is equivalent to the conjunction of the following sets of prioritized goals: 

     it should be emphasized that the translation of aggregation * into a possibilistic propositional logic base is done at the expense of the introduction of new levels in the scale. indeed * is not closed on the finite scale   generally. moreover  note that the symmetry of * is not required. the goal base k in example 1 can be retrieved by combination of its syntactic components  
example 1 :  moura-pires and prade  1  
consider three preference profiles a  b and c where a and b are fuzzy and c is discounted by p. a is supposed to be thresholded by 1. moreover  c  p  and b are supposed to be aggregated by a compensatory operation  here the arithmetic mean this can be formally written as : stands for the min aggregation. in the example we use the satisfaction scale   

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 

for a and b and we take 1 m 1  p = 1. the 
problem can be then translated under the form of a stratified possibilistic base. namely  let   eg.  
                  here the 1-cut . thus  the level cuts of the fuzzy set lead to the possibilistic 
base; 

satisfaction problem  this can be exploited for relaxing it into crisp problems corresponding to the different level 
cuts of the above possibilistic logic base; see  mourapires and prade  1 . see also  moura-pires et al.  1 . 
1. constraint-based specification of preferences 
the possibilistic framework can be  useful in qualitative preference profile elicitation from a set of constraints specifying them in a granular way. for instance  a preference in favor of a binary property q w.r.t. not q can be expressed by a constraint of the form 
		 1   
which is equivalent to say that there exists at least one decision value in the set of models of q which is better than all the decision values in the set of models of-q. 
　this is rather a weak manner for expressing the preference about q. indeed  due to the definition of a 
　possibility measure   1  expresses that the most satisfactory candidate satisfying p  is preferred to the most satisfactory candidate   hence to all candidates   not satisfying p. 
　　such a constraint can be easily made context dependent: the requirement if p is satisfied  q is preferred to can be expressed by the constraint 
 1  
　more generally  a collection of such requirements gives birth to possibilistic constraints  whose greatest solution 
  in the sense that for any solution  can be computed and represents a preference profile agreeing with the requirements. the minimal specificity principle expresses that any candidate is satisfactory inasmuch it complies with the constraints. however  there may exist other worth-considering selection procedures of a particular possibility distribution satisfying the set of constraints; this is open to discussion. 
   this approach is formally the same as the possibilistic treatment of default rules. indeed  a default rule  if p then generally q  is translated into the constraint   which expresses that p and q true is strictly more plausible than p true and q false. a set of consistent default rules of the form  if then generally qi  is thus represented by a set of constraints like  1  which implicitly defines a set of possibility measures. the greatest solution of this set always exists. then  applying the minimal specificity principle  which here amounts to keep the level of normality for each possible state of the world as great as permitted by the available knowledge   it induces a plausibility ordering on the interpretations encoded by the associated possibility distribution  . this ordering can be encoded at the formula level by constraints of the form 
i.e.  by a possibilistic logic base  where measure associated with see  benferhat et al.  1  1a  for details. 
example 1  continued  
in section 1.  the set of stratified goals c1  c1  c1 was directly 
                       however  such a stratification can be related to the possibility distribution which can be selected from a set of constraints of the forms for 
 instance if an agent expresses that he wants coffee  and if coffee is not available he would like tea. this corresponds to the possibilistic base with  or equivalently 	which corresponds the least specific solution of the two 
following constraints  where c1=coffee and c1=tea. 
   other types of constraints can be introduced  for instance for expressing contextual indifference as  or for expressing forms of independence as in  dubois et al.  1 . besides  a stronger counterpart of  1  is: 
 1  
where 	p is the guaranteed possibility function  dubois and prade  1 .  1  expresses that any candidate satisfying q is preferred to any candidate satisfying  this is the ceteris-paribus principle. see  boutilier et al.  1  for a similar approach to preference modelling  although not expressed in the possibility theory framework. 
　as suggested by the following example  a similar approach can be useful for completing orderings which are implicitly specified through both examples and general principles. 
example 1: let us consider the following situation with three criteria  namely the levels in mathematics  m   in physics  p   and in literature  l   and three candidates a  
b and c rated on the 1 level m 	 p 	l 
	a 	m a 	b p 	f l 
	a b 	a f 	b e 	a f 
c b 	d f 	c e 	c a 
	c 	d 	c 	c 
where m and p are supposed to have the same importance  greater than the one of l  while the result of the global aggregation of the three criteria should be such that the candidate c is preferred to a and a is preferred to bl. this can be expressed by the following sets of constraints: 

1 this example has been recently used by michel grabisch and marc roubens  with a=1  b=1  c=1  d=1  e=1  mo  for illustrating the case where no weighted average aggregation function can agree with both the proposed orderings between the candidates and the respective importance of the criteria  while a choquet integral can represent the situation. 
benferhat  dubois  and prade 

i   c is preferred to a and a is 
preferred to b  
ii   for all x  y and z  m and p have the 
same importance  
iil  for all x if  p is more important than l  
tv   for ally if  m is more important 
than l  non-decreasing 
y  is decreasing w.r.t. x  y and z  the greater the grades  the better the candidate . 
　　where  denotes the level of acceptability of having grade x in m  y in p and z in l  using an encoding of the grades x  y  z into the 1 level scale  
please note that just encodes a ranking and is not an absolute value. such a family of constraints defines a family of  compatible with the constraints. this family is non-empty if the constraints are consistent  which is the case in the example . note that the constraint  i  reflects the example provided the user  while the others express general principles which should be applied to any tuples of grade in m  p and l. then we may think of using a selection principle such as putting each triple xyz at the higher possible rank compatible with the constraints. let  be the selected ranking; because of  v   it is equivalent to a stratified set of propositions expressing prioritized goals of the form   the grade in m is at least the grade in p is at least  and the grade in l is at least this provides another reading of the preferences implicitly specified by means of the ranking  c is preferred to a and a is preferred to b  and the relative assessment of the importance of the three criteria. this new expression of the preferences can be presented to the user for verification. 
　note that the approach only looks for a ranking between triples of grades in m  p and l  without trying to get this ordering by means of some aggregation function to be determined in a given family  e. g.  choquet integral  grabish et al.  1    as classical approaches do. the development of such an approach raises computational issues which are not addressed here. 
　let us emphasize that the interest of such an approach would be to obtain a ranking of the situations without having to identify an aggregation function for the criteria grades. it also enables us to check the consistency of the user requirements and to restate the preferences as a set of stratified goals  which may be checked by the user . 
1. revising preferences 
this section briefly points out another issue where the possibilistic logic representation of preferences can be useful: the modelling of the dynamics of preference. 
　the revision of a possibilistic belief base k by an input a  whose set of models is a   held as certain  amounts at the semantical level at defining the conditional possibility distribution  e.g.   dubois and prade  1   
where let 
 a  and let a be the smallest degree such that is consistent  then a is called the level of inconsistency of  the formulas in the layers of k with a 
degree smaller than a are forgotten in the revision process  even if they are not involved in the inconsistency . 
indeed at the syntactical level  k is changed into  when k is revised by the input a. 
　viewing a possibilistic logic base as a set of goals with their level of priority  rather than as a set of uncertain pieces of information as it is usual in belief revision* it enables us to express the dynamics of the preferences when a new imperative goal a is added to k. more generally  we may think of applying rules for belief revision under uncertain inputs for modelling changes in preference as suggested by ryan and williams  1 . the role of the uncertain input is then played by a new preference profile  under the form of a prioritized set of goals . as emphasized in  dubois and prade  1   an uncertain input information  is not understood in the same way whether it is a constraint or an unreliable input. 
in the first case  it forces the revised profile  modelled by to satisfy 	n' a = where a is the complement of a; the following revision rule respects these constraints 

a = 1  we obtain a possibility distribution less specific than such that  where n is associated with which corresponds to a complete lack of priority concerning a. 
　　when  rule  1  expresses that the most satisfactory candidates in a become fully satisfactory  the most satisfactory candidates in a are forced to level and all other candidates that were originally more satisfactory than  if any  are forced to level as well. this operation minimizes changes of the satisfaction levels of candidates so as to accommodate the constraint n' a  = only firmly entrenched preferences are left untouched. rule  1  can be extended to a set of input 
constraints  forms a partition of 
 normalisation . it gives the following rule 

　rules  1  and  1  are qualitative counterpart of rules proposed by spohn  1   for revising uncertain information; they have been also proposed more recently by williams  1  under a different but equivalent form. in the second case is viewed as an unreliable input  represented by the weighted nested pair of subsets f =  where the weights denote degrees of 
possibility and u is the whole set of candidates. the revised profile  is defined by formal analogy with 
 1 : 

note the difference with  1 : there is no conditioning on 
however  contrary to  1  the 
equality 
n a  whenever 	lastly  	 since then 	no revision takes place. this behavior is very different from the case when the uncertain input is taken as a constraint. besides  these two types of revision 

1 	uncertainty and probabilistic reasoning 

can be performed directly on the corresponding possibilistic logic bases; see  dubois and prade  1 . 
　however  the transposition of belief revision techniques  especially under uncertain inputs  to preference dynamics is not completely straightforward. indeed  the above rules  1  and  1  suppose that the uncertain input is defined on a partition  while there is no reason for the preference input to have this particular structure. rule  1  might be preferred for preference dynamics. however if we want to give strong priority to the contents of the input  it would be advisable to revise the input by the previous preference profile  an unusual procedure in belief revision! this is open to discussions. 
1. concluding remarks 
this paper has been advocating the use of possibilistic logic in various aspects of decision analysis where representation issues are important. the qualitative handling of preferences  their symmetric combination as well as their revision have been addressed. 
　in connection with the new approach proposed in this paper  one may think of other lines of research. first  the logical framework does not only provide a convenient representation tool  but also provides a basis for generating explanations of interest for the user. 
　besides  another worth investigating issue  where a layered logic framework may be useful  is the analysis of conflict between preferences. suppose that different preference profiles  expressing different points of view  are to be combined symmetrically. taking these different preference profiles together very often creates inconsistencies  see  e.g.  felix  1 . the problem is then to determine what goals can be relaxed or put at smaller levels of priority  taking advantage of the stratification of the preferences. methods developed for reasoning from stratified inconsistent prepositional logic bases may be very useful for that purposes: these methods are based on the selection of particular consistent subbases  or on the research of arguments pro and cons  benferhat  dubois  and prade  1   or on the exploitation of minimally inconsistent subsets  benferhat and garcia  1 . 
references 
bellman r.  zadeh l.a.  1  decision-making in a fuzzy environment. management sciences  1-1. benferhat s.  dubois d.  prade h.  1  representing default rules in possibilistic logic. proc. kr'1-1. 
benferhat s  dubois d.  prade h.  1  reasoning in inconsistent stratified knowledge bases. proc. of the 1 inter. symp. on multiple-valued logic  ismvl'1   santiago de compostela  spain  1 may  1. 
benferhat s.  dubois d.  prade h.  1a  nonmonotonic reasoning  conditional objects and possibility theory. artificial 
intelligence  1-1. 
benferhat s.  dubois d.  prade h.  1b  from semantic to syntactic approaches to information combination in possibilistic logic. in: aggregation and fusion of imperfect information  studies in fuzziness and soft computing series   b.bouchon-
meunier  ed.   physica. verlag  1. 
benferhat s.  garcia  l.  1  dealing' with locally-prioritized inconsistent knowledge bases and its application to default reasoning. in applications of uncertainty formalisms  t. hume  and s. parsons eds.   lna1  springer. 
boutilier c. 1  toward a logic for qualitative decision theory proc. of the 1th int. conf. on principles of knowledge 
representation and reasoning  kr-1   bonn   j.doyle  e.sandewall  p.torasso  eds.   morgan kaufmann  1. boutiiier c  brafman r.  gcib g  poole d.  1  a constraintbased approach to preference eiicitation and decision making. working notes of the aaai'1 spring symp. series on qualitative preferences in deliberation and practical reasoning  stanford  c a  mar.1 1. 
dubois d.  farinas l.  herzig a.  prade h.   1  qualitative relevance and independence: a roadmap. proc. ucai-1-1. dubois d.  lang j.  prade h.  1  automated reasoning using possibilistic logic: semantics  belief revision and variable certainty weights. ieee trans  on data and knowledge 
engineering  1  1   1. 
dubois d.  le bene d.  prade h.  sabbadin r.  1  logical representation and computation of optimal decisions in a qualitative setting. proc. aaai-1-1. 
dubois d.  prade h.  1  a synthetic view of belief revision with uncertain inputs in the framework of possibility theory. int.j. approx. reasoning  1-1. 
dubois d.  prade h.  1  possibility theory: qaulitative and quantitative aspects. in handbook of defeasible reasoning and uncertainty management systems. vol 1  pp. 1  kluwer academic press. 
felix r.  1  towards a goal-oriented application of aggregation operators in fuzzy decision-making. proc. of the int. 
conf. on information processing and management of 
uncertainty in knowledge-based systems  ipmu-1   
mallorca  july 1 1. 
grabish m  h. t. nguyen  and e. a. walker  1  fundamentals of uncertainty calculi  with applications to fuzzy inference. kluwer academic. 
lacroix m.  lavency p.  1  p