 
temporal aliasing artifacts are common in both computer generated and natural motion sequences. one of the most striking manifestations of temporal aliasing is the apparent reversal of motion commonly referred to as the  wagon wheel effect.  in this paper  we examine temporal aliasing from the standpoint of joint spatiotemporal/spatiotemporal-frequency representations. we show that apparent motion reversal can be explained using these representations  and demonstrate that a motion estimation algorithm based on such a representation  the 1-d gabor transform  can accurately predict this illusion. 
1 	introduction 
in temporal aliasing  components of the image sequence with high temporal frequency appear at lower frequencies due to an insufficient temporal sampling rate  commonly referred to as the frame rate . these components affect the visual quality of the sequence in two respects. the first  most noticeable at low frame rates  is a disruption in the smoothness of perceived motion  a breakdown of the apparent motion illusion underlying all motion picture display methods . although predicting the sampling rate at which this effect will become visible is not trivial  the effect itself is intuitive - the motion appears nonsmooth because too few samples are presented. the second  which may be seen at comparatively high frame rates  is a distortion of the direction and speed of the perceived motion. this distortion is common in current film and video  and manifests in connection with ob-
jects that exhibit both significant high-spatial-frequency components  e.g.  the spokes of a wheel  and that move with relatively high speed  the wheel is turning relatively rapidly . in the classical manifestation of this effect  a rotating wheel is seen to reverse its direction of rotation as the rate of rotation increases - the  wagon wheel effect.  this effect is not so intuitive  and to the author's knowledge the connection between aliasing and apparent motion reversal  while observed  has not been explained in the literature. 
1 	robotics and perception 
　the selection of an appropriate temporal sampling rate for a given application is of significant practical importance. a broad range of rates are in use  spanning from the very low rates  1 frames per second or less  used in current visual communications systems  through the moderate 1 - 1 frame per second rates used in animation  film  and standard television  to 1 frames per second in high definition television. much higher sampling rates are used in scientific applications  hundreds and even thousands of frames per second   and are becoming increasingly common and economically viable as technology improves. for sequences involving high degrees of motion  particularly when detailed spatial structure must also be represented   temporal aliasing is the most important phenomenon in determining the temporal sampling rate1  providing an additional motivation to understand it fully. 
　motion is most intuitively a spatiotemporal phenomenon. however  it has been shown that it can also be characterized in the frequency domain via fourier analysis.  watson and ahumada  1  have used this approach to investigate the relationship between frame rate  the bandwidth of the human visual system  and the perceived smoothness of motion for a moving line stimulus. their results clearly demonstrate the value of frequency domain analysis for understanding aspects of visual motion perception. 
　in this paper  we consider the manner in which aliasing affects sequences at comparatively high frame rates  where motion is generally perceived as smooth  yet distortions of speed and direction may be visible. a method is demonstrated by which motion estimates consistent with those perceived visually are obtained  in cases both with and without aliasing  for sequences consisting of regions with different motions  a task that cannot be undertaken with conventional fourier analysis . to do so  we utilize a generalization of frequency domain motion analysis  based on a joint spatiotemporal/spatiotemporal-frequency repre-

l
   note that we distinguish here between sampling and screen update rates  the later being driven primarily by the perception of wide area flicker. screen updates need not be unique samples  a fact reflected  e.g.  in current film to video conversion practice. 


figure 1: the spectrum of a static sinusoid with frequency  and the same sinusoid moving with velocity 

sentation  the 1-d gabor transform . 
1 motion and aliasing in the frequency domain 
the frequency domain characterization of motion has been studied for some time  and for certain situations is well understood. in the case of an initially static image undergoing translation with constant velocity  motion is particularly straightforward to describe in the frequency domain. the spectrum of the sequence lies in an oblique plane  the slope of which indicates the velocity of the motion. 
   consider a simple 1-d continuous sinusoidal  image  with spatial frequency moving with velocity 
	when 	 the image is 
static   the fourier transform of the sequence consists of two components at the spatial frequencies  as  increases  the temporal frequency coordinates of the two components change from zero to  respectively  see figure 1 . the slope of the line connecting the two components is 
　as is well known from elementary sampling theory  if the sinusoid is spatially and temporally sampled  the spectrum described above is scaled and replicated on centers determined by the sampling rates. we will assume the spatial sampling rate is sufficient  and focus on the temporal sampling. as illustrated in figure 1  for a given temporal sampling rate  the sequence can be either oversampled  critically sampled  or undersarnpled depending on whether r is less than  equal to  or greater than  temporal aliasing occurs when the compo-
nents of the replicated spectra occur at frequencies less than or equal to   the later two cases . again this is well known  but sampling theory does not predict the visual impact of this aliasing. 
　consider these two cases from the standpoint of the apparent motion represented  the slopes of the line or lines connecting the components of the spectra with temporal frequency less than  however. in the criti-
cally sampled case there are in fact two lines  with slopes of indicating simultaneously motions of the same speed but opposite directions. in this case  one would expect the sequence to appear essentially static  although a  jitter  or  flashing  might be seen . in the undersarnpled case there is only a single line  with slope depending on r and the degree of undersampling. for moderate undesampling the sign of the slope is positive indicating motion in the direction opposite to that of the original sequence. this is the basis of the  wagon wheel  illusion. 
　the above simple example might lead one to expect that temporal aliasing and its effects on perceived motion can be completely characterized using fourier techniques. however  in sequences of practical interest  which may include multiple objects in independent motion  this is not the case. aliasing is a local phenomenon  and the artifacts associated with aliasing are restricted to regions of the sequence which are insufficiently sampled. in practice  these regions typically correspond to objects or surfaces exhibiting high spatial frequencies  that are also moving at relatively high velocities. although aliasing is certainly reflected in the fourier transforms of sequences of this type  the connection between the aliased spectral components  or indeed any of the spectral components  and the spatiotemporal locations of the associated regions or objects cannot in general be made. for this reason  the fourier transform cannot be used for the analysis of motion in complex sequences. 
　to identify the locations and motions of objects  frequency analysis localized to the neighborhoods of the objects is required. windowed fourier analysis has been proposed for such cases  gafni and zeevi  1 . however  the accuracy of a motion analysis method of this type is highly dependent on the resolution of the underlying transform  in both the spatiotemporal and spatiotemporal-frequency domains. it is known that the windowed fourier transform does not perform particularly well in this regard. filter bank-based approaches to this problem have also been proposed  e.g.  fleet and jepson  1    heeger  1 . a shortcoming of these approaches is the lossy nature of the proposed filterbanks  which can introduce a bias in the motion estimates. 
   there are a variety of alternative methods for local frequency analysis beyond the windowed fourier transform. examples include the wigner distribution  a bilinear local frequency representation  and the gabor transform  which is linear . because they can provide a large degree of spatiotemporal locality and spatiotemporalfrequency resolution simultaneously  within the bounds of uncertainty   the use of these techniques is particularly promising for frequency-based motion analysis with multiple motions. the use of the wigner distribution for this task was examined in  jacobson and wechsler  1 . however  the bilinear nature of the wigner distribution  and the attendant cross terms produced by multicomponent signals  can make motion analysis difficult  in practice. a motion analysis technique based on the gabor transform has recently been demonstrated  reed  1 . we will briefly described this approach in 
	reed 	1 

figure 1: for a sinusoidal signal of spatial frequency uo sampled temporally with 
from  left  oversampling   middle  critical sampling  and  right  undersampling. the original spectral components are represented by filled circles  the replicated components by unfilled circles. 
the following section  and use it to investigate apparent motion reversal in section 1. 
1 	motion analysis using the 1-d gabor transform 
the gabor representation was first introduced for timefrequency analysis  gabor  1   in this representation  the signal of interest is expressed as a weighted sum of basis functions formed by the products of shifted  usually gaussian  windows and complex exponentials. the relative popularity of this representation has been due in part to the good spatial and spectral localization prop-is a 1-d gaussian function   and determine the scale of the gaussian along the respective axes   is the center of the function in the spatiotem-
poral domain  and  is the center of support in the spatiotemporal-frequency domain. 
　a complete basis can be formed using the gabor functions  resulting in an invertible transform  the gabor 
transform . in the discrete case  for an image sequence with spatial dimensions n by m and p frames in length  n.m.p basis functions are required. the sequence can then be expressed at each discrete point  as erties of the gabor functions. it has also been demonstrated  marcelja  1    daugman  1    webster and de valois  1    field and tolhurst  1    jones and palmer  1  that the 1-d gabor functions agree reasonably well with receptive-field profiles measured for 
 1  simple cells in the cat striate cortex. 
an image sequence can be considered a 1-dimensional 
 spatiotemporal  volume of data. extending the gabor 
representation to 1-d  this volume can be represented as for completeness  the weighted sum of 1-d gabor functions of the form denotes the gabor basis func-
                                                                                             tion with spatiotemporal and spatiotemporal-frequency centers of 	and 	respectively  and is the associated coefficient  which is gen 1  	erally complex. there is substantial freedom in selecting the locations of these basis functions  while maintaining where 
completeness. largely for computational reasons  in this work the functions are centered on a regular cubic grid. 
　because the gabor functions are not orthogonal  the gabor transform coefficients cannot be calculated by simply computing the inner products of the basis functions and the signal to be transformed  or  equivalently  by convolving with the basis functions and subsampling . 
1 	robotics and perception 

due to substantial interest over the past several years in the computation of this transform  there are a number of alternative methods available. the method used in this work is a 1-d extension of the algorithm first reported in  ebrahimi et al.  1 . 
　from the 1-d gabor transform of an image sequence  the motion parameters can be estimated at each spatiotemporal location by fitting the surface representing the spectral signature of the motion to the local spectrum. in the case of uniform translational motion  the slope of the planar spectrum is sought  yielding the motion vector  there are a number of ways in which this can be done. 
　a straightforward approach to estimating the slope of the local spectra  used in the examples which follow  is to form vectors of the and  coordinates of the basis functions that have significant energy  magnitudes exceeding a threshold  for each point in the sequence at which basis functions are centered. the motion vector and the coordinate vectors and  at each point are related as 
		 1  
where  an lms estimate of the motion vector at a given point can then be found using the pseudoinverse of a: 
		 1  
1 	results 
to examine the effects of temporal aliasing  we will first use a simple test sequence in which each frame includes two fields  consisting of both horizontal and vertical sinusoids with frequencies of and  radians/pixel respectively  one field above the other. the sinusoids are scaled and offset so that all pixel intensities fall in the range 1 to 1. the sequence is 1 frames in length  with 1-by-1 pixels per frame. as the sequence progresses  the top and bottom fields move to the right at the same rate. we will consider three rates of translation: 1  1  and 1 pixels/frame. the first three frames from the 1 pixel/frame sequence are shown in figure 1. the top field is oversampled for all three velocities. the bottom field is oversampled  critically sampled  and undersampled  respectively. 
   we next compute the gabor transform of the sequences  using a complete basis on 1 pixel centers in space-time  with a 1 pixel offset in each dimension  spaced apart in spatiotemporal- frequency  and with 
computing the slope of the plane 
which best fits the local spectra for each sequence  the motion estimates shown in figure 1 result for the point in time between frames 1 and 1 of the sequences. note that the estimates are located between frames because the basis functions used in the transform are centered between frames. the arrows in the figure are scaled to the maximum velocity for each case. similar results are obtained between frames 1 and 1  and frames 1 and 1. 
　as shown to the left in figure 1  for a translation of 1 pixel/frame where both fields are oversampled  the motion estimates for the two fields are correct and identical  with the exception of some edge effects . for 1 pixels/frame  figure 1  center   the estimate for the upper field  which is still oversampled  remains correct  while the motion estimate for the lower field is zero. in this case  the lower field is critically sampled. visually  this field appears to  flash*' or  jitter   but not to translate  which is consistent with the motion estimate. in the third sequence  figure 1  right   the motion estimate for the  oversampled  upper field is correct  1 pixels/frame to the right . the estimate for the lower field  which is now undersampled  is 1 pixel/frame in the reverse direction  exhibiting the apparent motion reversal discussed above. visually  the lower field appears to move to the left  consistent with the estimate. 
　we next consider the sequence shown in figure 1  1 frames in length  with 1-by-1 pixels per frame. the background is static  consisting of a sinusoidal  plaid  field with horizontal and vertical frequencies of 1r/1 radians/pixel. superimposed on this background are two blocks  1 pixels square  starting in the upper and lower left of the frame. the first has spatial frequency components identical to the background  while the second has horizontal and vertical frequency components of 1r/1. the sinusoidal plaids are each scaled and offset  so that all pixel intensities fall in the range 1 to 1. as the sequence progresses  the two blocks move to the right at 1 pixels/frame. 
　the 1-d gabor transform of the sequence was computed as in the previous example. computing the lms estimate described in equation 1 the motion estimates shown in figure 1 result  for the points in time between frames 1 and 1  1 and 1  and 1 and 1 respectively. 
　this example illustrates two points. viewed as objects  the surface characteristics of the blocks lead to correct motion estimates for the interior of the upper block  consistent with the object motion   but incorrect  reversed in direction and reduced in speed  for the interior of the lower block. this is exactly as found for the two fields moving at 1 pixels/frame in the previous example. however  as is clear by examining figure 1 from left to right  the motion of the blocks themselves remains correctly represented. they both move from left to right  retaining the same relative position. this is the same behavior observed in the classical  wagon wheel  illusion  where the wheel appears to reverse its direction of rotation and to rotate at a lower rate  but as a whole continues to move in the proper direction at the proper speed. 
1 	conclusions 
in this paper we have investigated the mechanism underlying apparent motion reversal in image sequences which exhibit temporal aliasing. we have demon-
	reed 	1 


figure 1: the first three frames from the first test sequence. 

figure 1: the optical flow fields for translations of 1  1 and 1 pixels/frame. 

figure 1: from left to right: frames 1  1  1 and 1  of 1  from the second test sequence. 
1 	robotics and perception 


figure 1: the optical flow fields between frames 1 and 1  1 and 1  and 1 and 1. 

strated analytically and experimentally that this phenomenon can be both understood and predicted using spatiotemporal/spatiotemporal-frequency representations. using a motion estimation procedure based on one such representation  the 1-d gabor transform  motion estimates consistent with those perceived visually were obtained in cases with and without aliasing. finally  it was shown that overall object motion information is preserved using a procedure of this type  even when the surface properties of the object induce apparent motion reversal over the object surface. this is just as observed in the classical  wagon wheel  illusion. 
acknowledgments 
this work was supported in part by the computer vision laboratory  department of electrical engineering  linkoping university  sweden. 
