 
generating expressions which communicate information already known to the hearer  building enthymematic arguments  and characterising refutations all pose significant problems to traditional natural language generation techniques. after exploring these problems  an approach is proposed which through its employment of a notion of saliency handles them cleanly  and offers support for further features including clue word generation. it is argued that propositional salience and its interaction with intentional  attentional  epistemic and structural components of a text generation system have a key role to play in the design and realisation of persuasive text. 
1 motivation 
it might be argued that the notion of saliency can be conflated with goals of discourse structure  or  in theories which handle intentionality separately  with intentional goals which are responsible for structure. in the former case  it could be maintained  including a proposition - or a relation between propositions - in a discourse plan carries with it an assumption that the proposition or relation will be realised directly into text and thereby made salient to the hearer. in the latter case  an intention such as bel h  p   that the hearer h believe some proposition p  might be assumed to lead to the generation of textual structure which can be guaranteed to make p salient to h. 
　such conflation of saliency with other components of a discourse loses a powerful distinction which can be demonstrated to be crucial in a number of concrete situations. three generation problems are presented which rest upon an explicit handling of saliency. 
　the first is the enthymeme - a syllogistic argument with one component left implicit  i.e. with a premise or conclusion not realised into text . one of the most common forms of the enthymeme in natural language is the omission of the major premise from a modus ponens  as in  you were born in bermuda so you're a british citi-
1 	natural language processing 
zen  wherein the major premise  if you were born in bermuda then you 're a british citizen is left implicit; the arrangement is so common that it has led authors such as sadock  and cohen  to treat it as a separate argument structure altogether  labelling it the modus brevis. the reason for its frequency is clear from the foregoing example - to include the major premise would render a text hopelessly cumbersome and repetitive. in many cases it is impossible to utter the antecedent and consequent of a modus ponens without the implication between them being immediately obvious - or salient - to a hearer. in some cases  however  a speaker will decide that it is necessary to include the major premise: this may happen if some other component of the syllogism - say the conclusion - is being left implicit  as in it's been raining  and rain makes the roads dangerously greasy. more importantly  there are some situations where it is appropriate to make every component of a syllogism explicit. a good example is one which also demonstrates the importance of contextual features such as the hearer's bias. if a speaker has reason to believe that a hearer is particularly sceptical  she may decide to lay out each component of an argument explicitly - thus sacrificing brevity for the sake of clarity. consider  for example  during a heated encounter between a darwinian and a creationist: we see around us an intricate inter-
play of complex systems  and such intricacy requires a designer. so logically there must have been a designer. in modus tollens  the default is reversed: normally  all three components of the syllogism are expressed  as in if matter had always existed  there should be no radioactive elements left. the presence of uranium  etc. is scientific proof that matter has not always existed. . occasionally  however  the speaker may judge that one component can safely be omitted  e.g. // it had been raining  the roads would be wet  but i assure you that it hasn 't been raining for days. there is a range of parameters and contextual features which impinge on the decision of whether or not to realise a proposition in order that it be salient  see  e.g.   reed  1    but the key point is that there are some cases where textual realisation is appropriate  and others where it is not. one approach to handling this decision is to include within an nlg system a 

module responsible for post-processing a given text plan and determining which components should be realised into text and which should not. apart from problems of determining exactly how such a module should exert its influence  it introduces additional complexity unnecessarily. the planning machinery already available within many nlg systems is perfectly capable of performing the function  if saliency is treated as a goal. a given goal of saliency can then be fulfilled either by textual realisation  or by particular configurations of linguistic and extra-linguistic context. 
　the second problem which benefits from employing saliency goals is the generation of utterances which remind a hearer - i.e. which communicate something that the speaker believes the hearer already knows. marcu 
 explains that in the genre of persuasive text   contrary to nlg wisdom  a system capable of generating persuasive text will also have to generate information that is known to the audience . in the increasingly popular approach to nlg in which speaker's intentions are fundamental  building on  grosz and sidner  1    the only intention which can be fulfilled by the realisation of known information is one of saliency. if the speaker knows that the hearer believes p  then a typical intention of the form bel h  p  is trivially satisfied without the need for textual realisation. 
　related to this is a third generation problem: refutation. it is often suggested in works on rhetoric and oration  e.g.  blair  1   that an argument which refutes a particular claim may  in certain situations  benefit from stating the claim which is to be refuted. there are two specialisations of this general rule which serve to illustrate the mechanism: first  the reductio ad absurdum argument strategy  whereby the reverse of the intended conclusion is assumed and then shown to lead to a contradiction; and second  the use of the null hypothesis in scientific experimentation  whereby the reverse of the anticipated conclusion is proven to be  significantly  wrong. in both these cases  it is necessary to realise a 
　proposition that the speaker wishes to bring the hearer to disbelieve. again  within a planning framework based on intentions  there do not appear to be any alternatives to taking an approach employing goals of saliency  as there are no other perlocutionary effects of such discourse actions. 
1 modelling saliency 
the rhetorica system implements an abstraction based nonlinear planner  based on abnlp  fox and long  1 . the planning operators in the current version of the system represent forms of argument  including standard deductive and pseudo-deductive schemes  such as modus ponens and modus tollens amongst the former and undercutting amongst the latter   inductive schemes  currently only inductive generalisation   and fallacious schemes  including the argumentum ad populum and the ignoratio elenchii . each operator has two parts: the shell  which resembles a conventional strips operator with pre and post condition lists; and a body which comprises a set of goals. planning proceeds by constructing a complete abstract plan to fulfil a given goal  and then refining that plan by opening up the bodies of the selected operators  and posting the goals found therein: further details of the planning process and the means by which it can support sophisticated ordering heuristics can be found in  reed and long  1; reed  1 . the central issue addressed here is the makeup of the operator bodies  and how saliency is operationalised in con-
junction with focus of attention. 
　the bodies of the modus ponens  mp  and modus tollens  mt  operators are given below in figure 1: 

figure 1. modus ponens and modus tollens bodies. 
thus in mp and mt  as in all the other operators  goals of belief  representing the speaker's intentions to engender belief by a particular agent in a particular proposition  are treated quite separately from goals of saliency  representing the speaker's intentions to make a proposition salient to an agent . it is goals of belief which result in the adducement of further argument operators at each refinement. to generate an argument in which a supports b  i.e. a  a -  b  b  and b in turn supports c  rhetorica first satisfies the goal bel /t  c  by using an mp operator with b as the minor premise. at refinement  this leads to the posting  amongst others  of the goal bel h  b   which is fulfilled by the second instantiation of an mp operator with a as the minor premise. at this point  the process terminates: without further information available  all bel goals are satisfied immediately  so long as certain conditions hold  such as the hearer not believing the converse of any of the propositions involved . 
　it is thus the bel goals which create the structure of intentions forming the scaffold of an argument. the role of the saliency goals  in contrast  is to set out what needs to be available to the hearer as the argument proceeds. saliency goals do not simply list what needs to be said: although some is salient goals will ultimately be fulfilled by a make.salient operator  which in turn is then used as the basis for generating the textual components of an argument   many other is  salient goals will be discharged in other ways. for example  in the two step argument a  a  b  b  b  c  c  the two saliency goals associated with the major premises will  other things being equal  be trivially fulfilled through invocation of a heuristic stating that a hearer will usually accept an implication without further support. this is the heuristic which leads to the predominance of the enthymematic modus brevis form of mp. there are  of course  situations in which the heuristic is inhibited  high levels 
	reed 	1 

of hearer bias  known disagreement with the implication  - these ensure that when appropriate  an mp will be realised with all three components stated explicitly. 
　this distinction between goals of belief and goals of saliency appears superficially similar to previous distinctions between the intentional and informational facets  young and moore  1   but there is an important difference. although the is salient goals are responsible for the generation of informational content  they are not themselves informational; rather  they represent system intentions which may be realised textually in any number of ways - or may not be realised at all  if the heuristics demonstrate that saliency can be achieved by virtue of the contextual setting . as with young and moore's work on dpocl  rhetorica moves away from a traditional 'pipeline* view of the link between intention and information by allowing the two to be intermingled at the same level of abstraction  and having intentions give rise to further intentions. unlike dpocl  however  rhetorica lists only goals in operator bodies  allowing saliency to be expressed as a goal which can then be fulfilled by context-dependent heuristics  or by further planning. thus both belief and saliency goals should be classed as intentional  with informational content being associated only with the operators which fulfil remaining saliency goals. 
　the third and final type of goal employed in defining operator bodies are the topic manipulation goals. these are closely related to the saliency goals in several re-
spects. first  they represent intentions of the speaker to manipulate the attention of the hearer. second  they can 
be fulfilled either through explicit textual marking  clue 
words  formatting  etc.  or as a result of contextual information already available to the hearer  typically resulting from the explicit fulfilment of another topic manipulation goal in close proximity . this explicit operationalisation of topic manipulation represents a departure from the more conventional approach wherein focus of attention is an implicit feature of a discourse  and affords a number of benefits concerned with the reordering of 
argument components for persuasive effect. one key advantage lies in the interplay between propositional sali-
ence and focus of attention. 
1 saliency and the focus of attention 
saliency and the focus of attention are not equivalent concepts. in the first place  as grosz and sidner  describe  'the attentional state is a property of the discourse itself  not of the discourse participants . this contrasts with propositional salience  which in the current work  is relativised to a particular agent. thus rhetorical topic manipulation goals represent intentions to alter the attentional state - so that  for example  if the hearer should interject  the attentional state for that interjection will be the one introduced by rhetorica.1 saliency goals  on the other hand  represent system intentions to make a proposition salient to a given agent: what is salient to one agent in a discussion need not  from the system's point of view  necessarily be salient to all the interlocutors. one way of viewing this situation is to see the focusing structure  the model of the attentional state  as a  virtual  shared resource between the participants. every participant in the dialogue has the ability both to change and inspect this structure  though inspection is subject to a 'mask' which restricts how much of the focusing structure can be seen by that agent - what the agent is attending to at a given moment. the successful fulfilment of a pushjtopic goal thus makes some change to that shared resource  namely  adding a new focus space . the execution of a make salient action  i.e. an utterance  performs two related actions: first  it adds the proposition to the focus space; and second  it modifies the mask of the indicated agent such that that agent is able to view the proposition in that focus space. 
　the last feature of topic manipulation in the rhetorica system is that focus spaces are named using the format arg x  y   read as an argument from x to y. this represents an abstraction from any particular argument scheme  mp  mt  ig  etc.  and allows goals of saliency to be tied  at plan time  to particular focus spaces. the goal is salient h  x  arg x  y   thus specifies that the system intends to make proposition x salient to agent h in the context of arg x  y   i.e. while the focus space arg x  y  is on the top of the focus stack. 
　this tying of utterances to focus spaces is necessary in providing the freedom to order argument supports in any arrangement selected by the rhetoric component of the system  whilst maintaining the level of argument coher-
ence discussed by cohen   the key constraint is that components of separate arguments should not be interleaved. so for example  if it has been determined that two mp arguments should both be rendered complete with both major and minor premise  then each minor should be adjacent to its related major - even though the order within each of the pairs  and between the two pairs should be left unconstrained. it is not at all cleat that these disjunctive constraints - crucial for achieving the flexibility required to produce persuasive component orderings - are supported by related systems such as dpocl  young and moore  1  and nag  zukerman et al.  1 . 
1 	characterising saliency 
it has been demonstrated that propositional salience is related to both the focusing structure of a discourse and the belief structure of an agent  but it remains to define 
1  the current implementation of rhetorica focuses on monologue  and does not support dialogic interaction. the point is 

1 	natural language processing 

made here to illustrate the independence of the attentional state from either participant. 

rather more carefully what these relationships entail. as discussed above  the belief component of saliency cannot be bel h  p  since propositions may be made salient by a speaker who neither believes a hearer holds p to be true  nor wants to persuade a hearer that p is true. there are several possible alternatives. the first is bel h  bel s  p   - i.e. that if p is salient to h  then h is led to believe that s believes p. related to this is a slightly stronger possibility bel h  intends s  bel h  x  . both of these seem flawed  as demonstrated by the case of refutation  where the speaker neither believes nor intends the hearer to believe the claim to be refuted. to maintain that by making the claim salient to the hearer  he is brought to believe that the hearer intends or believes something which she does not  is to imply that every case of refutation involves deception  which runs counter to intuition. 
　another possible  weaker  interpretation of the belief component of saliency rephrases the foregoing in terms of absence of contradiction  i.e. bel h  bel s  or  perhaps  bel h  intends s  
again  however  although these seem reasonable in many cases  stating the claim in a refutation violates these definitions. perhaps more importantly  all these candidates violate an intuition that propositional salience should not involve sense - if p is salient to an agent it should not necessitate that agent holding a belief that either p or its negation is true. 
　this intuition is formalised explicitly in the belief model employed in rhetorics which distinguishes between conventional belief and 'awareness'  introducing further possible epistemic states - namely  being unaware of a proposition  and being aware but 'undecided'. agnosticism  for example  might be characterised using the 'aware but undecided' state. although the primary aim of this distinction is to capture the differences in argumentation style adopted in situations of varying hearer belief  it permits an alternative definition of the epistemic component of saliency. thus bel h   p  - representing the hearer being aware of  but undecided with respect to p - forms a part of saliency such that after the speaker utters some proposition  the hearer is then  at the very least  aware of that proposition. of course it may be the case that in uttering something the speaker brings the hearer to believe  or  in certain situations  such as irony   disbelieve the proposition. the speaker is guaranteed  however  that if nothing else  the hearer will be undecided with respect to the proposition: he will certainly not be unaware  assuming the utterance to be successful . 
　there must  however  be a second  attentional component  for even if bel h   p  is  guaranteed to be  in the hearer's model  the hearer may not be attending to it. the attentional model adopted in the rhetorica system is based upon the hierarchical  stack model proposed by grosz and sidner   rather than the cache model sketched out in  walker  1 . there are several factors contributing to the conclusion that walker's model is inappropriate in the current context. the first is that argumentation represents an unusually structured and strict form of natural language  in which focusing constraints seem to be carefully adhered to. it is presumably for this reason that it has been possible to derive theories of coherent argument over and above basic textual coherence  cohen  1 . walker cites evidence to suggest that even in argument  the cache model is more appropriate because  referring expressions in argumentative texts treat the conclusions of popped sisters as salient   p1  - consistent with propositions remaining in the cache until being dislodged  rather than being actively removed at a pop. the proposed cross-boundary reference would seem to violate the rules of argument integrity proposed in  cohen  1  inter alia  and although it may be that these rules are too constraining  a simpler solution is that the conclusion of a syllogism is active in a different focus space to that in which the premises are found. in this way  focus spaces concentrate on the supporting function of statements  with conclusions belonging to the focus spaces in which they act as premises to some higher conclusion. this approach  employed in rhetorica  is crucial in arranging multiple supports for a given proposition if  for example  a and b both support some conclusion c  then c must lie in a focus space lower down the stack than a or b - otherwise it would be stated twice  once as the conclusion of the a argument and once as the conclusion of the b argument . 
　another key area of evidence that walker cites in favour of the cache model is the occurrence of informationally redundant utterances  irus. of the three main classes of iru identified in  walker  1b   it is those of attention and consequence which are of importance here  since the function of attitude irus are exclusively dialogic . consequence irus  make inferences explicit   pl1   a definition which relies upon the logical omniscience assumption  loa   that interlocutor agents are logically omniscient - the existence of consequence irus  walker then takes to be evidence of the failure of the loa. walker's view  however  is that such consequence irus have to be introduced to a discourse plan  since the initial plan has been produced under the loa1  and therefore would not involve components which are  ogica  y tedundatvt. wawei  taus considers e-tv&vymemes to be the starting point  and fully specified arguments to be extensions of those enthymemes involving irus. apart from the problem that walker's account only enables enthymemes in which the conclusion is omitted  surprisingly  it doesn't allow for the modus brevis form  which would presumably require irus of a different class  the proposal seems  in the context of argumenta-
1  in fact  walker's account is rather more subtle and involves assuming deductive capabilities across what is salient  rather than what is believed. there is still  however  an assumption in the initial plan that if the minor and major premise are available then the hearer will deduce the conclusion without it being made explicit. 
	reed 	1 

tion  to be somehow convoluted  making use of the loa which it goes on to show is unreasonable. an alternative approach is to eschew the loa altogether  and start from the assumption that an audience needs to be led from one proposition to the next - that a presented argument should be the record of an informal proof procedure in natural language. from this starting point  enthymemes and implicit components are generated by deleting goals  rather than by failing to add irus. as with consequence irus  attention irus  which are employed to make a proposition salient  are also already present in the plan at a deep level  and then may or may not be realised at a 
surface level  depending on contextual pressures. 
　apart from allowing greater flexibility in the types of enthymemes which can be produced  this approach is also closer to aristotelian and argumentation theoretic notions of argument presentation  and for these reasons  rhetorica employs neither irus nor a cache based model of focusing. walker's criticism  that stack based models have  no constraints related to length  depth  or amount of processing required  for a given focus space   is circumvented because many such constraints are explicitly represented in the heuristics drawn from studies of rhetoric  psychology and argumentation theory. 
1 	worked example 
to demonstrate the interplay between the components of saliency employed in the rhetorica system  a short example is here presented and analysed. 
　the example is based on a real argument from source cited in  fisher  1 : the original has been analysed to produce the propositions in figure 1. 
a: radioactive elements disintegrate and eventually turn into lead 
lb: matter has not always existed 
c: there are no radioactive elements left d: uranium etc. is still present figure 1. initial propositions 
the input to rhetorica in figure 1 is a representation of the relationships between these propositions  expressed as a set of system beliefs  other input  including a broad parameterisation of the intended hearer is omitted for clarity . the hearer is assumed initially to be unaware of all propositions  hence the absence of any hearer beliefs. 
bel s a  	bel s  not b   
bel s  supports not b   c   	bel s  d  
bel s  not c   	bel s  supports d  not c    bel s  supports a  supports not b   c    
figure 1. system input 
the initial goal of the system is bel ago  b  - i.e. to persuade the hearer that matter has not always existed. associated with this goal is a saliency goal for the same proposition. after one round of planning  rhetorica identifies that a modus tollens argument can be employed to fulfil bel ag1  b . after refinement  the goals 
1 	natural language processing 
within the body of that mt are posted: these are shown in figure 1  notice that although not c  is the conclusion of the major premise of the mt  it is b which is the conelusion of the mt as a whole . 

both the major and the minor premise of the mt can be supported by further argumentation: the major with an argument from d  and the minor with an argument from a. both these supports take the form of mp arguments. thus figure 1 leads to the abstract plan in figure 1. 

the topic manipulation goals are fulfilled by operators of the same name which are regarded as primitive in rhetorica. similarly  both is salient goals are fulfilled by make salient operators which are also primitive at this abstract level. as discussed in section 1  it is rarely appropriate to perform enthymematic contraction within mt  so neither is salient goal gets fulfilled by heuristic manipulation. 
at the next stage  the goals in the bodies of the two 
mps are posted. the goals of the first are shown below in figure 1: 

the two belief goals are trivially satisfied because no further information is available  and because the hearer is not known to disbelieve them. of the two saliency goals  only the first  expressing d  is fulfilled by a make salient operator. the second is discharged by one of the enthymematic contraction heuristics. the other mp operator is planned for in a similar way. 
　in the interests of brevity  this summary of the planning process has ignored details of rhetorical ordering heuristics and the clue word introduction mechanisms  and has omitted the specification of the partial order; details of this functionality can be found in  reed and long  1; reed  1 . the final step is to produce a 
　fully ordered list of primitives: this system output is 

shown in figure 1. 
