 
in this paper  we propose a potts spin 
mean field annealed network to address the open  independent and incompatibility classes of causal reasoning  also said abduction  abductive diagnosis . the strong feature of the current work is its characterization of the reasoning task in these classes by an energy/target function. computation of a scenario  also said explanation  is done by means of mean field equations. the application of the model to small and large-scale causal problems reveals its efficacy and robustness in handling varied and multiple causal interactions. 
keywords: causal reasoning  artificial neural networks  mean field theory  potts spin modeling  open / incompatibility / independent causal interactions. 
1 prologue 
1 	machine learning causal reasoning  also known as abduction  thagard  1; ayeb et al.  1   is ubiquitous in diagnosis  peng and reggia  1   scientific reasoning  thagard  1   natural language processing  charniak  1   etc. the intuition behind causal reasoning can be stated as follows   goel et al.  1; ayeb et al.  1  . given an elementary cause c  an observable effect e and the knowledge that c causes e  causal reasoning consists in hypothesizing that c occurred. the key feature of causal reasoning is to infer a set of composite causes from the elementary ones. these composite causes are said to form a scenario  explanation in  thagard  1; goel et al.  1  . unfortunately  computation of a best scenario is np-complete  bylander et al.  1 . hence  the computational time becomes prohibitive  particularly in the presence of incompatibility interactions  goel et al.  1; bylander et al.  1 . 
　artificial neural networks  anns  are biologically motivated computational models that turned out to be efficient in solving many np-complete optimization problems. mean field theory  mft   peterson and anderson  1  is receiving an increasing attention  mainly due to its robustness in solving many large-scale np-complete optimization problems other methods failed to solve in general; e.g. the  traveling salesman  and the  graph partitioning   peterson and soderberg  1 . mft is a combination of the simulated annealing  sa  of the boltzmann machine  kirkpatrick et al.  1  and the hopfield's network  hopfield  1 . hopfield's network is mainly characterized by the simplicity of its neurons and its efficient hardware implementation. however  a major drawback of hopfield's network is its deterministic nature so that the network gets easily trapped into poor local minima as the problem size increases. sa is a stochastic hillclimbing algorithm that uses a gradient descent combined with probabilistic movements. the simulated annealing process consists of first melting the system at high temperatures  then slowly decrease its temperature until the neurons  crystallize  and formulate a solution for the case at hand. however  due to the stochastic and annealing processes  the computational time could be unacceptable. merging both hopfield's network and sa  mft has shown to be efficient in finding optimal solutions for academic and real-world a/'p-complete problems. another important issue of mft is its ability to compute optimal  or near optimal  solutions in practical time spans even for large-scale problems. 
　in the current work  we use potts spin mft annealed networks to address the open  independent and incompatibility classes of causal reasoning. the strong feature of the current work is the characterization of the reasoning process in these classes by an energy function. the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we outline the minimal preliminary material and give a real-world causal problem. in section 1  we formulate the energy function for open  independent and incompatibility causal problems. in section 1  we use mft potts modeling and mean field equations to minimize our energy function. section 1 describes 

our algorithm and section 1 gives illustrations. finally  the paper is concluded in section 1. 
1 background 
the main purpose of this section is to formalize the open  independent and incompatibility classes of causal reasoning and to give an introductory causal problem. 
1 	preliminaries 
a causal problem is entirely described by a set of possible effects a set of possible causes and a set of causal inter-
actions several and multiple causal interactions could be modeled in and thereby several classes of causal problems could introduced. formal definitions follow. 
definition 1 we use to denote a causal interaction in  
  is an 	interaction if it is expressed as:  
  is 	an 	interaction if it is expressed as:  
where w  resp. is a real number measuring the strength of the causality  resp. incompatibility  between cause c and effect e  resp. causes a and ck  
in definition 1   denotes the null effect  i.e. an effect that can never be observed. now  we express the concept of a manifestation  observation in  thagard  1; goel et al  1   for a causal problem as follows. 
definition 1 let  be a causal problem. a manifestation mm for cp is a three-tuple {ep ea eu   where ep  ea and ea are the three finite sets of present  absent and unknown effects  respectively  
according to definition 1  each possible effect in 
♀ is assigned a. state. it is present if it is known to occur  it is absent if it is known not to occur  and it is unknown if we have no  knowledge  about it. in a practical situation  an effect is unknown if its 
 value  cannot be accessed for some reasons1. now  we are ready to define the independent  open and incompatibility classes of causal problems as follows. 
definition 1 let be a causal problem. let be a manifestation for 
cp  then 
  cp 	belongs 	to 	the 	class is an independent interaction. 
  cp 	belongs 	to 	the 	class 
such that is an incompatibility interaction. 
  cp belongs to the open class if  
1  among reasons; let us mention safeness  time. 
now  we need the following notation inspired from 
 bylander et al.  1  to define the concept of a scenario  explanation in  thagard  1; peng and reggia  1  . 
in definition 1  the minimality criterion is taken w.r.t. set cardinality. one should remark the potential conflict between criteria  i   u   m  and  iv . unfortunately  it is not always guaranteed to meet all these criteria in a single scenario. this explains why characterization of a best scenario carries certain arbitrariness  goel et al.  1 . however  a precedence relationship could be adopted. for our concern  we adopt a decreasing precedence relation for criteria  i  to  iv  with criterion  i  assigned the highest precedence. 
1 	a medical causal problem 

figure 1: the set of causal interactions for cpmd 
for the sake of illustration  we consider a relatively small causal prob-
lem from the medical domain. 	= 	 
ble symptoms  effects in our model . 	= {laryngitis  
ben romdhane 

pneumonia  sinusitis  tonsillitis} are the possible diseases that a cause takes exclusivity in the coverage of a 

 causes in our model . the set of causal interactions is summarized in figure 1. for instance  the causal interaction tells us that pneumonia causes dyspnea with the maximal causality 1  whereas  fin tells us that laryngitis and tonsillitis are incompatible diseases with a relatively high degree  1. this means that laryngitis and tonsillitis are incoherent and cannot coexist together. one should remark that the causal interactions in   as well as in our modeling  are a matter of degree rather than being either/or  cause/not-cause  compatible/incompatible . this allows flexibility since real-world causal interactions are generally modeled from scratch. 
1 proposal 
	1 	formulation of the energy function 
	let 	be a manifestation for 
the causal problem at hand. we use 
and i to index all quantities related to effects  while we use and to index all quantities related to causes. card x  denotes the cardinality of the finite set is the strength of the causality between cause and effect we denote by the strength of the incompatibility  or incoherence  between causes and measures our belief in the presence  resp. absence  of effects in ep  resp. unknown effectshave a null certainty degree  i.e. for each present effect we associate a set of discrete variables defined as follows: 
a  
                                        1  the variables are called ising spin variables. s is the vector of variables  
　we define the  cover level  of a cause w.r.t. mm as follows: 
 1  
where is null if does not cover any of the present effects. the vector of cover levels is e = hence  the cover level of all possible causes in c is computed by: 
		 1  
maximizing j1  s  is equivalent to putting  on  all ising spin variables. hence  for each effect one or more ising spin variables  and thereby one or more causes  are active. this kind of competition is referred to in anns as wnner-tokes-others  wto   since more than one competing cause are active at the end of the competition. however  a winner-
takes-all  wta  competition is necessary to ensure 
1 	machine learning 
given effect  and thereby meet the minimal cardinality criterion. one possible way is to considerably limit the resources of competition between causes  i.e. to activate the minimal number of ising spin variables for each present effect. the number of active ising spin for effect is given by 
however  in order to ensure a coverage of at least one corresponding ising spin must be active. for this  we define the following constraint: 
		 1  
maximizing ji s  in  1  under the constraint ja s  in  1  will push each cause to maximize its individual cover level and to take the exclusivity in covering the present effects. causes with the highest cover levels are more likely to win the competition than those with the lowest ones. 
　the open class of causal reasoning is modeled as follows. for each cause we define a penalty factor by: 
 1  
　　　if does not cover any absent effect  and otherwise. we use these factors to weight the cover levels of causes. thus  we redefine equation  1  to: 
 1  
where from equation  1   one can see that causes are strongly penalized if they cover some absent effects. consequently  these causes enter the competition less effectively  and therefore are more likely to loose it  than other causes than do not cover absent effects. 
　in computation of a scenario  we should avoid simultaneous activation of incompatible causes. for this  we define the following constraint: 
	us  	= 	 1  
where  is the matrix of incompatibility interactions. we should note that is null-diagonal  i.e.  = 1. in fact  each cause is totally compatible with itself by definition. minimizing js s  would prevent a simultaneous activation of incoherent causes. particularly  j1 s  is null if all active causes are totally coherent. 
　using equations  1    1  and  1   we characterize the reasoning process in the open  independent and incompatibility classes of causal reasoning by the following energy function: 
    
             are lagrangian multipliers used to weight the distinct constraints in the energy function j s . due to the precedence relationship between the coverage  see definition 1   minimal 

cardinality and coherence criteria  one must have 
minimization of the energy function 
j s  in equation  1  leads to inference of a minimal set of coherent causes covering the present effects and avoiding coverage of the absent ones. 
obviously  minimization of the energy function 
j s  in equation  1  is not a trivial matter due to the huge number of possible states. a state is defined by the ising spin variables sij. naturally  the complexity of the search space is problem-/casedependent. hereafter  we derive its expression in the worst-case  i.e. assuming that all effects are present and that each effect is covered by all possible causes. 
in this case  the dimension of the search space is  where  = card c   and 	= 
consequently  the remaining task is to employ a robust method to optimize our energy function: by robustness here  we mean the ability of finding optimal solutions in practical time spans. evidently  the use of sequential search approaches is inappropriate and indeed impossible for large-scale causal problems. gradient descent methods which are local in scope are not applicable since they can be easily trapped into poor local minima. mean field annealing techniques have been shown to be robust in solving large-scale combinatorial optimization problems as the the  traveling salesman  and  graph multi-partitioning   peterson and soderberg  1   to cite just a few. for details about mft methods  we refer the interested reader to the specialized literature  for example  peterson and anderson  1    peterson and soderberg  1 . in the next section  we use mft potts spin modeling to derive the mechanics of our model. 
1 	potts spin mft modeling 
the ising spin variables sij are replaced by continuwe have omitted the in  1 . due to the continuous nature of the last term in  1  is added to force variables to converge either to 1 or 1 - see  wang and ansari  1  for a similar approach. using equations  1  and  1   the mean field variables are given by: 
using equation  1   we can see that 
when withbeing the number of causes covering e . as   fixed points {1} emerge. potts spin mft modeling has many advantages for causal reasoning. first  due to formula  1   the dimension of the search space is reduced from to  second  it ensures that a present effect ej is always covered by some active causes since  always holds. in the next section  we 
describe the mechanics of our algorithm. 
1 	the algorithm 
our algorithm is summarized in figure 1. in the initialization phase  we compute the factors due 
to absent effects. moreover  we set 	and 	 
we should note that one can use a progressive to emphasize constraint violations at low temperatures  i.e.  the potts spin variables are initialized to their high-thermal averages and some small random bias is added to  break the symmetry  of the system of neurons  if any . in fact  in 

ous variables representing their thermal averages; 
i.e. 	where 	is said the annealing 
 temperature  of the system. at a given t  the probability vij obeys a boltzmann distribution: 
 1  
 1  
the variables  f ij are called the mean field variables  vij are called potts spin variables and their probabilistic interpretation is evident. 
　due to equation  1   the energy of the network j v  in equation  1  is transformed to: 
	 1  
let us first remark that due to equation  1   the constraints  = 1 holds automatically. that's why figure 1: solving multiple causal interactions 
	ben r1mdhane 	1 

some cases  more than one equivalent solutions exist for the causal problem at hand  and without an unbiased start the algorithm is unable to choose a direction to follow. 
　thereafter  we update synchronously mean field and potts spin variables. in computing potts spin variables  we use a  time-step  to avoid the  flipflop  behavior of the synchronous mode  peterson and soderberg  1 . however  one has to set as close as possible to 1 since this results in a slower convergence by a factor  
　the algorithm terminates when all potts spin variables saturate at 1  the rate of change  or the temperature of the system are both small enough. in figure 1  is the total number of potts spin variables and is given by regarding 
the saturation criteria 
the output of our algorithm consists of those causes surviving the competition; i.e. whose cover levels are not null. hereafter  we illustrate the mechanics of our algorithm on a medical causal problem. 
1 	illustration 
in this section  we run our algorithm on cpmd  the medical problem introduced in section 1. in our simulation  we used the following parameters: the cost-term = 1  the initial temperature t 1  = 1  the  time-step  = 1. moreover  we have 
used the annealing scheme where is the  time-counter . 
a relatively high degree of certainty  1. dyspnea and fever are absent with relatively weak degrees of 
certainty: = 1 and = 1. re-
member that unknown effects {nasaldischarge and thoracic-pain in this case  are automatically assigned a null degree of certainty by the algorithm. the computed scenario for mm by our algorithm is 
scenariomd 	=  since these 
is the best scenario that can be proposed. in fact  
　we considered a manifestation mm ep  ea eu   other scenarios as {tonsillitis  sinusitis  or {tonsillitis  where = {cough  expectoration  inflamedjhroat  sinusitis  pneumonia} will respectively lead only to are the diseases  causes  winning the competition see figure 1. laryngitis enters the competition with a strong activation since it ensures coverage of the majority of the effects in ep. tins allowed laryngitis to endure the competition more effectively than the rest of the diseases and to be included in scenmd. in contrast  tonsillitis starts to compete with a weak activation since it only covers inflamedjhroat in addition  tonsillitis is penalized since it covers the absent effect fever. hence  tonsillitis does not survive the competition for long and is dragged down toward 1 around the 1th iteration - see figure 1. sinusitis and pneumonia start the competition with the same activation level. however  sinusitis sustain the competition mainly due to its exclusivity in covering the present effect nose-pain - see figure 1. due to its incompatibility with sinusitis  and to its coverage of the absent effects dyspnea and /ever  pneumonia is slowly  weakened  as the competition continues and  dies  around the 1th iteration - see figure 1. one should remark that scenmd  1  ensures coverage of all present effects   1  is composed only of coherent diseases   1  avoids cover of all absent effects  and  1  is minimal w.r.t. set cardinality since removing either sinusitis or laryngitis  from scenmd will lead only to a partial coverage of ep. remark that scenmd 

headache  lost-voice  nose-pain   ea = {dyspnea  fever} and  = {nasaldischarge  thoracic-pain . nose-pain somewhat occurs. this is modeled by assigning nose-pain a degree of certainty = 1. the rest of the present effects are assumed to occur with 

figure 1: final scenario for cpmd w.r.t. mm. 
1 	machine learning 
a partial coverage of ep or to a scenario including incoherent diseases. 
1 	epilogue 
in this paper  we presented a potts spin mft annealing model for mechanization of causal reasoning in the open  independent and incompatibility classes. we characterized the reasoning process in these classes by an energy function to be minimized by means of mean field equations. the main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows. to our knowledge  it is the first proposal in the literature that models an explicit energy function for independent  open and incompatibility causal problems; and use mft potts spin modeling to encode its dynamics. the use of mft potts spin method has many advantages for causal reasoning. first  it automatically ensures a total coverage of the present effects. to date  no existing neural model in the literature meets this criterion  particularly in large-scale causal problems. second  it is able to find  in prac-

tical time spans  optimal solutions since it avoids efficiently poor local minima of the energy function. third  its inherent parallelism raiders the hardware implementation of the model possible and indeed desirable. we have numerically compared our model to a recent abductive model presented in  ayeb et cd.  1  on a large-scale medical problem composed 
of 1 diseases  1 symptoms and 1 causal interactions; using a huge battery of 1 cases. simulation results revealed that our model performs better than the model in  ayeb et al.  1  in computing optimal scenarios  in much less cpu time. due to the space limit  these benchmarks will not be reported herein. 
　as one should expect  there are some shortcomings in the current work. an important issue is extension of our model to include cancellation and monotonic interactions  bylander et al.  -1   which have to be addressed in future research. remember that cancellation interactions involve not only causes  but also effects  bylander et al.  1 . regarding additive interactions  they suggest cooperation between causes  goel et al.  1 . unfor-
tunately  additive/cancellation interactions cannot straightforwardly implemented by means of spin  either potts or ising  modeling. 
　finally  use of mft methods raises the problem of a so-called  critical temperature   peterson and soderberg  1 . during the thermostatic operation of mft equations  a critical temperature tc is reached at which each potts spin begins to move predominantly to 1 or 1. estimating tc can save time since annealing at temperatures much higher than tc is in vain  peterson and soderberg  1 . unfortunately  we found no general methodology in the literature for estimating tc. most proposals estimate tc empirically using many assumptions which are valid only for the tackled problem. however  the methodology adopted in  peterson and soderberg  1  seems to be applicable for many combinatorial optimization problems and could be adapted to our case. in  peterson and soderberg  1   tc was estimated by forming a small signal model of the system of spins and finding the eigenvalues of the matrix which expresses the interactions between the linearized neurons. unfortunately  computing the eigenvalue of the interaction matrix is difficult especially in large-scale causal problems and if the goal is to infer scenarios within reasonable time scales. most importantly  is that the interaction matrix is case-dependent  i.e. it varies from one manifestation to another given the same causal interactions. hence  it is unworthy to proceed this way since the computational burden will not be negligible. however  it would be more appropriate to estimate tc  or even an upper bound of it  from the set of causal strengths  independent and incompatibility  since these do not vary from one case to another. the last point is under investigations. 
acknowledgment 
the author wish to thank prof. bo soderberg for his helpful discussions about mft. mr l. b. romdhane is supported by a joint cida/acdi and muet  montreal  fellowship. 
