 
this paper deals with the way dual genetic algorithms  dga   an extension of the standard ones  explore the search space. after a brief introduction presenting genetic algorithms and dualism  the fitness distance correlation is discussed in the context of dualism. from this discussion  a conjecture is made about the genetic: heuristic used by dual genetic algorithms to explore the search space. this conjecture is reinforced by the visualization of the population centroid trajectories in the plane fitness distance. these trajectories help to point out  leg-up  behaviors  which allow the dual genetic algorithm to reach the global optimum from walks on deceptive paths. 
1 	introduction 
1 	genetic algorithms 
genetic algorithms are adaptive systems inspired from darwin's theories on natural evolution. their fundamental bases were defined twenty five years ago by holland   holland  1   in his book on natural and artificial adaptation. much works have been done since  in particular to improve their function optimization abilities   goldberg  1  . 
the basic algorithm is simple: an initial population of 
n individuals is randomly drawn and evaluated given a fitness function; according to this fitness value  the individuals are allowed to reproduce in such a way that the number of expected children of each individual is proportional to the fitness; children are mated together  mutated  in order to obtain a new population of size tv; and the algorithm loops until a stop condition is reached. individuals may be problem solutions  function parameters  and so on. 
　improvements consist in modifying the evaluation step  the reproduction step  the mating and mutation step  or even the algorithm itself. but the main problem is always to choose an appropriate representation for the individuals. dualism was introduced in order to bypass this problem by having an algorithm less sensitive to representation shortcomings. 
1 	search 
1 	dualism 
dual genetic algorithms  dga  are an extension of ga 
 see  collard and eseazut  1  for more details . their principles are the same as the standard ga  sga  ones. they only differ in the representation of the individuals. within dga  individuals are enhanced with an additional bit  termed meta bit  which controls their interpretation. 
　　let  be the binary space where the problem is originally defined  that is the basic search space. the space is called the mirrvr space. strings from are interpreted as follows:  is intended as while is intended as the binary complement of  apart from this interpretation step  this is a classical ga which is applied on the mirror space. 
　　elements from are known as chromosomes  and elements from as anti-chromosomes. a chromosome and an anti-chromosome corresponding to the same element of  form a dual pair. for instance  1 and 
1  both represent the same individual from u  1. 
　there are many studies on application of dga in several contexts: time dependent optimization  multiobjective optimization and classifier systems. 
1 	fitness distance correlation 
some researchers have established a correspondence between evolutionary algorithms and heuristic state space search   jones and forrest  1; tackett  1  . this correspondence is based on the fact that both approaches can be seen as searching labeled graphs. evolutionary landscape matches state space  individual potential solution and fitness function heuristic function. in the landscape model  the label on a vertex is a measure of the worth of that vertex as a solution. whereas for many heuristic searches  as means-ends analysis or the a* algorithm  the label is interpreted as a measure of the distance to a goal. there are many results that show that the better an heuristic is as an estimate to the function which gives the exact distance to the goal  the better it will perform. from these results  jones   jones and forrest  1   suggests that the ideal fitness function for evolutionary algorithms must provide a measure of how far away a good solution is. so he proposes to use the relationship between fitness and distance to the goal as 

a measure of difficulty for a genetic algorithm. 
the definition of the fitness distance correlation  fdc  
is quite simple. given a set  of fitness values from n individuals and the corresponding set  of distances from them to the near-
est optimum  the correlation coefficient is calculated as: 
i 
is the covariance of f and d  and the standard deviations and means of f and d. 
　from the correlation coefficient r  problems may be divided in three classes: 
1. deceptive problems  for which the fitness increases with the distance to optimum. 
1. hard problems  for which there is no correlation between fitness and distance. 
1. easy problems  for which the fitness increases when the distance decreases. 
　hard problems are in fact hard to predict  since in this case  the fdc brings little information. so  jones recommends to examine the scatter plot distance vs. fitness  especially when r is near zero. this allows to distinguish between a problem such as o needle in a haystack  niah  from a problem with a symmetrical scatter plot  for example. they both have a null coefficient  but niah is a hard problem  while there are symmetrical problems which are easy. 
　jones recommends to use distances related to genetic operators. however  it is not sure that such distances exist  and if so  that they are easily computable. jones claims that hamming distance allows a first approximation of a fdc more related to the operators. 
　in order to validate the accuracy of the fdc  .jones uses it on problems with known difficulty. results show undoubtedly the predictive ability of the fdc  even calculated with hamming distance. 
　these results are surprising  since the distances actually implied by operators are not taken into account. the only operator taken into account is the mutation  as the hamming distance between two individuals is directly related to the number of bit flips to pass from one individual to the other. 
　altenberg   altenberg  1   goes further. he says the fact that the fdc is only a statistical and static measure  based on a distance which is apparently only bound to mutation  implies two assumptions: either hamming distance is connected to the way genetic algorithms work; or this relation exists in a fortuitous way among the test set chosen by jones. in which case  counter examples exist for which this relation does not hold  and which  therefore  deceive the fdc. 
　since there seems that there is no relation between recombination operators and hamming distance  and that mutation is supposed to play a marginal role in genetic algorithms  altenberg claims that it  is possible to construct a counter example. the counter example he constructs is ga-easy  but the correlation between distance and fitness to optimum is null by construction. further  the observation of the scatter plot gives no more informations. 
　this counter example deceives the jones' conjecture which claims that if the fdc is close to 1 and if the scatter plot exhibits no particular structure  then the problem is ga-difficult. moreover  quick et al.   quick et a/.  1a   construct a class of problems  called ridge junctions  which are ga-easy with a high positive correlation. 
　while the altenberg's counter example is prone to discussion  in particular on the definition of the ga-easiness  the counter example of quick et al is clear: there are functions that the fdc predicts misleading and which are in fact easy. nevertheless  these two counter examples exploit known weaknesses of the fdc: its nullity for the symmetrical functions and the low contribution of a particular path in the global calculation. besides  quick et al.   quick et a/.  1b   recognize that the fdc cal-
culated with the points actually sampled by the ga gives better results. 
　in a more general way  naudts and kallel   naudts and kallel  1   show that a fdc drawback is its great sensibility to non-linear scaling. kallel and schoenauer   kallel and shoenauer  1   show in a more formal frame the irrelevance of fdc as performance predictor for ga  in an article judiciously entitled:  no universal statistical measure but a set of hints . 
　nevertheless  the success of the fdc: on a large number of functions remains an unsolved question. collard et al.   collard et a/.  1   bring some elements of response  exhibiting a correlation between hamming distance and instability implied by crossover. 
1 	fdc and dualism 
this section deals with the relations that can be established between fdc theory and dualism. in the first part  we define the dual distance that should be used to calculate the fdc in the dual case. in the second part  a conjecture on dynamical behavior of dga is proposed. 
1 dual fdc 
the dualism implies two ways to transform an individual  to another individual the first one  called direct  is equivalent to mute the i different bits between x and y. this corresponds to a walk on the boolean hypercube and the associated distance is simply the hamming distance. the second one is equivalent to get x and y each in a different mirror subspace and to mute the  identical bits  where is the chromosome length. this corresponds to a step through the boolean hypercube followed by a walk on it. we called the associated distance the codistance  dc. it can be established that : 
the 1 is for the step through  and is the length of the walk on the hypercube. 
	clergue and collard 	1 

　the dual distance between two individuals from the basic space x and y  is naturally defined as follows : 
where is the hamming distance  are the two dual individuals corresponding to .x. since : where  being the length of strings over 
this result expresses that the dual distance between x and y is the minimum of the hamming distance and the codistance. 
　　the dual distance remains a distance over the basic space but  it can be easily extended to the mirror space we note  the distance over the mirror space to the nearest optimum. it is easily shown that : 
where x is the individual of corresponding to x  and is the optimum over thus  there is a correspondence between a distance over appropriate to calculate a fdc and the dual distance defined over 
　now  we are going to study the predictive capacity of the dual fdc on a well known function family  the trap functions   deb and goldberg  1  . they are defined over the imitation of chromosomes  that is the number of genes set to '1' they admit two optima  a global one and a local one  one being the logical complement of the other. they are parametrized by two values and r. the first one   allows to set the width of the attractive basin for each optima  and r sets their relative importance. the function /'/  is so defined by : 
where un x  is the imitation divided by 	the length of chromosomes  in the experiments  
　we calculated the exact value of fdc  that is with all the points of  in function of xb  and r. results are shown on figure 1. they are roughly identical to the deb & goldberg  deb and goldberg  1  ones  who used another theoretical framework to obtain the conditions on  and r for which the trap function is deceptive. these results are corroborated by the performance obtained with a  real'1 cm. 
　we define performance as the number of runs for which the global optimum is found in less than a given number of generations  1   divided by the total number of 
1 	search 
runs  1 . the figure 1 presents such performance measures obtained with a cm on the trap functions. it is shown that the experimental deceptive area  where performance is less than 1  corresponds approximately to the theoretical deceptive area found with the fdc. 
for dga  the predicted deceptive area is less important 
 figure 1 . it can be shown  from figure 1  that there is no couple  for which the global optimum is never found. this reinforces the hypothesis made elsewhere   collard and aurand  1   for which there is no totally deceptive problem for dga. 

figure 1: standard fdc for trap functions. lines delimit areas in the plane  for respectively deceptive  hard and easy trap functions  according to the jones' classification. 

figure 1: performances of the so a on trap functions. 
1 	fitness driven distance 
now  we are concerned in studying the dynamical behaviors of dga and the relation that can be made with fdc. during evolution  the dga has to make choices between direct path and indirect path  that is  for each dual pair  it has to choose between the chromosome and the 


figure 1: dual fdc for trap functions. 

figure 1: performances of the dga on trap functions. 
anti-chromosome. indeed  keeping both of them implies too much instability. such a choice cannot be influenced directly by fitness  since dual individuals have  by definition  the same fitness. so  there is no direct explanation on the way these choices are made. 
　in the context of fdc  this choice may be expressed by the definition of a distance over  to the optimum. if the optimum is considered in one of the two mirror subspaces  say  choosing an individual in the same subspace is equivalent to consider the hamming distance between it and the considered optimum; and choosing an individual in the other subspace is equivalent to consider the codistance. thus  there is a strong relation between a strategy of choice for the dga and the effective distance over  used to calculate the fdc. 
　in the next  we are going to show that the best strategy  with regard to the fdc  is that which consists in choosing the individual in the same mirror subspace than the optimum if its fitness is above average  and in the other subspace else. this strategy is instantiated by the so-called fitness driven distance  defined as follows 
* 

it may be obviously established that: 
property 1 the fitness-distance correlation coefficient calculated with the fitness driven distance is always negative. 
moreover  the following property is verified: 
property 1 the fitness driven distance is the best strategy of choice between dual individuals with regard to the 
fitness-distance 	correlation. 
demonstration: let d be a distance over  representing a choice strategy for each individual between hamming distance and codistance to the optimum. it is obvious that: 
then  each term ivolved in 
the covariance calculation is 
since 	it is easily established that 
the covariance calculated using the fitness driven distance is inferior or equal to the covariance using any other distance d. 
so  the correlation coefficient calculated with the fitness driven distance is inferior or equal to the one calculated with any other distance d. 
　we conjecture that the dga tends to follow the strategy expressed by the fitness driven distance. 
1 	f d c and population dynamics 
in this section  we give more insight in the dga dynamical behavior  by plotting the trajectories of the population centroid on the fitness-distance plane. in particular  we point out the  leg-up  behavior  which allows the algorithms to lean on a deceptive attractor to reach the global optimum. 
1 	fitness distance trajectories 
representing the population dynamics is a difficult task. indeed  there is a trade-off to do between the information being presented and the clarity of the representation. the first step is to choose a relevant plane. the fitness distance space seems to be an interesting one. the second step consists in choosing how the population is to be represented in this plane. to do so  it is natural to plot the position at each generation of the centroid of the population  that is  the point corresponding to the mean distance to the optimum and the mean fitness of the population. 
1 	 leg-up'' : a way to converge 
 in order to exhibit the choices made by a dga during evolution  we are going to consider two functions  the previously introduced trap function  and a modified trap function called 
	clergue and collard 	1 

the 	trap function 
the trajectory of the population centroid for the sga  see figure 1  is not surprising. the population follows the deceptive branch of the landscape toward the local optimum. 

figure 1: sga: trajectory for the trap function. 
　the figure 1 represents the trajectory for a dga considering distances in the basic space. first  as for the sga  the population converges toward the deceptive optimum. but after a while  the population crosses the space to converge on the global optimum. this is the  leg-up  phenomenon: the algorithm leans on the local optimum to reach the global one. 

figure 1: dga: trajectory for the trap function in the basic space. 
　the representation in the mirror space   see figure 1  gives another point of view of this behavior. in particular  it shows that the population begins to move on the mirror subspace   solid line . then it jumps on 
 to reach the global optimum  dashed line . 
1 	search 

resents the  individuals  and the dashed line  the ones. the points are the trajectory of the population. 
the 	bi-trap 	function 
the trap function involves an unique  leg-up . indeed  although the space  is crossed from part to part  this corresponds to the change of only 1 bit in  but this strategy may be used by dga  even when the local optimum is not in the vicinity of the global optimum complement. moreover  there may be several successive  leg-up  during evolution. 
　now  we are going to introduce a function involving two  leg-up . the trap function is modified in order to get many local optima  see figure 1  : the binary complement of the global one and the individuals situated at imitation 1. 
　according to the initial population  the sga behaves half of the time as for the trap function  that is it converges toward the complement of the global optimum. any time else  it converges toward the other local optima  from where it occasionally reaches the global optimum. 
　with dga  the trajectory of the population exhibits clearly two  leg-up   see figure 1 . initially  the population follows the left branch. it jumps a first time to follow the right one and converge toward the deceptive optimum. then it makes another jumps to reach the global optimum as with the standard trap. these jumps in u correspond in fact to mirror subspace changes  as shown figure 1. 
1 	conclusion 
dual genetic algorithms seem to be a promising improvement of genetic algorithms. however  it lacked explanation on why they are so efficient and on the way they behave. in this paper  we bring some element of response  using the fitness distance correlation  and plotting their dynamical behaviors in the fitness distance plane. 
　the trajectories plots in the distance fitness space exhibit the  leg-up  phenomenon. the choice of the trap functions was influenced by our needs to get a function 


trajectory of a dga. 
individuals  and the dashed line  the  the points are the trajectory of the population. 
with a simple representation in this space. this way  the position of the centroid gives more informations about the distribution of chromosomes and anti chromosomes  than with functions with fuzzier representation. however  in the general case  it may be supposed that this jumping behavior is also present  while less observable. 
　this reinforces our conjecture  firstly made with the fitness driven distance  for which  during evolution  the dga is confronted to choices between dual individuals  and that it tends to make such choices in a way which optimizes the correlation between fitness and distance to the global optimum. 
