high level memory structures and text coherence 
in translation 
cj yang 
department of computer science 
yale university 
new haven  ct 

　　　various memory organization schemes have been proposed in the last five years. lots of intelligent computer systems have been experimenting with memory schemes like scripts  plans  goals  1  and mops  in the domain of text understanding   and information retrieval   1   . in this paper  the focus is on the problem of translating sentences that involve lexical items which don't have equivalent counterparts in the target language. examples are drawn from translations between english and mandarin chinese. 
consider the following sentence .1 
la 	john went to a restaurant and ordered a hamburger. 
lb john chiu yi g1a tsan tien dian  leh lc john go one restaurant order 
yi geh hamburger  one 	hamburger. 
　　　notice that  and  in la does not appear in lc. however  in 1a below: 
1a john read a book and wrote a l e t t e r . 
1b john dwu- leh yi ben  srvu heh-
	1c 	john read 	one 	book and 
shiye  leh yi fong shien*. write one l e t t e r . 
the word  and  is tranalated   i . e . ge  hkh-  . what then determines when  and  should be 
   the following conventions w i l l be used throughout this paper: 
a refers to the english sentence b refers to the chinese sentence  in upper case . c refers to the word-for-word translation of b 
nouns like  john  and  hamburger  are not translated since their translationa are phonetical. 
translated in chinese  although both la and 1a consist of two events  the two events in la are causally related and the ones in 1a are not. in l a   each verbal phrase corresponds to an event in the restaurant script   1   . recall a script is actually a giant causal chain. so  if two events are part of the same script  their causal connections can easily be inferred. the two events in 1a  however  have no such connections at a l l . 
so our claim i s : 
if 	the causal 	connection 	between 	two events 	in 	a 	chinese 	sentence 	is inferable  
then the two verbal phrases representing these two events are connected without the use of heh-.  in fact  its use is forbidden  
verbal phrases that satisfy the above condition are said to be conjoinable. 
　　　without the knowledge at the script level  both la and 1a w i l l just be understood as 1 separate events. so they should be translated exactly the same way. if thia is the case  then it is impossible to determine why  and  is translated differently in lb and 1b. therefore  understanding la at the acript level is crucial to i t s correct translation. 
　　　however  we are not saying that a l l events in a script can be expressed in a sentence without using connectives. consider the next example: 
	1a 	john went to a restaurant where he ate a 
hamburger and drank a cup of tea. 
	1b 	john chiu' tsan tien 	tsre leh yi geh 
	1c 	john go 	restaurant eat 	one 
hamburger heh- heh leh yi bei tsra-. hamburger and drink one tea. 
　　　although eating a hamburger and drinking a 
　　　cup of tea are events in a restaurant script  they are not causally related. so the connective  heh-  must be used in 1a. the concluaion we should draw here is that scripts together with causal chains provide a definite criterion for conjoinability of verbal phrases in chinese. 
now l e t ' s consider the following more complex 
1 

story: 
1. john vent to a restaurant for lunch. 
1. he left without paying the check. 
the translation of the f i r s t sentence is quite straightforward and irrelevant to our discussion here* let's focus on the translation of the second sentence: 
1a. he left without paying the check. 
1b. ta mei- fwu chian- cio' d1  leh. 
     1c. he not pay money ttt  leave. according to the dictionary   gio  means  at that moment . but actually it means more than that. we understand that john shouldn't leave the restaurant without paying because we have the knowledge about restaurants   i . e . the restaurant script . 1a doesn't explicitly express that a violation of the restaurant knowledge has occured. the chinese translation of this story  however  uses  gut  to indicate that  leaving the restaurant  ahould not occur before  not paying the check . although  gio  can't be directly translated from english  this doesn't mean  gio  should never appear in a chinese translation of english. 
　　　let's see how  gio   can be generated using the knowledge at the script level. f i r s t   1a is parsed into two cds  conceptual dependency representations   1     : 
1  ptrans  actor 	john  
 object john  
	 from 	restaurant   
1 utrans  actor 	john  
 object money  
	 from 	john  
	 mode 	neg   
with the knowledge of the restaurant script  the generator realizes that 1 followed by 1 is not a normal instantiation of the script. so  gut  must be generated to indicate this violation. 
　　　usually  words are generated from some specific nodes in the memory or slot f i l l e r s . for example  dzo   means  to leave   is generated from  ptrans from current place   fwu   means  to pay   is generated from  atrans money   and so on. however  we can't find such memory nodes or slot f i l l e r s that correspond to worda like  cut . it is used to characterise certain states or aspects of the memory structures. in other words  certain patterns of memory structure can also trigger generation besides static memory nodes.  gio*  should be generated for any memory structures that satisfy the condition we discussed above. failure to do so w i l l result in serious misunderstanding. for example  if  cht  is left out in 1b  then 1b becomes 1b' as shown below: 
	1b' 	ta me1- fwit chian- z1  leh. 
     1c' he not pay money leave. native chinese speakers w i l l think that 1b' does not make sense. we are going to show why they w i l l think so by the conjoinability criterion discussed earlier. in 1b  the two verbal phrases representing  not paying the check  and  leaving the restaurant  are not connected by any connectives. this implies that these two events are causally related according to the conjoinability c r i t e r i o n . thus  1b' should be interpreted as  john didn't pay the check so he left the restaurant  which obviously violates our knowledge about restaurants. therefore  1b' won't sound right to chinese speakers. the point is that without the knowledge of the restaurant script  1b' w i l l be generated to as the translation of 1a. 
　　　as a concluding remark  we want to emphasize that high level memory structures are responsible for maintaining text coherence in translation. our discussion has just scratched the surface. 
there are many other kinds of memory structures besides scripts. currently  we are working on how different high level memory structures are related to the generation of coherent text. 
acknowledgements 
i thank mike dyer for his comments on the f i r s t draft of this paper. 

1 
