 concepts that this system w i l l need. 
　　　the process that the system uses is called explanatory schema acquisition . the basic idea behind it is that the causal connections in an understood representation of a new input can be used to propose and propagate constraints on slot f i l l e r s . that is  from one particular instance of a situation the system can  reason out  the a general structure underlying that instance. the system is therefore capable of learning from just one example. 
　　　there has been much work in the past on learning systems which start from a state of very l i t t l e or no i n i t i a l knowledge  for example  minsky and papert  1   meisel  1  . to a large extent  these systems failed to live up to the expectations of researchers. more recently  learning and knowledge acquisition systems have been constructed on a firm foundation of rich i n i t i a l knowledge  lenat  1   soloway  1   buchanan and mitchell  1   mcdermott  1   selfridge  1  . 
the work reported in this paper was supported in part by the office of naval research under conract n1s-c-1. 
　　　the system described here is a knowledge based one. it must contain much background information on how the world behaves and on the goals and motivations of people. prom this  it is able to learn more about the behavior of the world. 
　　　in the example below assume the system does not yet have schemata for kidnap or extortion. it does  however  possess a considerable quantity of background information about stealing  bargaining  the use of normal physical objects  and goals of people  companies and institutions. some of this knowledge is in the form of other schemata already b u i l t into the system. 
　　　paris police disclosed tuesday that a man who identified himself jean maraneux abducted the 1 year old daughter of wealthy parisian businessman michel boullard late last week. boullard received a telegram demanding that 1 million francs be left in a lobby waste basket of the crowded pompidou center in exchange for the g i r l . asking that the police not intervene  boullard arranged for the delivery of the money. his daughter was found wandering blindfolded near his downtown office on monday. 
　　　in processing the story the system w i l l be able to learn a general schema for processing kidnap stories from this one instance. using explanatory schemata acquisition  understanding is viewed as the process of explaining input events. the explanations can then be used to generalize a single event into a new schema. 
in processing this example without a kidnap or 
extortion schema the system cannot explain all of the events via existing schemata. in particular  existing schemata cannot explain why maraneux might steal boullard's daughter. while this is quite clearly an instance of taking something that belongs to someone else  there is no motivation for i t . the daughter has no apparent value to boullard  and a person  unlike money  cannot be used to acquire other valued goods. the system requires motivations for major volitional actions  su h as a character invoking the steal schema . therefore it is confused at this point. 
　　　the confusion is resolved by the next sentence. this input invokes the bargain schema. the system understands the motivation for maraneaux to i n i t i a t e the bargaining event: he is trying to acquire money which it knows to be a possible goal of any human. furthermore  this provides the motivation for the steal event. maraneaux used the steal schema to satisfy the precondition of the bargain schema of possessing the item to be traded. 
　　　resolving the confusion causes the system to invoke i t s explanatory schemata acquisition procedure. this procedure does two things. first  it constructs a new schema composed of a steal event and a bargain event where the steal is used to satisfy a precondition of the bargain. second  constraints on the slots for the new schema are derived from the knowledge in the systems steal and bargain schemata and the story as follows: 
1  the slot f i l l e d by 1 million francs is generalized to be any amount of money. 
1  the slot f i l l e d by maraneaux  the kidnapper  is generalized to be any adult human. 
 o the slot f i l l e d by the daughter is generalized to be anyone with close personal ties with  1 . 
1  the slot f i l l e d by boullard is generalized to be any human who both has the amount of money to f i l l  1  and a person with close personal ties to f i l l 
　　　thus the system now has a schema that can be used to process a new story about a person stealing another person in order to trade him back for money. this i s   of course  a f i r s t approximation to a kidnap schema. 
	one might make the argument that learning 	the 
kidnap schema is unnecessary since the system could  after a l l   correctly process the example input without i t . why not simply rely on the more general planning/goal knowledge and forget about the schemata  there are three reasons. 
	first  there is an 	efficiency 	consideration. 
the more a system can rely on pre-packaged schemata  the less goal following and complex planning it w i l l have to do. 
　　　second  planning systems have proved to be more fragile and distinctly less successful than script/frame/schema systems. it might well not be possible to build a successful planning type system to deal with an interesting domain. the problem is that the f r a g i l i t y of a planner is multiplied by long reasoning chains  a domain rich in alternatives  as the real world tends to be  and the need to invoke the planner many times in the course of processing an input. in the proposed system  most of the processing is handled by the schema knowledge. only when a new schema is being constructed or refined must the system resort to less reliable knowledge sources. 
　　　finally  script/frame/schema systems have been much criticized as 'ad hoc*. this is due to the fact that programmers invariably b u i l l in a l l of the necessary  and no unnecessary  knowledge structures. a system that could acquire these knowledge structures for i t s e l f would help dispel that criticism. 
　　　this is not the end of the learning process for the kidnap schema. the system is designed to refine and expand i n i t i a l schemata in the course of processing more stories. we hope that the system w i l l be able to expand the i n i t i a l kidnap schema into a general extort schema by recognizing that other things besides people ran be stolen and traiel back. 
　　　the system is only in 	the 	beginning 	stages. as yet it is not implemented. 
　　　in conclusion  it should be pointed out that this kind of learning does not depend on correlational evidence. that is  the new schema is not constructed by noticing the similarities and differences among a large number of inputs  like winston  1  or fox & reddy  1  . nor does it construct special purpose knowledge structures from mor  general ones already existing within the system  e.g.  lebowitz  1  . rather  the system is capable of  one t r i a l   learning not unlike soloway's  1 . from just one kidnap story  the system constructs a plausible kidnap schema. this schema can later be refilled and expanded  but from the beginning it is a viable new schema capable of aiding future processing. 
