 
this paper distinguishes a set of c r i t e r i a to be met by a machine translation system  eurotra  currently being planned under the sponsorship of the commission of the european communities and attempts to show the effect of meeting those c r i t e r i a on the overall system design. 
	1. 	introduction 
     eurotra is a machine translation system which so far exists as a detailed set of technical specifications. work leading to the drawing up of the specifications started in february of 1  and has been carried out on a collaborative basis by a group drawn from the member countries of the european community  under the aegis of the 
commission of the european communities. the present author is responsible for the co-ordination of the technical work  and therefore makes no claim to be more than the synthesizer of ideas whose original sources are 
multifarious. 
     the system to be designed had to meet a number of very specific c r i t e r i a   some of them coming from the particular needs of the european community  some from an i n i t i a l decision to carry out both planning and implementation of the system collaboratively. this latter meant that the system must be designed so that groups in the different member countries could work more or less independently during implementation. 
     in what follows  each section identifies a particular c r i t e r i o n   explores i t s consequences on the overall system design and tries to put these consequences into perspective by comparison 
with other systems. no distinction is made  for these purposes  between systems which are operational in the sense of producing translations routinely  for their bread and butter  and pilot systems which were developed primarily as experimental test beds for interesting theoretical ideas. nor w i l l any attempt be made to describe systems referred to in d e t a i l   or to put them into relationship with one another. hutchins   1   f u l f i l l s these latter two tasks admirably. 
1. multilinguality 
the most obvious special demand made of the 
eurotra system design was that it should be multi-lingual. the european community had  at the time of starting work  six o f f i c i a l languages. this has recently been increased to seven  and a further two languages are in prospect. n languages implies n n-l  language pairs  so 1 languages gives 1 language pairs. a l l early translation systems were bi-lingual  e.g. the georgetown system     the analysis of the source language being done within the perspective of a particular target language. if this tradition were followed  1 separate translation systems would have to be written  one for each language pair; a proposal which is clearly uneconomic. some systems  although i n i t i a l l y developed as bilingual systems  have made some attempt to move towards multi-linguality by allowing analysis or generation of a new language to take over techniques developed for some other language. this is the case  for example  with systran  . such an approach has obvious disadvantages: quite apart from the practical d i f f i c u l t y of modifying the treatment of linguistic facts in one language to deal with  optimistically  similar linguistic facts in another language and the consequent proliferation of historical remains carried over from one version of the system to another  it is by no means self-evident that the treatment appropriate for one language is appropriate for another. 
     it seems preferable then to separate out different stages of translation in such a way that as much as possible is done within the context of a single language. thus analysis and generation within eurotra depend only on the grammar  in the widest sense  of the particular language being treated  and contain no reference to a particular target or source language respectively. 
     however  since translation clearly involves a mapping between two languages  there has to be a 
     bi-lingual link between the analysis of the source and the generation of the target. this is the transfer stage of the translation process. there must clearly be as many transfer modules as there are language pairs  so in the interests of economy the transfer part should be kept as small as possible. 
     other systems   e.g. geta   1   1   1       have already adopted this approach to some extent. they differ from eurotra  however  in the level of representation aimed at. 
     mu1i-lingual ity has obvious repercussions on the level of representation. since it is not possible to take advantage of similarities between source and target the representation must go some way beyond an analysis of superficial syntactic structure. the choice of how far to go beyond it depends on a compromise between the ideal of producing a complete and explicit semantic/pragmatic representation of the text and the f e a s i b i l i t y of reaching such an ideal in a system which has to work for its living within a relatively short time. geta aims at establishing what is essentially a deep syntactic representation  based on the valency patterns of predicates. eurotra t r i e s   at its 'deepest' level of representation  to characterize the semantic relations between constituents in the text via a set of relations based on an expanded form of case grammar  similar to the relations used by wilks  1 . however  since the set of relations are defined as those useful for translation and are only 'universal' within the project  there is no attempt to reach a ideal  genuinely universal semantic representation. 
     there is one further implication which should be spelt out  which comes partly from the multi-linguality constraint and partly from the collaborative nature of the project. since the same analysis module must provide input for a number of different transfer modules  and the same generation module accept output from a number of different transfer modules  the structure and content of that input and output must be very closely defined if the system is not to disintegrate into a number of mis-matched lumps. this consideration has led to the definition of an interface structure  to be used as a means of transferring results between the main modules  and indeed as a way of representing intermediate results within the main modules. more w i l l be said about this interface structure in subsequent sections. 
	1. 	practicality 
     the aim of the project is to produce a system which w i l l be operational  at least within a limited domain  within five years from the start of implementation. the semantic relation level of text representation outlined in the last section i s   in terms of a practical  working system  quite ambitious. although experimental systems  e.g. wilks  op. c i t .   have proved quite successful  it would be rash to assume that an accurate semantic representation can always be established. but a working system cannot be allowed just to give up and produce no translation at a l l   especially if the informationis lacking only for some limited stretch of text. the system must therefore have fall-back mechanisms. thus  the interface structure is also to include information on the valency boundedness of constituents  on their surface syntactic function  on their morpho-syntagmatic class  and on the morphology of terminal elements. furthermore  the geometry of the interface structure defines the syntactic constituent structure of the text. all this information may be used during transfer in order to establish the correct lexical units in the target language. where the semantic relations are unavailable  it may also be used by bi-lingual safety-net grammars in order to provide some translation rather than none at a l l . such grammars can be imagined as producing translation in descending order of quality. in the worst possible case  the quality would be that of 
word-to-word systems. 
     although the main j u s t i f i c a t i o n for retaining as much information as possible about the source language text is its potential usefulness as fall-back information  it does f u l f i l l another useful purpose  in that information about the surface form of the source text can often be very useful in selecting the appropriate surface form of the target language text. 
     the necessity to keep a l l these difterent kinds of information on a single data structure has led to the definition of a structure whose geometry is determined syntactically. the data structure is a general tree  where at each level of the tree one node is distinguished as being the node to which a l l other nodes are  syntactically  related. thus  within a verbal phrase with a f i n i t e verb the distinguished node w i l l be the f i n i t e verb node  within a noun group the noun and so on.  the analogy with dependency grammar   1   i s clear.  this might be expected to lead to the semantic information  which is represented via labellings on the nodes of the tree  being represented somewhat unnaturally. in fact  although this does happen occasionally  it happens rather less often than one would expect  partly because semantic relations  once named  need not be ordered  cf. charniak  for the inverse argument that if ordered they need not be named   partly because an extension of the data structure to allow for copies of constituents to be inserted in those cases where a single constituent plays two semantic roles  e.g. 'i told him to go'  removes much of the d i f f i c u l t y . the awkward cases are those where i n t u i t i v e l y   the dominant constituent semantically is defined to be the dependent constituent syntactically  e.g. 'the bottle of wine'   ' b o t t l e ' is syntactically dominant . even here  intuition tends to oscillate depending on surrounding context: 'he drank the bottle of wine' vs 'he broke the bottle of wine'. 
	1. 	collaboration 
     one of the i n i t i a l postulates of the system was that it could be designed and implemented collaboratively. 
     in practical terms  collaboration means individual groups working on the analysis and generation of their own language  joint teams constructing transfer modules and a separate group ensuring communication and co-ordination between the participating groups. such an organisation is made possible by the strict division into analysis  transfer and generation 
modules already described. 
     it is re-inforced. however  by a further consideration. in planning such a project  it is preferable to draw as much benefit as possible from experience already existing amongst the participating groups: indeed  it is the experience of those who have co-operated in planning the system which has produced its overall design. but the fact that experience exists means that it is experience with particular techniques and strategies of language processing. obviously  a group which has spent many years developing and improving a particular strategy w i l l want to use the results of that 
work in working on eurotra. therefore  the participating groups should be left considerable freedom to choose their own linguistic strategies. 
     this has immediate implications  if only because anarchy must be prevented from degenerating into chaos. the most obvious concerns the interface structure: its definition must be agreed by a l l parties  and a l l parties must agree to produce results conforming to that definition. for this reason  much of the last three years has gone on defining the interface structure. 
     a further guarantee of final integrability comes from an agreement to use a common basic software  manipulating an agreed data structure. the data structure is a chain graph  very like the q-system q-graph   1    whose arcs are labelled with trees conforming to the definition of the interface structure. it is manipulated via production system type rules | 1 |   internally unordered except of course for implicit ordering  but controlled by external means as in mycin |1    both the rules themselves and the control mechanisms are written in a specially designed language  intended to allow convenient and transparent expression of linguistic facts. no conceptual distinction is made between grammar rules and dictionary rules  both of which are written in the high-level language. dictionary information may be very complex  including valency information  semantic information  information on surface behaviour and contextual information in addition to conventional morphological information. the unity of the data structures and of the high-level language for describing and manipulating them makes elegant expression of a great deal of information possible. 
     several systems have contributed ideas to the definition of this part of the system. both geta  op. c i t .   and taum   1     amongst machine translation systems  have used external rules  and production systems as a whole have received wide-spread attention in a i . eurotra pushes the general approach to an extreme  by explicitely separating control  rules and computational model in a way which allows the same basic tools to be 
used in a variety of different ways. 
	1. 	extensibility 
     multi-linguality has a further dimension which was not discussed explicitely in the second section: it implies the a b i l i t y to add new language pairs at any time without having to re-write the pre-existing system. this is made possible by the overall modularity of the system. to add a new source language going to existing target languages a  b  c  it is only necessary to write an analyser producing a valid interface structure from source language texts  and three transfer modules transferring the new source into languages a  b  c. the existing target generation 
modules w i l l then take over. 
     similarly extension of the linguistic modules to cover new structures or new domains of discourse is simplified by the use of internally unordered production rules. addition of new rules does not perturb the existing set of rules. 
     but extensibility was also defined to include extension to include new research results. in the current state of the art  certain linguistic problems such as resolution of pronoun reference depending on extensive use of world knowledge seem to be intractable within the framework of a bread and butter system. however  given advances in linguistics and in ai in the recent past  it is possible that they may become tractable. the general framework described in the preceding sections should prove flexible enough to allow the incorporation of new research results permitting the treatment of problems which  for the moment  have quite deliberately been left aside. on a less ambitious scale  the r i g i d separation of rules  algorithms and control should make it easy to experiment with new linguistic models. 
	1  	conclusion 
     this paper has outlined some features of the design of a multi-lingual  extensible machine translation system to be developed by a number of groups working in collaboration. an attempt has been made to explain the considerations leading to those features  and to set the system within an overall framework. 
     

