opportunistic processing in arguments 
rod mcguire  lawrence birnbaum  and margot flowers 
yale university 
department of computer science 
new haven  connecticut 

     in two previous papers  we have proposed a part of a computational theory of argumentation  including representations for argument structure and rules for using those representations in understanding and in rebutting  birnbaum et ai  1  and flowers et al  1 ; related work includes cohen  1  . one property of the model which we emphasized is the way in which argument mechanisms and inferential memory can each help to direct the processing of the other. in particular  we presented examples in which inferential memory can uncover good rebuttals to an input as a side-effect of the processing that naturally goes on in trying to understand that input. when such opportunities for rebuttal are noticed during understanding  they render unnecessary the use of argument rules to find a response  since one has already been discovered. 
　　for example  consider the following exchange in a mock argument between an arab and an israeli over 
middle east affairs: 
 l arab: israel is trying to take over the middle east. 
 israeli: if that were our goal  we wouldn't have given back sinai to the egyptians. 
the israeli's understanding of the arab's claim  involves instantiating a knowledge structure representing imperialism  with israel as the actor and the middle east as the target  and recognizing that this is intended as an accusation. this knowledge structure  let's call it takeover  has several component substructures  roughly as shown in figure 1. 
we propose that in trying to understand input . the 
israeli must relate this entire structure to his long-term memory. in so doing  he will discover  among other things. 

this work was supported in part by the defense advanced research 
projects agency  monitored by the office of naval research under contract n1-1-c-i i i i   and in part by the national science 
foundation under grant ist1 
that israel has indeed engaged in building up its military strength  although in his memory that fact would be explained by the goal of self-defense . more importantly for this example  in the course of relating the occupy territory substructure to memory  he will find a counterexample - an instance of israel relinquishing occupied territory  the sinai . 
　　this fact  which contradicts the original allegation of imperialism  forms the basis of the israeli's rebuttal . there remains the problem of distinguishing this fact  which is extremely relevant from the point of view of producing a rebuttal  from other facts brought to light while relating the input to memory. inferential memory must be informed enough about the goals of the arguer to realize that any evidence it uncovers which contradicts the allegation of israeli imperialism will be useful  and should therefore be saved. this entire process is an instance of the more general phenomenon of reminding  schank  1  and  1  . 
　　as another example of this kind of processing  consider the following continuation of the previous exchange: 
 1  arab: but then why haven't you given back the west bank to the palestinians  
both the israeli utterance  and the arab response  refer to arab territory occupied by the israelis. it seems entirely reasonable to suppose that this topic is sufficiently important to an informed supporter of the arab position to 
1 

warrant the existence in his memory of some knowledge structures which organize information relevant to it. in particular  these knowledge structures would point to instances of occupy territory which have israel as the actor and former arab lands as the target. further  these would be the exact structures which we would logically expect to play a role in the inferential memory processing needed to understand utterance . thus  in the course of trying to understand the utterance  the arab would naturally be reminded of instances of continued israeli occupation of arab territory. one of these instances  the west bank  forms the basis of the arab response . further examples of this sort can be found in birnbaum et al  1  and flowers et al  1 . 
　　in many cases  of course  no rebuttal will be uncovered by inferential memory during the understanding phase. it then becomes necessary to utilize argument rules and structures in order to select a point to attack or defend. for example  consider the following argument fragment: 
 israeli: the arabs started the 1 war  by blockading the straits of tiran. 
 arab: but israel attacked first. 
 israeli: according to international law  blockades are acts of war. 
 arab: were we supposed to let you import american arms through the straits  
by our analysis  the arab's use of inferential memory during the course of understanding the israeli's claim  does not yield a possible rebuttal as a side-effect. hence  the derivation of his response  must result from the explicit application of argument rules based on larger structural features of the entire fragment  through . 
　　in our model  the structure of an argument is represented by an argument graph in which the individual propositions of the argument are related by support and attack links. for example  the argument graph representation that we propose for the above text fragment is shown in figure 1. many of the propositions in this graph  for example  1a  and  1a   are not explicit in the utterances given  and must be inferred. the motivation for their presence  and mechanisms for producing them  are discussed in flowers et al  1 . 
the argument graph shown in figure 1 is an instance of 

 1a   that the israelis were responsible for the war  or he can attack the israeli claim  1a   that the arabs were. this latter possibility is realized in the arab's response   which attempts to justify the blockade  and thus attacks the support relation between  1a  and  1b . although inferential memory is of necessity involved in producing this justification  in this case it plays a secondary role  directed by the argument rules. 
a contrastive positions structure  an argument form which is on the input: by the time any such rule were invoked  either 　　these examples illustrate that rebuttals can be produced in two very different ways  either as a side-effect of inferential memory processing performed at understanding time  or as a result of explicit use of argument structures and rules. an important corollary of this processing distinction is that if a direct attack  i.e.. a contradiction  is made on an input  it was discovered at understanding time. the argument is as follows. the same inferential memory apparatus  with the same knowledge base  is used both in understanding and in rebutting. hence  if inferential memory processing does not uncover any contradictory evidence at the time an input is understood  none will be uncovered a few steps later during response formation at the behest of some argument rule  since exactly the same processing  leading to the same outcome  would occur then. so there is no point in having an argument rule which advises trying to find a direct attack 

generally characterized by a mutual attack relation between two central propositions  in this case  1a  and  1a   to which further supporting and attacking propositions are attached. rules associated with argument structures of this sort are used to constrain possible response choices. the rules for a 
contrastive positions structure suggest two rebuttal options: the arab may offer additional support for his own claim the basis for a rebuttal would already be in hand  or no 
direct attack on the input would be possible. 
　　this point has implications for the role of argument rules in our theory. if direct attacks are only discovered by inferential memory during understanding  then a key function of the argument rules must be to focus attention on 

1 

other points of possible contention in the argument when no direct attack on the input is possible. that is. they must primarily be concerned with identifying which previous points are worth going back to  or which new points arc worth raising. 
　　this distinction also has broader implications for computational models of argumentation  and more generally  conversation. hobbs  1   among others  has argued that conversation is best viewed as planned behavior  in which utterances are produced by some kind of planning mechanism which is trying to achieve the conversational goals of the participants. our notion of rebuttals produced as a side-effect of understanding an input implies that any such planning mechanism must be opportunistic  in a sense akin to that of hayes-roth and hayes-roth  1 . that is  it must be able to utilize opportunities for rebuttal which are discovered by inferential memory when performing another task  understanding . it seems possible that a theory of conversation  or more specifically of argumentation  based on this kind of opportunistic processing can reconcile our everyday perceptions of conversations  or arguments  as being  on the one hand  planfu . and on the other  wandering and disorganized. 
