 
　　　problems which induce performance that has the false appearance of success  garden path problems  may be an inevitable consequence of the need  in both human and computer problem solving systems  to create abstract knowledge representations in order to make problem solving efficient. an example is presented from s domain of physics problem solving tasks in which a hierarchical organisation of lines of reasoning leads to errors of the garden path type. several aspects of a possible model of the problem solving process in these tasks are briefly outlined. 
1. 	introduction 
　　　classes of problem solving tasks exist in which errors regularly occur  even among  human  expert problem solvers. the usually desirable strategy of beginning a task with f a i r l y global concepts and then working towards more specific levels of detail  1  frequently f a l l s when the structure of the problem is such that the i n i t i a l choice of global representation either does not apply or else f a l l s to emphasise the detail of knowledge required for a successful solution. some types of problem structures have the additional property that the dominant global strategy they e l i c i t appears to be correct when  in fact  it is not. problems of this type can be refered to as  garden path problems** since they induce performance that has the false appearance of success. 
　　　if garden path problems consisted merely of pussies or tasks in which tricks or caveats had to be discovered in order for a correct solution to be obtained  they might be interesting curiosities  but the attention given to them by the scientific community would be small. what makes these problems interesting  however  is the fact that they may exist in a wide variety of knowledge domains  eg.  1  . thus  they are of relevance to the study of both cognitive science and expert 
systems. 
this work was supported in part by the national science foundation under grant sed1. 
. thompson 
of minnesota 
	1. 	an example: 	milko 
　　　one famous example of a garden path problem is found in the domain of physics problem solving and is attributed to harvey cohen * in cohen's original problem  termed milko   a milk bottle is f i l l e d with a mixture of milk and cream and l e f t to stand. after a time the milk and cream separate and the cream rises to the top  without any change in volume . cohen asks simply whether the pressure at the base of the bottle is the same or different after separation of the two fluids. expert physicists  as well as more novice problem solvers  frequently f a l l to correctly solve the milko problem. 
　　　difficulties with the milko problem appear to be due primarily to improper choices of problem representation and level of detail in reasoning. pressure change is associated with change in either the height or amount of f l u i d above the base  and since neither of these change in the milko problem  there is presumably no change in the pressure  the garden path answer . what is not considered  however  is that the problem deals with two variables: non-homogeneous fluids and a container with slanted sides  the milk bottle . if one of these variables is present  by itself  there is no pressure change  pascal's principle . if both variables are present  however  then the pressure at the base of the container is less f o l lowing the separation of the two fluids. 
　　　understanding competence in garden path problems has implications for both cognitive modelling and error detection/recovery in formal problem solving systems. for example  if following the milko problem  individuals are given a second problem in which shape is made explicit by a drawing of a flask with slanted sides  the more expert individuals w i l l often recognise their error in the f i r s t problem and proceed to do both problems correctly. for some experts and most non-experts  however  the illusion that the pressure does not change is so great that a third problem is necessary - one in which explicit values are given for the variables of shape and f l u i d densities  so that exact calculations can be made. 
1 　　　detection of errors occurs when individuals in the second problem take explicit notice of the slanted sides of the container  or in the third problem are faced with calculations that show that the pressure in the separated state is less. recovery from error in either esse consists of choosing sn slternatlve problem representation  a more detailed line of reasoning  or both. when experts working on problems of this type see errors in their thinking  they not only recover end sdopt the correct approach to the lowedlate problea  but they also frequently generalise this recovery both backwards and forwards. not only is the previous error recognised  but additional problems of the same type are solved correctly. novices  by contrsst  do not generalize either backward or forward and w i l l frequently abandon a correct approach when given a new problea. 
1' 	a framework for modelling 
　　　observstions of human performance on error prone tasks provide important information for the development of formal models of problem solving. not only can the limits of competency be investigated  but it is often essier to probe for the underlying mechanisms when the problem solving process hss been perturbed by applying it to situations l i k e l y to result in incorrect decisions . studying the differences in performance between experts snd novices on the same class of tssks gives additional insight by allowing comparisons of problem solving using different knowledge bases. we heve been investigating the performance of human subjects on a variety of error prone problem solving tssks in physics with the sim of developing s computational model of this process. our preliminary reaults indicate that a hierarchical planning process  is employed in solving these problems. unlike previous work in this area  however  we find that there is no clear level of primitive actions at which the validity of a plan can be confirmed. 
1. hierarchical 	lines of 	reasoning 
　　　to solve all but the most t r i v i a l problems  individual actions must be organised in an e f f i cient way. for many teak domains  expert  human  problem solvers often structure their knowledge into  lines of reasoning  - partially or f u l l y ordered sequences of conceptual actions which are useful for specific types of problems  1 . significant efficiencies arise becsuse these sequences are predetermined and need not be rediscovered for each new variant of a problem. a general claas of teaks w i l l typically have many lines of reasoning associated with i t . these lines of reasoning can be characterised by the categories of knowledge used and by the level of detail with which that knowledge is represented. problem solving occurs by identifying an adequate line of reasoning  mapping the problem specification into the appropriate repreaentatlon  and then executing the implied inference steps. 
　　　if problem solving knowledge is structured in terms of levels of d e t a i l   then it is often possible to further reduce the set of actions which must be searched in order to find a solution. problems can be f i r s t solved at an abatract level of representation and thla solution can then uaed to constrain the p o s s i b i l i t i e s at more detailed levels  1j. the garden path errors in our example occur becsuse many problems sre approached using s hierarchy of lines of ressoning n which the more detailed units of knowlsdge sre often never exsnlned. such en organisation appears necesssry for solving complex problems with limited computational resources. efficiency is schleved by ter-
minating the sesrch through the hlersrchy whenever it sppesrs thst the  sbstrsct  solution is likely to be correct. thus  garden path errors represent examples of the failure of powerful heuristics thst  for the most psrt  grestly extend the effectiveness of s problem solving system. 
　　　a general class of tasks w i l l typically have many lines of ressonlng sssoclated with it. these lines of reasoning can be characterized by the categories of knowledge used and by the level of detail with which that knowledge is represented. for example  two major lines of reasoning are suggested by the milko problem. one is bssed upon pressure  forces  and cross sectional area and is formalised by p - f/a. the other is based upon pressure  density  gravity  and fluid height and is formalised by p - pgh. either line of reasoning lesds to failure when applied at the global level where concepts in the corresponding equations are instantiated in terms of the total fluid in the container. either line of reasoning can lead to success when applied at a more detailed level where concepts are specified in terms of 
decomposed problem states. 
1. control 	issues 
　　　the manner in which control is exercised within snd among lines of ressonlng is centrsl to the modeling of expert problem solving behavior. the desirable breadth of search has been a continuing topic among the a r t i f i c i a l intelligence community. nsrrowly structured sesrehes promise potential efficiency  but easily result in garden path errors. brosder search sacrifices  bestcase  efficiency for improvements in accuracy. our studies of human problem solving suggest that breadth of search is s function of both problem type and level of expertise . 1 structured problems or those for which limited knowledge  expertise  is available w i l l result in less effective heuristics for recognising the appropriate line of reasoning. this must be compenssted for by control functions thst lesd to greater breadth in the seerch process snd thus allow for the simultaneous considerstion of more p o s s i b i l i t i e s . 
	in human problem solving  differences 	appear 
in the ways in which experts snd novices implement lines of ressonlng. if a novice abandons a particular line of reasoning snd then returns to it iater in the problea solving process  the line of ressonlng is usually reinvestigated from the beginning. both the space ssvlngs snd time inefficiencies of clssslcsl bscktrsck programming sre present. few lntermedlete results need be remembered  but many sub-problems may- be re-eolved severel different times. experts  on the other hand  seem to u t i l i s e some sort of coroutine 

1 structure. lines of reasoning are reactivated essentially at the point at which they were suspended. this bay be possible because nore finely developed control heuristics result in consideration of far fewer possibilities  allowing a small set of partial results to be preserved. 
1. 	summary 
　　　garden path problems have been identified and studied in task domains as diverse as physics and medicine . such problems may be a natural consequence of hierarchically organised lines of reasoning created to support expert problem solving. we hope that our analysis can eventually lead to improved frameworks for knowledge engineering efforts as well as more complete models of cognitive behavior in problem solving. 
acknowledgments 
　　　robert sedlmeyer and richard keller provided valuable comments during the preparation of this paper. 
bibliography 
 1j j.h. larkln   teaching problem slovlng in physics: the psychological laboratory and the practical classroom ** in problem solving in education  d.t. tuma and f. relf  ede.  hillsdale  n.j.: lawrence erlbaum 
associatea  1. 
 1  r. pelerls  surprises in theoretical physics  princeton: princeton university press  1. 
 1 h.a. cohen   the art of snaring dragons   mit ai memo 1  1. 
 1  h.a. simon  the sciences of the a r t i f i c i a l   cambridge: mit press  1. 
e.d. sacerdotl  a structure for plans and behavior  new york: elsevier north-holland  
1. 
 1; e.a. felgenbaum   the art of a r t i f i c i a l intelligence: themes and case studies of 
knowledge engineering ** proc. fifth international joint conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. 1. 
 1  j.h. larkln  j. mcdermott  d.p. simon  and h.a. simon   expert and novice performance 
in solving physics problems *' science  v o l . 1  pp. 1  1. 
 p.e. johnson  a. barreto  f. hassebrock  j. holler  m. prletula  p. feltovlch  and d. 
swanson   expertise and error in diagnostic reasoning ** cognitive science  1  in press . 
1 
