 
　　　the paper discusses the design principles and current status of a natural language front end for access to data bases. this is based on the use  f i r s t   of a semantic ally-oriented question analyser exploiting general  language-wide semantic categories and patterns  rather than data basespecific ones; and  second  of a data base-oriented translation component for obtaining search specifications from the meaning representations for questions derived by the analyser. this approach is motivated by the desire to reduce the effort of providing data base-specific material for the front end  by the belief that a general analyser is well suited to the  casual  data base user  and by the assumption that the rich semantic apparatus used w i l l be both adequate as a means of analysis and appropriate as a tool for linking the characterisations of input and data language items. the paper describes this approach in more detail  with emphasis on the existing  tested  analyser. 
　　　we are trying to build a front end processor for natural-language access to data bases based on the principle that the semantics as well as syntax of the language analyser should be general and not data-specific. the function of the analyser is to build a meaning representation of an input question which is then converted to a formal data base search query  specification by a separate translation component. 
　　　the reason for adopting this approach is to reduce the analyser's dependence on the specific properties of the data base  and hence the cost of dealing with new data bases. the properties of the data base necessarily determine the form of search specifications; but the assumption is that the transition from text question to search query is most naturally and effectively achieved by the use of a meaning representation for the input text which is normalised  i.e. reduces input text variation  and which is wholly  or at least primarily  independent of the data base applica-
this research is supported by the science research council. 
t i o n . data base-specific information is embodied in translation rules linking the semantic 
categories and relations of the text meaning representation with those of the data base. 
　　　the claim underlying the approach is that the categories and relations of the general meaning representation language are on the one hand powerful enough to capture the sense of the input quest i o n   and on the other can be naturally linked with whatever categories and relations are used to characterise the data  both substantively and administratively. the project differs on the one hand from e.g. planes  and ladder  in not relying on data base semantics in the analyser  and on the other from e.g. phliqa1  1 in not deferring semantic processing until translation. the analyser is essentially a general semantic processor providing question representations for further  specialised interpretation in the data 
base context. 
　　　the project is based on an existing analyser developing ideas derived from wilks   1     the analyser exploits a semantic apparatus relying on an extensive system of semantic primitives and types of semantic pattern. parsing is under the control of an atn processor  combining the use of conventional syntax for identifying sentence constituents with semantic checks and structurebuilding actions. the output meaning representation consists of a case-labelled dependency structure with elements defined by semantic primitive formulas. 
more specifically  the analyser is designed to 
	identify 	noun 	phrases  	clauses  	and 	modifiers 
 especially prepositional phrases   using an orthodox grammar  currently of moderate extent. these sentence constituents are then interpreted and assembled  and the resulting structure labelled  by satisfying the semantic preferences expressed by the various types of pattern applied. the more important of these patterns are 
 'templates1  representing basic propositional message forms; 'pre plates' and 'preps pecs'  representing prepositional modifier patterns for free prepositional phrases and post verb constructions respectively; and  most important  'verb frames'  representing the case contexts of verbs. the slots in a l l of these patterns are defined by the semantic primitive characterisations required of the heads of individual word formulas  or  in 
1 

complex constructions  of the heads of their governing words. the essential idea behind preference semantics is that those matches which 
satisfy most requirements are selected  even if not a l l of the specified requirements oan be met. 
　　　the approach  following wilks  is specifically intended to deal with word sense selection  and with semantically-motivated modifier phrase attachment. however the system differs significantly from wilks* in the use of conventional syntax for constituent identification  in the adoption of the atm processing mechanism  and in the provision of a more f u l l y structured and explicitly labelled meaning representation. as an i l l u s t r a t i o n   given the question  what is the weight of the blue parts which are supplied by cure to london    the analyser outputs the representation of figure 1. in the figure ' b e 1 '   ' s u p p l y 1' etc. identify selected input word senses which are characterised by the immediately following semantlo primitive formulae  while *##agent' etc. are dependency structure case labels* this representation can be summarily glossed by saying we are querying the ttstate weight ...  of an ilagent many...inanimate things  which  ...be  in a flstate oolour ...  and are  ...given  by an magentc ...man  to a ftdestlnatlon ... point . 
　　　the system has already demonstrated i t s capacity to disambiguate lexically and structurally complex sentences  1. however for the purposes of data base access the analyser must be developed: thus mechanisms for treating quantiflcational structures w i l l have to be provided; it is also probable that as the meaning representations derived are not very radically normalised  further processing may be required prior to  rather than during  translation to bring different meaning representations which map onto the same search specification closer together. 
　　　the use of general semantic categories and patterns  rather than ones appropriate to particular universes of discourse  rests on what may be called an 'anti-frame'  or 'anti-script'  approach to text analysis  or at least on the view that while particular pragmatic knowledge may be relevant to language understanding  it does not play a dominant part in text processing. however rejecting universe of discourse-specific concepts and relationships makes the task of the analyser much more onerous than it is in most data base systems. the use of data base-specific categories and patterns in these systems  and of dictionaries limited to germane senses of lexical items  eliminates a good deal of interpretive e f f o r t . in this project lexical items  even if selected for their data base relevance  w i l l not be characterised in terms of their specific data-base readings and contexts. 
　　　unfortunately  this approach leads to acute d i f f i c u l t i e s with the noun-noun compounds which are 


1 

especially rampant in data base worlds  for example   apartment block building regulations  or  wing flap elevator control parts . since semantic interpretation and description is interleaved with syntactic processing in the operation of the analyser  if specialised pragmatic knowledge is required to handle such constructions  this would seem to imply that the attempt to build an analyser using only general  language-wide  knowledge is doomed to failure. however we make the distinction between basing the analyser primarily and explicitly on data-base specific semantics  and basing it on general semantics with provision for the invocation of supporting particular knowledge. the project is essentially an experiment designed to show whether this distinction can be maintained. thus the intention is that the relevant specific knowledge  in the form in which it is required for the translation component  should also be available for use  in a controlled and sufficiently universal fashion  by the analyser. 
　　　for i n i t i a l tests a relational data base w i l l be used  with search specifications in relational calculus or algebra form. it is not clear whether it will be possible or appropriate to treat the translation component just as a set of production rules mapping meaning representation structures into search specifications  in the style of lunar  or  more elaborately  as a set of procedures exploiting an enriched data base characterisation in e.g. the form of a semantic network. in either 
case  however  the assumption is that it w i l l be possible to link the language of the input questions with that of the data base by a common characterisation of concepts and relationships in terms of the semantic primitives so far used in dealing with text inputs. 
　　　for example  if we hypothesise a data base dealing  in familiar style  with suppliers and parts  we will have formulas for words occurring in questions like  part  or  supplier   and meaning representations for phrases  like  blue parts   cf figure 1 . the data base words used in the data description  i.e. the data base entity  attribute and relation type names  w i l l be similarly characterised  and this common method of meaning characterisation should in principle permit the translation component to connect the elements of the input question and the search query. of course it cannot be assumed that input expressions corresponding to data base values can be characterised in advance: this is conspicuously a problem with proper names but can occur with other 
words. the oonnection here between input and data base has to be via common components of input word representations  which should serve to identify appropriate search areas in the data base. thus the representation for  blue  would overlap with that for colour via such a common sub-formula as   man subjmsee sense  . the semantic primitives of the question meaning representation  and especially the case labels  should similarly promote the translation of the question structure into an appropriate search query form. thus  to take a very simple example  
     1agent ...thing   ...be  f#state ...kind  w i l l map into a data language expression of the form entity have attribute. for more complex questions the dependency structure of the meaning representation should be easier to manipulate to derive the search query structure than the input text surface syntax. work recently began on developing a translator along these lines. 
