 
     this paper explores the problem of judging whether or not an english sentence could correspond to a real world situation or event which is is literally  physically plausible  and the related problem of representing the different possible physical situations. the judgement of plausibility can be made at a high level by checking semantic marker restrictions on verb case frame constituents. often  however  plausibility judgement can only be based on the results of an attempt to construct  imagine  a scene that corresponds to the sentence  and which does not violate  common sense   i.e. relevant physical laws and expected  stereotyped behavior . methods are presented for constructing representations for different scenes which could correspond to a sentence. these methods incorporate  1    subscripts   sequences of scenes which comprise an event  with attached preconditions and postconditions  to express different verb senses   1  object representations which express properties such as shape  size  weight  strength  and behavior under common conditions;  1  physical laws  encoded as constraints on behavior;  1  representation of context; and  1  robot problem solving-like methods to f i t all this material together. 
1. introduction 
     it is clear that humans understand language in far greater detail than do any programs written to date; people can make fine distinctions based on apparently peripheral properties of objects or nuances of behavior  and can draw upon a vast number of possible inferences about any given sentence or situation. this paper examines the problem of adding greater detail to the internal representations and reasoning methods for a natural language understanding program which works in the domain of physical scenes and events. i show how we can begin to account for the fine-grained but important distinctions introduced by the use of alternative verbs  e.g. hit vs. graze vs. strike vs. smash  and adverbial modifiers  e.g. hit vs. hit hard vs. almost hit vs. hit squarely . 
     understanding language involves  at least  the following processes: 
      1  judging the plausibility of the language; various possible readings of a sentence or text may have to be compared for relative plausibility  both on the 
basis of the inherent content of the language in isolation  and within the context where the* language is 
encountered; 
      1  representing meaning; a suitable representation of the meaning of the language  in context  must be constructed. the representation should be unambiguous  and should have anaphora and ellipsis resolved. representations should be capable of distinguishing readings that people regard as different; they should allow one to make natural inferences about the the events or scenes described; and similar meanings should have similar representations; 
　　　  1  retrieving information from and/or making modifications and additions to relevant memory; 
      1  taking action if appropriate; action can be physical  linguistic  e.g. performing a speech act   or 
mental  e.g. 	planning a strategy . 
these actions should not necessarily be done in any particular sequence. for example  it may be that one has to find a representation from memory before one can judge its plausibility. 
1 representing spatial meaning in ehglish 
     ehglish is a particularly poor language on which to bise a study of language and perception. english spatial locative prepositions  on  in  at  etc.  are ambiguous and irregular  so ehglish descriptions of the perceptual world which use them are in general highly ambiguous. we often need to have a great deal of a priori knowledge in order to understand the idiomatic meanings which result when ehglish locative prepositions are used with particular objects. 
　　　for example  to understand  the chair is at the desk   one must know that the ordinary relationship between desks and chairs is one where the chair faces the desk  and is partially beneath i t ; if a chair is facing away from the desk  or is upside down  or is on top of the desk  it cannot be said to be  at the desk . phrases such as  at the corner    at the store    at the door   and so on  also require idiosyncratic analyses  and thus their meanings must be stored as separate lexical items. the same is true for other ehglish spatial locative prepositions  see 1 1  . 
　　　ehglish verbs present similar problems. take for instance  the verb  cut .  cut  can take on a wide variety of spatial/temporal meanings  which depend upon the nature of its object and instrument. compare for example  the images and inferences evoked by  cut the board with a hand saw    cut my finger on broken glass    cut through the mountain with bulldozers    cut the paper with a scissors    cut the steel with a torch    cut the corn with a combine   and so on. a system must be able to judge that it is possible but peculiar to cut a grape with a jigsaw  that it is impossible to cut a diamond with a plastic knife. although there seem to be shared aspects of meaning  each verb-object-instrument combination must have separate and extensive meaning representation scenarios. 

 i'nis work is supported by the office of naval research under contract nooo1-c-o1. 
1 

　　　the c r i t i c a l problem we face is t h i s : what is an appropriate way to represent various possible meaning of language describing spatial relationships and physical events  there seem to be four main p o s s i b i l i t i e s : 
 1   case frame representation. 
　　　 1  sentences of spatial primitives using either predicate calculus  as in  1 and 1    or a conceptual dependency- or s c r i p t - l i k a form. 
　　　 1  schematic modeling  using data structures to directly represent qualitative spatial knowledge in 1-d diagrams  1 1 1 ; 
　　　 1  direct geometric modeling  using 1-d coordinate systems and specification of locations  velocities and directions  1 1j; 
it seems clear that a l l flour types of representation are important  and that they stand in a hierarchical relationship with each other: alternative  1  is the  deepest   i.e. closest to the representations of high-level perception  alternatives  1  and  1  are progressively more abstract  and  1   is closest to a surface linguistic representation. alternatives   l   and  1  are attractive options  since their representations are bounded  linear forms  whereas  1  and  1  require the ievelopment of novel representation schemes. 
1. 	biting dachshunds 
 let us look in some detail at the way sentence  1  my dachshund b i t our mailman on the ear. 
would be processed by a program which generates a model of the physical world correlates of the sentence*. as a general strategy  i assume that the program should start i t s processing at the most abstract level  and only go to 
deeper levels of simulation if necessary. 
　　　 step 1  the f i r s t things to check are the case frame for the verb  bite  and any possible semantic interpretation patterns which match the words of the sentence. the case frame for b i t e : 
     bite  animate-entity physical-object  is satisfied with the arguments  dachshund  and  mailman's 
ear   respectively. 	general world knowledge** e.g. 
 goal dog  bite dog physical-object  often  
 goal dog  bite dog man  sometimes  
      avoid man  bite dog man  usually  would also match the given sentence  so the general p l a u s i b i l i t y of the sentence would be immediately established  and i n i t i a l goals for the man and dog would be hypothesized. in a quick reading or shallow understanding mode  processing might terminate here. similarly  if general arguments were the only ones given in the sentence  as i n : 
 s1  the dog b i t the man. 
then there would be no reason for further processing  since the case frame for this sentence already matches exactly one of the semantic patterns known to the system. 
　　　 step 1  the mention of  dachshund  and  mailman  cause the ' i n s t a n t i a t i o n ' of internal data structures  consisting of default postures and settings for both the 
'programs have not yet been written to handle these examples. i believe  though  that there w i l l be no insurmountable obstacles to writing such programs. 
**this knowledge may be listed e x p l i c i t l y   deduced from general facts  or deduced from the analysis of scripts for typical actions. 
dog and mailman. the mailman is instantiated on 1 residential sidewalk  since this is a strongly coupled default  and the dog is put in the same scene with the mailman  since dog is weakly coupled to a number of default locations  yard  indoors  pet store  kennel  e t c .   . the dog and mailman are both assumed to be standing. the scene is thus as shown in figure 1. the structures for each scene entity actually represent only the coordinates of i t s enclosing parallelipiped  along with a stick figure skeleton to which named parts can be attached. the mailman's enclosing volume is the standard one for adult males  and the dachshund's is found by scaling the dimensions of the dog enclosing volume appropriately.  midget  or  puppy  would select different enclosing volumes  as would e x p l i c i t mention of height  a1 in  the six-foot mailman  . 

	figure 1. 	default instantiation for  1 . 
　　　 step 1  the next step is to attempt to  run   interpretively evaluate  the definition of   b i t e   . this d e f i n i t i o n is shown p i c t o r i a l l y in figure 1a  and part of 
the d e f i n i t i o n in assertion form is shown in figure 1b. 

1 

	bite  animate-entity 	physical-object  
preconditions 	action 1 action 1 1:  deformable p  	1:  closing m  
1:  and  mouth m  
 part-of a m   
1:  partially-around m p  
1:  open m  1:  contact m p  
1:  complete bite  action 1 
 deformed p  
 not  closing m   
 connected m p  
 apply-force-on m 
 may-not-be  open postconditions 
1:  may-not-be 
 partially-around m p  
1:  open m  
1:  may-be  damaged p   
1:  time bite  aprx 1 sec   	figure 1b. 	assertions for definition of  bite . 
the definition includes preconditions  postconditions  and a body. the only postcondition we need for this example is bite-postc-1   which states that there is  probable  
damage to the thing bitten. the preconditions are of two kinds:  static preconditions  on the nature of the individual entities involved  analogous to semantic marker restrictions  and  dynamic preconditions  on the relations between the individual entities. in this case the static preconditions are bite-prec-1  which states that the object bitten must be delbmable  or else we would say  bite down on  instead of  bite i  and bite-prec-1  which states that the thing that bites must be something that can close in the manner of a hinge  preferably a mouth of an animal or person*. the single dynamic precondition is bite-prec-1 which states that the thing that bites must partially surround the object bitten  if it totally surrounded the object  we would probably use  chew on rather than  bite  . 
	checking preconditions  we see that bite-prec-1 	and 
bite-prec-1 are satisfied  since ears are deformable  and the dachshund has a mouth**. precondition bite-pc-1 cannot be directly derived from general knowledge  however  so  bite  tries to make it come true. 
      step 1  to this end  the program would attempt to plan a sequence of steps which could simulate reaching the goal: 
 be  partially-around dachshund's-mouth 
mailman's-ear   . 
     to accomplish this goal  new preconditions must be satisfied. basically they are partially-around-prec-1   that the mouth be open  and partially-around-prec t; that the location of the object be located between the ends of the  jaws  of the mouth. partially-around-prec-1 is trivially satisfied  since we assume that opening a mouth is something that agents can always do unless explicit conditions have been mentioned which preclude this action. however problems arise in trying to satisfy precondition 
partially-around-prec-1  	since 	the 	dachshund's mouth is 
 the meaning of  bite  corresponding to the bite of a bee or mosquito would have a different representation. 
**these facts could be stored with the concepts of  ear  and  dachshund  or  more likely  with their ancestor concepts in a  structured inheritance network   e.g.  1|  - i.e. these facts can be derived automatically from more general facts  in this case  that the parts of the body of a creature  except bones and teeth  are deformable; likewise all animals have mouths. 
not around the mailman's ear in the default situation instantiation  see figure 1 . 
      step 1.1  to achieve partially-around-prec-1  one can either bring the mouth to the ear  or the ear to the mouth. case grammar analysis has already identified the dachshund as the agent  so the preferred method is to bring the mouth to the ear. 
 step 1.1  the first goal tried is thus: 
 reach dachshund's-mouth mailman's-ear  
through match of general patterns for accomplishing reach  at least four possible subgoals can be suggested: 
	 reach-by-body-posture   	 jump-up- to   
 climb-up-using physical-object   and  make someone  move someone physical-object  . the library of dog body positions should be checked first***. 
     none of these postures allows the mouth to be around the ear  so jump-up-to is made the subgoal  and dynamic 
behavior of the dog checked. using high level knowledge of animals' abilities attached to jump-up-to  for instance that animals can typically jump no higher than twice their longest dimension  it can be deduced that the dachshund could not j mp high enough either. 
     the next thing to try is  climb-up-using physical-object . methods attached to this goal attempt to use any objects that are known to be around in order to let the dachshund climb up to the mailman's ear. however  since no objects have been mentioned explicitly  and no 
default objects  e.g. mailbag  uniform  dog collar  are good for climbing on  this possibility fails also. 
     the last possibility is to induce someone to lower the ear so that the dachshund can reach i t . the only other possible agent is the mailman  and dogs can send only a very limited repertoire of messages. a dog might make sounds to induce the mailman to pet i t   but other options  e.g. convince  bargain  etc. are only available to people. other messages a dog can send  such as  threaten   would probably lead the mailman to flee rather than to come closer. 
      step 1.1  having failed at getting the dachshund reach the mailman's ear  the program would then check to see if the mailman's ear might be gotten to the dog. here too there are two main possibilities: the mailman may have put his ear within range of the dog's mouth intentionally or unintentionally. having earlier noted the general fact: 
　　 goal man  avoid  bite dog man    we can conclude that the goal 
　　 goal mailman  bite dachshund mailman's-ear   has a low probability of being true  and we can thus preclude the possibility that the mailman might intentionally put his ear within the dachshund's range for the purpose of having it bitten. 
     another possibility is that the mailman got bitten unintentionally; this could happen if the mailman typically assumed postures that would allow the dachshund to reach him. to check out this possibility  the script for  mailman  must be consulted. no mention of postures other than standing  walking  getting mail out of a mailbag  and putting mail in boxes are to be found in the script  so there is no reason to believe that a mailman would get to where a dachshund could reach him unintentionally either. 
   note that we could also find range of body positions possible for a dog by simulating the movements of its joints. however  i do not believe that people behave this way  and for a program  it is a great deal easier to simply store common postures  and posture sequences  directly. 
1 

     the overall conclusion of the program would thus be that while it is plausible that a dog could bite a man  the program cannot imagine how a dachshund could hive bitten a mailman's ear. how can we avoid pssible explanations based on the observations that people do occasionally squat or lie down  making them accessible to bites by small dogs  during informal experiments  people have suggested only possible explanations that tie in somehow with the particulars of mailmen and dachshunds; they do not suggest explanations such as  the mailman was a friend of the owner of the dog and was lying down on the owner's sofa when bitten . this seems consistent with a policy of omitting concepts that do not occur in the sentence explicitly  e.g. sofa  owner of dog  friendship  unless they can be assumed as part of a relevant script  mailbag  letter  dog collar  mailbox  and so on could thus be used as part of an explanation . knowledge about apparently peripheral items  e.g. the likelihood that the mailman is a friend of the dog's owner  is not necessarily irrelevant  and may in fact be used explicitly by people in reasoning about event plausibility. i see no reason to 
believe that a system could understand natural language in any epistemologically non-trivial sense without having available a great deal of information  see also  . 
     if forced to produce a plausible explanation  the program should be able to select ways of getting the dog's 
mouth to the mailman's ear which were not precluded  but for which there was no support  e.g. the mailman may have squatted for some reason  there might have been an object that the dachshund could climb up on  the mailman might 
have been very short  etc. . 
1. 	slightly 	different 	sentences  	radically 	different processing 
     let us now look at the ways in which the processing of similar sentences would differ from the processing of 
 1 . 
let us start with 
 1  my dachshund bit our mailman. 
as in the case of  s1   the dog bit the man   mentioned earlier in section 1   this sentence would be processed only to the case frame level. if pressed  of course  a system could imagine a scene to simulate this sentence  e.g. the dachshund biting the mailman on the leg. 
     consider next  s1    my doberman bit our mailman on the ear . the first step in processing would be exactly the same as that for  1   i.e. the general plausibility of dogs biting people would be noted along with the fact tht people usually avoid being bitten. the second step 
would likewise be similar  but in this case the size of the dog would be much larger. in step 1  however  the processing would follow a very different line. in step 1.1   reach doberman's-mouth mailman's-ear  would succeed via reach-through-body-posture  since the pre-stored postures of a dog would allow the mouth to be at the height of the ear when scaled appropriately for a 
doberman. 
     the program would then continue the running of the event simulation fbr bite  see figure 1   simulating in turn the closing of the mouth on the ear  the contact 
between the mouth and ear  the deformation of the ear with probable damage  and the opening of the doberman's mouth again. finally  through knowledge that only a few body postures are stable  i.e. can be held for a long time   the program would simulate the return of the doberman from its standing-on-two-legs posture to a 
standing-on-four-legs posture. in this case  then  nothing remains to be explained  the program could judge that the event described in the sentence was plausible  and the simulated subevents could become part of its memory. 
     consider now  1    my dachshund bit our gardener on the ear . the processing of  1  would be different from any of the cases above; it would parallel the processing of  1  until the point where the mailman script is checked to see what body postures are ordinarily assumed by mailmen in the course of their work. the script for a gardener involves getting into a kneeling or sitting position frequently  so there would be a ready explanation for how the person's ear could have gotten in range of the dachshund's mouth. the processing could then continue as in the case of  1  to completion of the biting action and return of the dog to a standing position on the ground. 
     the processing of  1    my dachshund almost bit our mailman   is especially interesting. here we have to decide what  almost  could mean. referring to the definition fbr  bite  shown in figure 1  we can see that the snapshot frame in which the teeth make contact with the object is marked  complete   meaning that if this snapshot portion ever occurs  then the action of biting will have been completed  regardless of exactly what course the action takes afterwards. on the other hand  until the action in this snapshot actually occurs  no biting can be said to have taken place. with this knowledge available  we are now in a position to understand  1 . 
     basically  we know that at least some of the preconditions for bite must have been satisfied  or else  almost bite  would not be an appropriate phrase to use to describe the event  this idea is related to grice's maxims for communication  . to process this sentence the way a person would  we would have to be able to generate the range of types of events that could qualify as  almost bite ; some would be easy  e.g. cases where the dog closed his mouth but failed to contact the mailman because either he or the dog moved  or where the dog opened his mouth near the mailman s body but never closed it on him. generating other cases would require special knowledge of how dogs bite  as opposed to the knowledge of biting in general  which we have been using so far. special knowledge of dogs could allow us to judge that a threat  such as baring the fangs and/or growling  might qualify as  almost biting . if we knew a great deal about the particular dog referred to in the sentence  we might envision arbitrary behavior that had in the past preceded biting incidents  e.g. the dog might always jerk its head rapidly to the left  or bark twice just before biting someone . 
     if the sentence had been  s1   my dachshund tried to bite our mailman   then the envisioned possibilities would be similar to those generated for  s1   although we would strongly prefer that all the preconditions of bite be satisfied  along with all actions up to the snapshot frame 
marked  complete ; idiosyncratic or ordinary threat signals would not really be appropriately described as  try to bite . 
     finally for  1    my dachshund bit our mailman hard   we would have to find a step where there was an application of force  in this case step action} of  bite   see figure 1 . the representation of this portion of the subscript would then be simply modified  and the additional observation made that biting hard ==  more 
deformation  probably  ==  more damage  probably . 
1 
1. 	how much knowledge is necessary to do these examples  	1 subscripts      a lot  though not an impossibly large amount. let us here take stock of the kinds of different knowledge necessary for processing the sentences above  and also look at how a system could know that it should retrieve this particular taiowledge at the right times. 
      l   case frames. garden variety case frames would suffice here  retrieved as dictionary entries; the only even mildly nonstandard feature i envision here would be to use structured inheritance for case frames  as well as most other types of information  so that  for example  verbs that describe events that have duration would have ancestors that elaborated on the use of time expressions for verbs with duration  as distinct from verbs describing events which occur at a point in time such as leave or hit  or verbs which describe states rather than events . 
      1  semantic patterns. as i envision these  they would be similar in many ways to the patterns which form the heart of parry  and also similar to the patterns used by wilks in his preference semantics . many of these patterns would be stored directly  e.g.  avoid animate-entity pain usually   and others would have to be inferred  e.g.  avoid man  bite dog man  usually  . generally these patterns would describe goals  beliefs  and combinations of concepts that would usually co-occur with a verb. i believe that it will prove worthwhile to tag these patterns with probability information of a rather broad type  always  usually  often  sometimes  rarely  never . the system would use this information in the manner of expert systems . generally the system would begin with patterns involving as many of the entities in the sentence as possible  and attempt to find patterns that would express the goals and/or beliefs of each of the participants. 
      1  spatial descriptions. each physical object known to the system should have a spatial description  which 
would allow the system to judge for each object its size  weight  stable postures or orientations  positions of parts within an enclosing volume for the object  dynamic behavior  how fast the object can move  what sequences of positions are possible   etc. these descriptions should be hierarchical  so that  for example   jaw  would have its own spatial description which is merely pointed to by the descriptions of entities which have jaws  along with appropriate scaling information. again here  structured inheritance would be useful to store information about the spatial world efficiently. 
      1   subscripts  for verbs. in addition to case frames  verbs would also have much more spacific information about the time sequence of subparts of the action described by the verb  including a set of preconditions  a body of actions  and a set of postconditions. the effects of the action could be found either in the general semantic patterns  item  1  above  or in the subscript corresponding to a given verb sense  or both places. 
      1  scripts. these serve to connect goals with methods for achieving them. in addition  scripts may be used to describe typical or stereotyped sequences of events  e.g. earthquakes cause structural damage to buildings  may lead to tidal waves  aftershocks  rescue of victims  repair of damage  etc. . the scripts may in turn include subscripts. in general each goal may refer to a number of scripts  see  . 
     subscripts are at the heart of the work i am describing here. they serve as a bridge between the case frames  selection restrictions  etc. on one hand  and spatial descriptions on the other. they are important for several reasons: 
      1   adverbial modifier representation. subscripts provide a framework in which adverbial modification has a natural representation. to take some specific examples  consider  almost ; as suggested in the example of handling of  1  verbs capable of being meaningfully modified by almost  e.g. hit  break  reach  finish  buy  etc.  each have a step in the body of their associated subscript which  if not completed  allows the action up until that step to be described as  almost having happened   whereas if that step does occur   almost  can no longer be used to refer to the action. adverbs such as hard  gentle  soft  violently  etc. refer specifically to subscript steps that involve application of force  transfer of momentum  or related concepts. adverbs such 
as fast  slow  smoothly  abruptly  suddenly  etc. refer to subscripts involving motion  and require that the system have a notion of  normal  duration or speed of motion in order to interpret them properly. other modifiers such as painfully  successfully  happily  etc. emphacize effects; s t i l l others  such as gently  quietly  rudely  cleverly  etc. require special knowledge of 
behavior that is beyond the scope of ray present work. 
      1 verb sense representation. subscripts permit easy distinctions between verb senses  even where the case frame constituents do not allow for any distinctions. thus  for example  fly  meaning  go by plane   can be easily distinguished from fly  meaning  pilot a plane    because the subscripts attached to each sense represent very different sequences of actions. the detail in subscripts  when compared with the current context  adds a great eal of information useful for selecting appropriate word senses. 
      1  common sense. subscripts provide ways of organizing pointers to relevant real world physical forces  behaviors  constraints and properties  which make it possible to bring general knowledge to bear on language 
understanding. 
	1. 	related ai work 
     the two questions of plausibility and representation have not usually been linked. case frames and semantic markers have been used to judge plausibility  as have wilks*  preference semantics  structures  but neither is a serious knowledge representation candidate. knowledge representation schemes  kl-one  netl  sneps  
krl  etc.  have not been much used to judge plausibility - rather  they have been used for storing information which is fed to them by other programs. a partial exception is the work of schank et al  on scripts as well as primitives and structures of conceptual dependency  which try to combine both plausibility and representation  although at a much more abstract level than the spatial models being proposed here. the representation of adverbial modifiers is also central here. relatively l i t t l e work has been done on this topic. overall  however  hcdermott's work  both on toplb  and the more recent work on spatial inferences   seems to me to be 
most similar to what is suggested here. other clear intellectual predecessors are   .   . and . 
1 

1. 	promising directions 
     a key problem is the development of an adequate s*t of spatial primitives. english prepositions are inadequate  so where can we look for guidance  we have been studying non-indo-european languages  at least some of which  e.g. jinghpaw  a tibeto-burmese language  and tarascan  a native american language  are far more regular and precise than english in their expression of spatial and temporal ;meaning. jinghpaw  for example  has some fifty different verbs for describing cutting actions  compare with english examples above   and a like number for describing different finger positions and motions. more will be reported on this study in the near future. 
     suggestive and very interesting material on grammatical clues for spatial and temporal information is found in talmy  and fillmore   and on building and switching contexts in chafe . i also intent to integrate my work on object shape description . 
references 
in the 