 	all of 	these generalizations were made by a 
	computer 	program  	ipp 	 the 	integrated 	partial 
true 	understanding 	of 	natural 	language 	text 	parser   a complete understanding system that reads 
requires the inclusion of generalization and long-	and remembers stories from newspapers and the upi 
term 	memory. 	this 	paper 	describes 	the 	news wire. the generalizations made  besides being 
generalization   process and! memory used 	in the 	interesting observations about the world  provide 
integrated partial parser  ipp   a computer program 	useful 	information 	for 	text processing and 	the 
that reads and remembers news stories. 	the need 	organizing memory of events. 	indeed  to have a 
for generalization and generalization-based memory 	computer system that understands in as powerful 
as 	an 	integral 	part 	of 	understanding 	natural 	fashion and over as wide a range of texts as do 
language text is illustrated with examples from 	people it is necessary for the system to have a 
ipp. 	in addition  the nature of generalization is 	dynamic  generalization-based memory that can be 
discussed. 	accessed during understanding* 

1. introduction 
　a computer system designed to read and remember natural language text must do more than just determine the meaning of each separate piece of text. it must also try and understand the  big picture  by comparing separate episodes. this requires making generalisations based upon the texts read that represent the general course of 
events in the world. 
　for example  proper understanding of international terrorisn requires generalizations 
such as those in figure 1  
figure 1: 	typical generalizations about the world 
- terrorist attacks in northern ireland are carried out by members of the irish republican army. 
- no one is ever hurt by bombings in el salvador. 
- the victims of kidnappings in italy are usually businessmen. 
- takeovers in latin america are usually carried out by left-wing groups. 
the research described here was carried out at yale 
university 	and 	was 	supported 	in 	part 	by 	the 
advanced research projects agency of the department of defense and monitored by the office of naval research under contract n1-c-1. 
　further details of the topics discussed here  including the specifics of the generalization process and an extensive discussion of the memorybased parsing process developed for ipp can be found in    
1. generalization as part of understanding 
　as an illustration of the role of generalization in understanding  consider stories si and s1. 
　 note: all the stories used as examples in this paper are actual  unedited news stories. ipp does not require any special preparation of the stories that it reads.  
1 - boston globe  1 february 1  italy 
three gunmen kidnapped a 1 year-old retired industrialist yesterday outside his house near this north italian town  police said. 
1 - new york times  1 april 1  italy 
a building contractor kidnapped here on jan. 
1 was released last night after payment of an undisclosed ransom  the police said. 
　after reading these two stories  we know more that just the independent meanings of the stories. even assuming no prior knowledge of terrorism in 
italy  it is possible to make some tentative conclusions about the nature of kidnapping in that country. in particular  the stories lead to the plausible conclusion that businessmen are common targets for italian kidnappers. generalizations of this sort are a basic part of understanding. 
1 

　conclusions made so quickly are hardly sure things. however  such hypotheses allow the best information currently available to be used for future understanding and memory organization. as long as it is possible to later disconfirm these generalizations  a process discussed in    then this is an effective way to make use of all existing information. 
　in order to generalize from a story  it must be possible to find similar examples already in memory. ifp allows the retrieval of such examples by organizing memories in terms of generalizations. 
　continuing with the previous example  suppose s1  which appeared after si and s1  is now read. 
s1 - new vbrk times  1 june 1  italy 
kidnappers released an italian shoe manufacturer here today after payment of an undisclosed ransom  the police said. 
　in order to fully understand this story  it is necessary to recall the previous two stories and the generalization made from i t . in effect  we understand this story as being an instance of the existing generalization. 
　the use of generalizations shown here is a very important one - they allow a reader  human or computer  to explain events in terms of existing generalizations  rather than trying to explain each new event from scratch. 
　sometimes generalizations must be used more explicitly in understanding. fbr instance  consider the way that ipp processed story s1  after it had generalized that bombings in spain are usually carried out by basques  basque-gen   as shown by the computer output in figure 1. 
	figure 1: 	ipp inferring default role features 
　in this example  ipp recognizes that s1 is an instance of the generalization basque-gen and uses that generalization to supply default characteristics of the terrorists. in particular  ipp assumes  corresponding with the generalization  that the terrorists are basque separatists. supplying information of this sort is an important use of generalizations  without which we would be required to initially provide an text processing system with every piece of information it would ever need for understanding. in this example/ the identity of terrorists in spain would have to be directly provided ipp if it could not learn that 
information itself. 
1. generalization and memory 
　new events are often interpreted during understanding in terms of known stereotypical situations. fbr reasons of economy of storage and efficiency in processing  it is advantageous to record events in memory in terms of these standard situations. in order for a computer program such as ipp to begin to process text  it must begin with some knowledge of such situations  before it can 
begin to generalize further. 
　there are two types of structures that capture different forms of regularity initially provided to ipp - simple memory organization packets  s-mops  that describe causal stereotypes such as extortions and attacks  and action uhits  aus  that represent concrete events  such as shootings  people being wounded  and hostages being released. aus serve as modular units in the makeup of s-mops. i will not give a detailed description of s-mops or aus in this paper  although they must be well specified  as is done in . the idea of memory organization packets was first introduced by schank in    
　the stereotypical patterns of events captured by ipp's initial s-mops are not the only patterns that exist. they represent the basic information needed to understand stories. further patterns are recognized in the form of generalizations of the sort shown earlier. 
　generalized patterns serve as excellent organizers for memories of actual events  since they require only the explicit recording of unusual details  e.g. those not captured by a generalization  of a story. furthermore  the generalizations made provide an adequate number of different points around which to organize memory. 
　the combination of a generalization and the events it organizes is known as a specialized mop  or spec-mop. as events are added to an s-mop or spec-mop  ipp is usually able to make generalizations that allow the memories of events to be spread among several spec-mops. this enables events to be stored in a distinctive  easy to retrieve fashion. 
s-mops and spec-mops are fundamentally similar 
1 

structures. presumably s-mops could be created from spec-mops that are used quite frequently. both s-mops and spec-mops describe abstract situations. both structures are used to organize memories of events and more specific spec-mops  as well as being used to make predictions for use in understanding. s-mops simply provide that information needed to initially understand stories. 
　ipp's memory  then  is a set of s-mops  each pointing to a net of spec-mops. associated with each spec-mop are events  in terms of the alls and role fillers that make them up  indexed by the ways in which they differ from that spec-mop. this index uses a discrimination net that allows easy retrieval of those events similar to a new event that might be explained by the same spec-mop. 
　figure 1 provides a concrete example of ipp's memory structure. it shows one small piece of memory  two spec-mops  after approximately 1 stories had been read and remembered. 

　the section of memory in figure 1 contains two spec-mops  given names for purposes of this discussion  that describe situations concerning extortion. the first spec-mop in figure 1  kidnapgen  describes the kidnapping of establishment males. several events are shown indexed under i t   
 1  a kidnapping by palestinians in turkey  and 
 1   a kidnapping of police by inmates in the united states. 
　since each unique feature of an event is used to index it under kidnap-gen  whenever this spec-mop has been determined to be relevant to a situation it is a simple matter to find events with features we are concerned about. 
　a similar scheme is used to index spec-mops under s-mops and other more general spec-mops. 
basically  all the features of the spec-mop are used as indices pointing from the higher node to the spec-mop. again  this indexing simplifies the process of finding the spec-mop at the times it is relevant. 
such indexing of spec-mops is shown in figure 1. 
kidnap-gen turns out to be a widely applicable spec-mop  and s t i l l more specific spec-mops are quickly created  including one shown in figure 1. once ipp encounters several examples of businessmen being kidnapped in italy  it concludes that this  too  is a generalizable situation. this decision results in the creation of a new spec-mop  businessman-gen  that is also used to organize memories of events  including  1     
　the indexing of spec-mops under s-mops and events under spec-mops makes it easy to find similar events as a new story is being read. by looking at the index for spec-mops under the relevant s-mop  it is possible to find generalizations that share features with an incoming story. after features have been extracted from a story  ipp uses the index for spec-mops under an identified s-mop to fetch any spec-mops with the same features as the 
story. 
　once ipp has found the best available spec-mops  it can then find events that differ from those 
spec-mops in the same ways the new story does. this time the event index is used to find other instances with some of the same non-stereotypical features  
1. the range of generalization 
　the inclusion of generalization in ipp lead to considerable insight about the kinds of generalizations that are useful to make as part of the understanding process. these fall into two basic classes - factual generalizations that can be made directly from information in texts or require only simple inferences and abstract generalizations that require processing of input texts beyond the initial identification of the events described. factual generalizations are fully implemented in the ipp as are some aspects of abstract generalization. 
1. tactual generalization 
　the generalizations made by ipp are models of specific situations that are useful in future understanding. ipp concentrates on noting the common factors in similar situations. in this section i will look at the nature of factual generalization  and the basic knowledge needed to make them. 
1 　a typical factual generalization can be made from s1 and s1. ira-gen  paraphrased below  is the generalization made by ipp from these two stories. 
1 - boston globe  	1 april 	1  	northern 
ireland 
irish republican army guerrillas ambushed a military patrol in west belfast yesterday killing one british soldier and badly wounding another army headquarters reported. 
1 - new york times  1 august 1  ehgland 
earl mountbatten of burma one of the heroes of modern british history was killed today when his fishing boat was blown up in the sea  apparently by terrorists of the irish 
republican army. 
ira-gen: the ira is a common actor of terrorist attacks against the british. 
in each of these stories about attacks in great 
britain  the terrorists involved belonged to the 
irish republican army. as it indexes the two stories in memory  ipp notices that they share a number of features. from this it makes the generalization that the ira is normally associated with terrorist attacks against british citizens. 
　it is important to realize that generalizations first arise from noting similarities in events  and may not be further analyzed. lb use another terrorism example  it is quite possible to recognise that hijackings in lebanon are usually the work of shiite moslems  while knowing very l i t t l e about shiite moslems. 
　the factual generalizations that ipp makes tend to be observations of properties of standard role fillers in given situations and normal action units  concrete events  for situations. knowing detailed characteristics of potential role fillers assists in identifying actual role fillers in stories  and can supply defaults  as in figure 1. standard action uhits can supply defaults in situations in which events that take place are only partially specified. 
only a limited amount of knowledge in addition to 
s-mops and action units is needed to understand a sizable number of stories and begin begin to make generalizations. the properties about people  organizations  objects and countries that are 
initially provided ipp are shown in figure 1. 
	figure 1: 	necessary properties in memory 
age area auto bodypart gender important 
minority nationality politics religion 
role status terrorist-group 
　some of the information initially provided ipp to aid it in understanding later proved to be learnable from stories. for instance  the property terrorist-group names the default terrorist organization associated with a given country. vtien ipp was first developed  it was provided with the knowledge that the ira normally carries out attacks in northern ireland  the red brigades in italy and 
so forth. 
　however  it was later discovered that even if this information was deleted from ipp's initial store of knowledge  it would make similar generalizations itself. furthermore  the knowledge from the generalizations was somewhat more specific than that initially provided the program. for example  instead of assuming that the ira was behind all terrorist actions in northern ireland  ipp was able to generalize that the ira was often behind bombings and shootings  but not usually kidnappings and hijackings. 
1. abstract generalization 
　not all generalizations can be made on a basic  factual level. it is also possible to make generalizations of a more abstract sort. i will consider here three classes of such generalizations -- generalizations that require high-level analysis of stories  generalizations requiring reasoning  and generalizations of other generalizations. in each case  the basic generalization process remains the same - noticing similarities among events - but the kind of information used as input is more abstract  
1.1. high-level generalization 
　it is possible to base generalizations on any of the levels of understanding that take place  not just the factual level that ipp concentrates on. 
all the kinds of processing that have been discussed by other researchers  such as that involving plans  goals  themes   1   1  1   political acts   and other high-level structures can be the sources of generalizations. the same processes - recording events in memory in terms of their representations and assuming that similarities among events indicate potential generalizations - works for stories analyzed at all levels. 
　che example of the need for many levels of knowledge involves the need for recognizing political situations. stories s1 and s1 are both about events that took place shortly before rhodesia's first bi-racial elections. 
s1 - upi  1 february 1  fhodesia 
	the 	last 	day 	of 	formal 	campaigning 	for 
rhodesia's independence elections was overshadowed by a powerful bomb blast sunday that killed two people and demolished the plant 
of an influential roman catholic newspaper. 
1 

s1 - upi  1 february 1  fhodesia 
gunmen reported bo be followers of guerrilla chief robert togabe tried unsuccessfully to ambush a mobile polling station in an isolated attempt to wreck rhodesia's independence election authorities reported today. 
rhodesia-gen: attempts at democracy in rhodesia are opposed by terrorists. 
　the generalization that terrorists will try to undermine democracy in rhodesia is one that most of us would make  or consider   but is based on rather complex analysis of these stories. in order to make such a generalization  a reader has to recognize that an attack on a newspaper undermines a free press which in turn decreases the likelihood of fair elections. similarly  in the second story the reader must determine that an attack on a polling place will deter people from voting  which again minimizes the possibility of impartial elections. 
　prom examples such as this we see that the generalization ability encompasses not only the level of concrete  factual analysis described in the previous section  but also higher-level knowledge  such as goals  plans  and political acts. it is necessary bo notice similarities among events at these high levels  as well as just analyzing each story to such levels. 
1.1.. generalization requiring reasoning 
　understanding is not always a matter of simply matching up new events being described with stereotypical situations  even high-level ones  that we already know about. at times it is necessary to use sequences of inference rules to determine how a new event relates to what we already know. the results of such reasoning can be the source of generalizations in the same way as 
more explicit information. 
　consider  for example  s1 and s1 which might lead to the generalization lebanon-gen. 
s1 - new york times  1 january 1  lebanon 
the palestinian guerrilla leader who reputedly planned the attack on the israeli olympic team at munich in 1 was fatally wounded here today in the explosion of a remote-controlled 
bomb. 
s1 - upi  1 july 1  lebanon 
unidentified gunmen monday ambushed a pro-iraqi politician riddling him and his bodyguard with bullets in the latest of the region's almost daily political assassinations. 
lebanon-gen: israeli agents are willing to k i l l their enemies in lebanon. 
　understanding these stories well enough to be able to make lebanon-gen requires reasoning about several different points  but i will concentrate upon the determination that both killings were carried out by israeli agents. 
　neither story mentions the identity of the actor of the killing described. in each case a rather complex chain of reasoning is needed to infer that the killings were carried out by israeli agents. however  once these inferences have been made  it is an easy matter to make the generalization that israelis k i l l their enemies in lebanon  using the methods described in this paper. the difficult task here is to determine vdien and how to apply the relevant inference rules that make up the reasoning procedure  
　inferences such as these can easily serve as input to the generalization process. however  it is necessary to perform extensive inferencing only when needed  arri rely mostly on the stereotypical situations previously observed as much as possible  in order to avoid extensive computational problems. 
1.1. generalizing generalizations 
　the generalizations i have considered so far describe specific situations that are useful in explaining events. however  generalization is actually a multi-layer process  requiring the recognition of generalities at based upon other 
generalizations. ultimately this process allows for the creation of structures applicable to wider ranges of situations. 
lb see the need for such a procedure  consider 
the generalizations in figure 1. 
	figure 1: 	similar generalizations 
italy-kill-gen: terrorists in italy k i l l people with guns. 
guat-kill-gen: terrorists in guatemala k i l l people with bombs. 
col-wound-gen: terrorists in oolombia would people with guns. 
　these generalizations clearly have something in conmon. each describes a location where attacks take place  a standard result  victims being killed 
or wounded   and a standard method  shooting or bombing    if we assume that features of this sort frequently appear in generalizations  i.e.  if we generalize the generalizations  then we will know to expect similar features in other generalizations about attacks. this corresponds to the way we can predict elements of events from the concrete generalizations that we make. 
　ipp concentrates upon making accurate factual generalizations. these generalizations provide the 

1 

predictions that are needed for most of the understanding done by ipp. some experimentation was done with high-level generalization  in particular  generalizations based on well-defined goals of terrorist groups such as black nationalists in africa and the ira. however  these more abstract generalizations  l i k e those requiring reasoning and generalizations based on generalizations  are not as d i r e c t l y applicable to the understanding of new stories as factual generalizations and was l e f t largely as a topic for 
future research. 
1. other research on generalization 
　generalization  as performed by ipp  is the learning of rules that define behavior in a certain set of circumstances. w h i l e l i t t l e has been done concerning learning from natural language texts  there has been work on learning in other contexts that has some relevance to ipp. 
　winston' s well-known program   1     is given structural descriptions of examples of blocks world constructions  and near misses  and determines the rules behind the specification of these structures. unlike the work described here  winston provides his system with the concepts to be learned. in addition  winston does not have to deal with problems of organizing and finding instances in memory  since he is dealing with small numbers of cases. 
　a piece of work that deals with problems closer to those of ipp is that of soloway   1   . his program takes episodes from a game of baseball  and attempts to generalize the rules of the game. the program involves multiple levels of analysis of generalizations about the data  and is able to determine the more basic rules of baseball. the most important difference here is ipp's use of generalizations to help find examples that are relevant. 
　two pieces of recent research in the area of memory organization are relevant. schank  introduced mops as a method of organizing personal 
episodic memories. kolodner   1     with the program cyrus  addresses the problems of organizing large amounts of such information in a manner suitable for efficient update  retrieval and question 
answering   
1. conclusion 
   in this paper i have illustrated the role of generalization in the understanding process  and considered the range of generalizations that can be made. the use of generalization and memory has made ipp a powerful understanding system. ipp is written in yale/rutgers/uci lisp on a decsystem 1 and uses approximately 1 words of storage for the program  including 1+ dictionary entries for parsing . the generalization-based memory is kept in a separate lisp core image  where over 1 events can be recorded in about 1 words of storage. 
　when ipp reads a l l the available stories about international terrorism taken from local newspapers and the upi news wire  it successfully identifies the events and role f i l l e r s for about 1%. over the course of reading better than 1 stories  ipp was able to make about 1 generalizations about terrorism  approximately half of which it later rejected. 
　whiile many of i t s generalizations were rather mundane  some were more interesting  such as the one in figure 1 indicating that there are never casualties from bombings in el salvador. it is generalizations of this sort that indicate the importance of including generalization in an understanding system. 
