 	ii the structure of si-nets 

　　　our aim is to build a knowledge base for a natural language understanding system. having chosen the si-net formalism as our tool for knowledge representation  we try to develop some pragmatics for i t s use. since a prominent feature of si-nets is the distinction between concepts and roles this a r t i c l e concentrates on the question which part of the knowledge should be represented as concepts and which part as roles. we distinguish between descrlptlonal  intrinsic  properties  represented as attributes of a 
　　　concept  and functional properties described through relationships between concepts. evaluated attributes of concepts oan be regarded as states. in the last section of the paper there is a short discussion of the change of these states over a period of time. 
i introduction 
　　　the aim of our project is the development of an nlu system capable of engaging in a purposeful dialogue with a human partner   1   . in this paper we describe some important aspects of our approach of representing real world knowledge in a semantic net. 
　　　during the last few years a couple of semantic net formalisms with a s t r i c t discrimination between structure and content have evolved   1   . one oan view these formalisms as tools for the creation of knowledge bases in arbitrary domains. but up to now no standards have been developed on how to map real world knowledge into such a kind of semantic net. 
	for our knowledge base we 	have 	adopted 	the 
structured inheritance net developed by r.braohman 
  1     which we have slightly modified according to our special needs. his net formalism has the advantage of being epistemologically clear and e x p l i c i t . he advocates strict discrimination between structural components of a semantic net and i t s content  what is being represented . our work was aimed at the development of pragmatics for the application of the si-net formalism to real world knowledge. we designed a system for describing real world knowledge  using the very powerful role/restriction distinction of si-nets. 
　　　si-nets are built out of very few different types of nodes and links. there are two main layers of knowledge represented in the net: one is the conceptual level  consisting of so-called generic concepts   the other one the episodical  comprising the individualizations . concepts are defined in terms of their attributes. interaction of these attributes is e x p l i c i t l y represented in the * structure' associated with each concept. attributes consist of two parts: role and value restriction. the value restriction is a link to another concept  which defines the range of possible f i l l e r s for the attribute  the role node explains the function of the f i l l e r within the concept. role nodes may be linked to other  more general  ones to explain their function. though this distinction between role and restriction is not entirely new   1     si-nets are the f i r s t to incorporate the idea into the net formalism in such a clear and explicit way. 
　　　generic concepts are organized hierarchically via sub/superooncept links. attributes and structure are inherited through these links as long as they are not modified e x p l i c i t l y . every concept may have more than one superconcept  inheriting the combined set of properties. 
　　　to refer to a specific entity of the world the appropriate concept must be individualized. individuals inherit attributes and structure  and they may evaluate the attributes by f i l l i n g them with individuals meeting the value restrictions. 
i l l roles and concepts 
　　　using this structure we developed our own deas of how to express real world knowledge in i t * the distinction between role and restriction reflects the way humans look at the real world. concepts are generalizations  reap. abstractions of sets of entities of the real world. in order to referenoe a specific member of that set the generic ooncept is individualized. on the other hand concepts f i l l roles in other concepts. in the same way individuals are used to evaluate attributes of other individuals. in a text the same word may be used to refer either to a ooncept or to a role  depending on the context.  a referenoe to a role is of course actually a 
1 
reference to the individual f i l l i n g that role.  this happens because we have two ways to refer to something  definitional  descrlptional  or functional. 
　　　let's take for example the word 'hammer'. usually  if one uses 'hammer'  one refers to an individualization of the concept 'hammer' which w i l l look more or less like the structure given in f i g . 1 . this concept gives the definitional description of a hammer  describing parts  material  size  etc. it does not explain though  in which circumstances hammers are used. 

　　　on the other hand one has a concept for 'to hammer'  see f i g . 1   . in that concept there is one attribute which plays the role of a hammer. of course one could think of providing the concept hammer with an extra attribute 'function' pointing to the concept 'to hammer'. but that does not work very well. though the role 'hammer' is usually f i l l e d by an individualization of the concept 'hammer' thla is not necessarily so. one could use practically every compact  heavy thing as a 'hammer'. therefore the value restriction for the attribute with the role 'hammer' is different from the concept 'hammer'  which is only one of the many subooncepts of 
'heavy/solid/object . 
	usually people don't 	pay 	any 	attention 	to 
theae two different aspects of a word  beoause functional and conceptual definition form a unit. as long as both aspects go together  one doesn't have to oare. but from an epistemologioal view this distinction seems quite important. it is a way to resolve the 'knowledge problem'   1     by integrating 'lexical' and 'practical knowledge' into the net. 
　　　individuals are defined not only in terms of their ooncepts  but also through a l l the roles they play. to go back to our example: one does not think about every stone to be a potential hammer  but as soon as a stone plays that role  we draw the connection. boles become very important  when individuals of a oertaln concept can f i l l a 
　　　variety of different roles. the most prominent example in our net is the concept 'person'. a person can act in a lot of different roles  depending on the situation and the oontext. 'father' and 'mother' for example are roles persons play in the concept 'family'. but the same individuals w i l l play different roles in different contexts. people are not only defined in terms of family relations  they have jobs like officer  teacher  farmer  they participate in games and sports  are chess-players  skiers  football-players  they are educated as students  take trips as tourists and so on. 
　　　it seems logical to represent a l l these relations aa role nodes instead of conoepts. if you talk about a father  you s t i l l refer to a person. you just put that person in the special context of a family. therefore we have only one generic concept concerning human beings  called 'person'. attributes of that concept are only those properties which are intrinsic to i t . these include body features  basic human a b i l i t i e s and requirements  etc. all the other information about a person is contained in the roles s/he can play in various other ooncepts. 
　　　a typical example for information of that kind are social circumstances of people. we are s t r i c t l y against oreating concepts like 'societal person'  since a l l these things are dependent on the cultural oontext and therefore not inherent to 
'person'. he do not see  for example  why 'address' should be an attribute of 'person'   1   . that way one would run into d i f f i c u l t i e s whenever one wants to represent in the net people with no or more then one residence. instead we propose to have a concept 'residence' with the roles 'address' and 'inhabitants' respectively. to find the address of a person one has to search for the residence s/he inhabits. 
　　　the roles an individual actually plays characterize that special person. as sore information about that person is gathered  more links to other individuals are established  oreating a history of that person. 
　　　the same thing is true for other ooncepts as well. individuals are defined by the attributes they inherit  but also in terms of a l l the roles they f i l l in the evaluated attributes of other individuals. to ooae baok to our f i r s t example 

1 

onoe more: we can say 'that atone is a good hammer' if we use it in that role  even though we know that a atone is no hammer. 
iv dynamic aspects of attributes 
　　　up to now we dearibed attributes as being basically static. once the attribute of an individual is evaluated it stays the same. this is true e.g. for actions  which take place at a certain time. but for individuals which exist over a longer period of time this is only partially true. 
　　　properties of physical objects are described as a number of states. these states are denominated by roles while their restrictions give the range of possible values. there are many different kinds of states: emotional states  anger  fear   physical states  colour  size   physiological states  health  hunger   dimensional states  time  location   possess state  etc. 
　　　some of these states remain  relatively  stable  while others change over time while the individual is s t i l l regarded the same. one possible solution to represent that change is to s p l i t up every individual into a set of manifestations   1   . for every appearance of an individual a new manifestation is created. 
　　　we resorted to a different approach. to every state there exlata a corresponding concept representing changes in the value of that state. attributes are the 'experienced of the ohange  'old state' and 'new state'  former and new value of that state  plus 'time'. whenever a change of state ocours  it causea two different modifications in the net. every change directly affects the individual  changing the value of the respective state. the change-of-state concept is instantiated keeping record of the event. the individual appears as the experiencer  to which that ohange occured. this way a history of a l l the changes is kept. 
acknowledgements 
this research is part of the project 'development of a language understanding system with regard to medical applications'  supervisor: r. trappl   which is supported by the austrian 'fonda zur foerderung der wissenschaftlichen forschung'  grant #1. 
