 
　bacon.1 is a program that discovers empirical laws. the program represents information at varying levels of description  with higher levels summarizing the levels below them. the system applies a small set of data-driven heuristics to detect regularities in numeric and nominal data. these heuristics note constancies and trends  leading bacons to formulate hypotheses  define theoretical terms  and postulate intrinsic properties. once the program has formulated an hypothesis  it' uses this to reduce the amount of data it must consider at later times. a simple type of reasoning by analogy also simplifies the discovery of laws containing symmetric forms. these techniques have allowed the system to rediscover snail's law of refraction  conservation of momentum  black's specific heat law  and joule's formulation of conservation of energy. thus  bacon.s's heuristics appear to be general mechanisms applicable to discovery in diverse domains. 
introduction 
　the dual notions of symmetry and conservation lie at the very heart of physics  and the assumption of symmetry has been a powerful aid in the discovery of many physical laws. in this paper we describe bacon.1  a program that discovers conservation laws through a simple form of analogical reasoning  bacon.1 is not intended as a detailed model of historical discoveries. rather  the system presents one of many ways in which historical discoveries could have occurred. the system is named after sir francis bacon  1   the early philosopher of science. the datadriven heuristics of the bacon 1 program are in much the same spirit as those proposed by bacon the philosopher over three hundred years ago. 
previous discovery systems such as am  and metadendral 
 relied strongly on theory-driven methods of discovery. in contrast  bacon.s employs data-driven heuristics to direct its search for interesting laws. a major goal of our research has been the identification of general discovery principles  and we feel that generality is more likely to reside in data-driven approaches than in theory driven ones  bacon.s is the fifth in a line of discovery systems developed by the authors  1  1  1 . the current system differs from its precursors in its data collection strategies  and in its ability to make symmetry assumptions  note simple analogies  and deal with noise. as an introduction  we consider bacon.s's discovery of the ideal gas law in the following section. after this  we discuss the program's heuristics and control structure. next we consider in detail bacon.s's performance on some additional tasks. finally  we draw conclusions from these results  and propose some directions for future efforts. 
   thto research was supported by grant ist-1 from the national science foundation and grant mh 1 from the national institutes of mental health. 　bacon.s  like its predecessors in the bacon series  addresses itself to that part of the scientific process that starts with a set of data and seeks to discover regularities in them. of course  this is only one of several ways in which scientific discovery takes place  and only one of the steps  albeit a crucial one  in data-driven discovery. scientists must also determine what data to gather  must invent and use appropriate instruments for making observations  must draw out potentially observable consequences from theories  and must analogize from one phenomenon to another. thus  bacon.s's capabilities provide an account of one important part of the scientific enterprise  while leaving other equally important components to future investigation. 
an example: the ideal gas law 
　the ideal gas law may be stated as pv = nrt  where p is the pressure on a quantity of gas  v is the volume  n is the amount of gas in moles  t is its temperature  and r is the constant 1. bacon.1 discovers this law in a straightforward manner. the system begins by holding the values of n and t constant  say at n = 1 and t s 1   while varying the values of the pressure p. when the resulting values of v are examined  bacon.s notes that the values of v decrease as those of p increase. this trend suggests that the product pv should be considered; when the values of this term are computed  they are found to have the constant value 1. now the program examines this phenomenon when n s 1 and t = 1; in this case  pv is 1. similarly  pv is1 when n =1 and t= 1. 
　at this point  bacon.s has enough information to relate the values of pv and the temperature t. these terms are linearly related with an intercept of 1  making the ratio pv/t equal to 1. now the discovery system can vary its third independent term by setting n to 1. upon gathering the relevant data  pv/t is found to be 1  while when n is set to 1  it becomes 1. when it compares the values of n and pv/t  bacon.s finds another linear relation with a zero intercept. the resulting equation  pv/nt = 1  is equivalent to the ideal gas law. 
1 　standard analyses of the scientific method partition the work  into data or observations  and hypotheses or laws that explain those data  bacon.s replaces this dichotomy with information represented at varying levels of description. a description at one level acts as an hypotheses with respect to the descriptions below it  and as a datum for those above it. in the case of the ideal gas law  the direct observations of n  t  p  and v represent the first level of description  bacon.s treats these as data  generating the hypothesis that pv is 1 when n is 1 and t is 1. next the program treats these values and others at the second level as data  leading to the rule that pv/t is 1 when n is 1 at the third level. this datum and others like it produce the final fourth level law  that pv/nt = 1 for all cases. as we shall see below  much of bacon.s's power derives from its ability to recursively apply the same heuristics at every level of description. 
the heuristics of bac1n.1 
　one of the defining features of intelligence is the ability to search. in this section we discuss the heuristics used to direct bacon.s's attention. we focus initially on the discovery system's techniques for gathering data. next we consider the central heuristic - looking for constancies   followed by the strategies responsible for defining theoretical terms. we then examine the processes which lead to the proposal of intrinsic properties. finally  we discuss bacon.s's heuristics for reasoning by analogy and dealing with symmetrical laws. 
gathering data 
　bacons begins a task by asking the user for the independent terms it should consider  the values of these terms it should examine  and the dependent variables it should inspect. having gathered this information  it starts to run experiments by varying one of the terms and holding all others constant. if this leads to a law  the program stores the term found to be constant with the term which was varied. now bacon.s alters the value of another independent term. however  since it has a strong expectation about the form of the law it will find at the level below  it does not vary1 the first term again. instead  k selects a single independent value  examines the associated dependent value  and computes the expected constant from these. similarly  once it has discovered a law at the second level  bacon.s need not vary the second term again. this method requires significantly less data than the complete factorial design technique used in earlier versions of bacon . figure 1 presents the data search trees for the two methods; the factorial design approach is shown by the light lines  while bacon.s's search is superimposed in darker lines. 
noting constancies 
　after manipulating an independent term which it has not varied before  bacons examines each of the dependent terms at the current level of description. if the values of a dependent term are constant  it passes this variable and its value to the next higher level  where they are treated as data. in determining whether a set of values is constant  bacon.s first takes the mean of those values. it then multiplies this mean by a user-modifiable fraction  say 1   and creates an interval by adding/subtracting the resulting product to the mean. next  each of the values is tested to see if it falls within the interval  bacon.s also computes the number of allowable exceptions by multiplying a second parameter by the number of values. if this product exceeds the number of 
exceptions  then the test succeeds and an hypothesis is formulated; otherwise the system must look elsewhere. 
　if a dependent term is not constant  then processing passes on to other heuristics. some of these define arithmetic combinations of the independent and dependent terms. when this occurs  the program computes the values of the new term and sees if they are constant. since bacon.s's central goal is to find invariance  this process of defining terms and testing for recurrence continues until a constant is found or the terms become too complex. in addition to applying to terms of different complexity  the same constancy detector applies to ail levels of description  whether the first or the final independent term has been varied. 
finding linear relations 
　if a term fails the test for invariance described above  bacon.s looks for a linear relation between that term and other variables. this test uses a standard linear regression technique to determine the slope of the best line relating two variables. using this slope  it then computes the intercepts predicted by each observation. if these intercepts pass the test for constancy discussed above  then the system creates names for the slope and intercept  and returns their values to the next higher to be treated as data. 
　certain values for slopes and intercepts are handled as special cases. if x and y are linearly related  then the slope s may be expressed as  y   i /x  where i is the intercept. however  if the intercept is 1  this simplifies to s s y/x; in such cases  bacons assumes that all future intercepts relating x and y will be 1  and defines the ratio y/x. similarly  the intercept can in general be expressed as i = y * sx  but this reduces to i * y   x when the slope is 1. in this case  the program assumes all future slopes will be 1 and defines the difference y   x. 
　as with constants  the system may not find a linear relation between the first terms it considers. in such cases  the heuristics discussed below may generate new terms which are then examined. for example  consider bacon.s's discovery of ohm's law for electric circuits. here the program manipulates the length i of the wire connected to a battery  and measures the resulting current i. the values of i are not constant  nor are i and l linearly related. however other factors lead bacon.s to consider the product il  and this term is linearly related to i. the intercept of this line corresponds to the voltage of the battery  while the intercept corresponds to its internal resistance. 
defining theoretical terms 
　the slopes  intercepts  ratios and differences discussed above may be viewed as types of theoretical terms. they are not directly observable  but their values can be computed from observables. although a term like il or pv/nt may be replaced by its definition at any time  its use can greatly simplify the statement of a law. bacon.s invokes a third heuristic when both of the above tests fail  which also proposes useful theoretical terms. if a monotonic increasing relation is found between two terms and the signs of their values are the same  then the ratio of those terms is defined. if a monotonic decreasing trend occurs and the signs agree  then a product is defined. when the signs differ  the reverse events occur. the test for monotonicity allows for a certain number of exceptions before the test fails. once a term has been defined  its values are computed and passed to the tests for constancy and linearity. 
in its discovery of kepler's third law of planetary motion  
bacon.1 observes1 the period p of a planet  along with its distance d from the sun. upon comparing the values of these terms for a group of planets  the program finds that d and p increase together. their ratio d/p is defined and its values are calculated. now bacon.s notes that d/p decreases as p increases; the product p d/p  is considered but abandoned  since it is equivalent to the distance d. however  d/p also decreases as d increases  leading to the product d 1 /p. when the values of this theoretical term are computed  the program notes that it decreases as d/p increases. the result is the product d 1 /p 1   which has a constant value; this invariance is equivalent to kepler's third law. 
   both terms are actually dependent  being functions of the independent nominal variable planet. which takes on values such as mercury  venus  and earth the intrinsic property heuristic discussed below lets the values of d and p be compered as if one were independent. 
　
1 
　
postulating intrinsic properties 
　although the above heuristics are useful for relating numeric variables  they cannot be applied when an independent nominal or symbolic variable influences the values of a numeric dependent term. for example  one finds that replacing one battery  e.g.  battery a  in an electric circuit with another  e.g.  battery b  produces changes in the slope and intercept of the line relating il and i. in such cases  bacon.1 postulates an intrinsic property associated with the nominal term. the values of this property are borrowed from one1 of the dependent variables. as a result  the ratio of that dependent variable and the new term is guaranteed to be 1 by definition. 
　fortunately  bacons is often able to move beyond such tautological reasoning through a process of generalization. initially  the intrinsic values associated with a set of nominal values are retrieved only under the exact conditions in which they first occurred. but later  as the program alters other variables  a situation will arise which differs from the original in only one respect  e.g.  x 1 instead of x = 1 . when this situation occurs  bacon.1 compares its set of intrinsic values to the set of dependent values observed under the new conditions. if the two sets of values are linearly related  a generalization results. in future cases  the intrinsic values will be retrieved regardless of the value of the varied term. once this has happened  the ratio of the dependent term and the intrinsic property can take on values other than 1  which can be related to other terms at higher levels of description. 
　in experiments where the same nominal term is associated with different objects  a similar process can occur. for example  in its discovery of snell's law  discussed at length in the next section   bacon.1 associates values of an intrinsic property called the index of refraction with different gases and liquids  such as air and water . the assignment occurs when one of the media involved in the experiment is varied. later  when the other medium is varied at a higher level  the program retrieves the values it generated earlier. this assumption that the same values apply to both cases lets the system break out of the tautological circle that can result from the introduction of intrinsic properties. 

figure 1. search trees for the ideal gas law. 
   if multiple dependent terms exitt  then bacon 1 attempts to relate each 1* them to the new property. when no relation can be found  the program proposes a second property baaed on the unrelated variable this occurs in the discovery of ohm's law  leading to separate intrinsic properties for voltage and internal resistance. 
reasoning by analogy 
　we have already discussed bacon.1's technique for using its expectations to minimize the data it must gather. in addition  the program incorporates a heuristic for reducing its search still further in special cases. when bacons is informed of a variable  it requests  the name of the object with which that term is associated. the program generates a unique name for this variable-object combination  and moves on to collect more information. however  before it plans an experiment  the system reorganizes the known variables  grouping together all those associated with the same object. 
　in some situations  two objects have exactly the same associated terms. in this case bacon.s assumes that the final law will be symmetrical  though it cannot predict the actual form. it orders the terms so that those attached to one of the objects are varied first. once it finds a constant theoretical term incorporating these variables  the program assumes that an analogous term should be used for the other object. thus  bacon.s must systematically vary only one of the second set of terms. when this is done  the two higher level terms take on different values  and can be related by other heuristics. in this way  the symmetrical laws so common in physics can be easily discovered. 
　in other cases  bacon.s must use its standard techniques to relate two entirely different sets of variables  each associated with an object. later  a new task may be presented in which one set of terms is identical with that from the previous problem. when this occurs  the system assumes that the theoretical term which proved useful before will do so again. none of the analogous variables need be systematically varied  nor must the system tediously search for the appropriate combination of terms. thus  this heuristic enhances the savings which normally occurs  reducing the data which must be examined and directing search through the space of theoretical terms. we discuss examples of each situation in the following section. 
the discoveries of bacon.1 
　in the previous section we discussed bacon 1's strategies in the abstract. below we trace some of the system's discoveries in detail  focusing on laws in which symmetry and conservation play a role. these include snell's law  conservation of momentum  black's specific heat law  and joule's formulation of conservation of energy. finally  we examine the generality of the program's heuristics with respect to these and other tasks. 

table 1. first level data obeying snell's law. 
snell's law of refraction 
　as a ray of light passes from one medium to another  the passage alters the direction in which the ray travels. snell's law of refraction relates the initial and final directions  as well as the media involved. if we let 1 be the incoming angle of incidence and o1 be the outgoing angle of refraction  then snell's law may be stated as sine 1 /n 1 = sine 1/v in thisequation  n1 the value of an intrinsic property of the first medium called the index of refraction  while n1 is the analogous value for the second medium. the index of refraction for vacuum is normally assigned as the standard 1  while the values for water  oil  and glass are 1 1  and 1. respectively. 
　
1 
　
　in rediscovering snell's law  bacon. 1 is presented with two objects  each with three associated variables. the first of these terms is the medium  which takes nominal values such as air and water. the second is the distance h from the intersection of the media at which the light is measured. the final term is more complicated. draw a perpendicular line through the point at which the ray crosses from one medium into the other. now find a point on the ray which has distance h from this intersection. the variable o is defined as the distance of this point from the perpendicular. thus  any combination of values for h and o determine a particular angle  bacons is given experimental control of the first medium  h1 o1  the second medium  and h1. to find o1 for a given experimental situation  one moves down the ray of light for the distance h1; the value of o1 is simply the 
distance of this point from the perpendicular. this formulation1 of the task allows the program to discover snell's law without knowledge of trigonometry. 
　when presented with these terms  bacons first plans its experiment so the h1 will be varied first  followed by medium1 or h1  and medium 1  in that order. the program makes a special effort to group variables associated with the same object together. table 1 presents some data collected when the value of h1 was varied. comparing the values of o1 and h1  the system finds a linear relation with a zero intercept. accordingly  the ratio o 1 /h 1 
　is defined  which has the constant value 1. note that this term is equivalent to sine o1 
　next bacons alters the value of the second medium  using oil instead of water. since the system expects o 1 / h 1 to be constant  it computes its value when o1 is 1  giving 1 as the result. using the same approach  o 1 / h 1 is found to be 1 when the second medium is glass. these values are summarized in table 1. at this point  bacons has a set of nominal independent values associated with a set of numeric dependent values. since no more progress is possible until numbers are associated with these symbols  the program postulates an intrinsic property n1 to be connected with the second medium. the values of this term are taken to be those of o 1 /h 1   and the ratio o1/h1 is defined. this new property has  by definition  the constant value 1. however  when the values of n1 are retrieved during later periods of the discovery process  this ratio may take on different values. 

having related all variables associated with the second object  
bacon 1 locuses on the first set of terms. assuming symmetry  the system does not bother to systematically vary o  and h1 instead  the values of the first medium  h1 and o1 are varied in conjunction  and the corresponding values of o 1 /h 1 n 1 are immediately computed. in addition  the values of o 1 /h 1 n 1 are found for each situation  and the higher level terms are compared  as shown in table 1. a linear relation with a zero intercept is uncovered  and the ratio o1n1/o1n1 is found to be the constant 1. replacing o/h with sine 1  we see that this law becomes n1since 1/n1sine o1 = 1  which is equivalent to snells law. the intrinsic properties n1 and n1 are proportional to the indices of refraction of the two media. figure 1 presents bacon.1's search through the data space for this task. 
conservation of momentum 
　physicists define the momentum of an object as the product of its mass m and its velocity v. similarly  the total momentum of a group of objects is the sum of their individual momenta. one of the most basic laws of physics states that when two or more objects collide  the total momentum of the system is conserved. for two-object collisions  this may be stated as m1 m1 = m1 + m1  where m1 and m1 are the masses of the objects  v1 and v1 are their initial velocities  and u  and u1 are their final velocities. this equation may be rewritten as m1 v1 - u   = m1 u1   v1   which says that the loss in momentum for one object is compensated by a gain in the momentum of the other object. 

table 1. first level data obeying conservation of momentum. 
　in discovering conservation of momentum  bacon.1 is informed of three terms  each associated with two objects. the terms name  and name1 take on nominal values such as a  b  and c; these serve to distinguish specific objects from one another. the terms vr v1  ur and u1 take on the same meanings as above. bacon.1 is not directly presented with the masses of the objects. 
the first five of these variables are under the system's experimental control  while u1 is viewed as dependent. the treatment of u  as independent requires some justification. in the normal interpretation of conservation of momentum  both u1 and u1 are considered dependent on the other four terms. moreover  the law cannot uniquely predict the values of u1 and u1; usually another equation such as conservation of energy must be invoked to achieve predictive power. however  since velocities are relative to the motion of the observer  one can simply move at a velocity which gives an arbitrary value to u1 once this is done  the value of u1 is uniquely determined. 
bacon.1 begins by arranging these variables so that v1 is varied 
 irst  followed by name1  u1 v1 and name . upon varying the values of v1  the program notes a linear relation between u1 and v1 with a slope of 1. accordingly  the difference u1 - v1 is defined  which has the constant value 1. when name1 is varied next  bacons considers only enough values of u1 and v1 to find the differences it needs. table 1 shows the results of these calculations for three different objects  where the relative masses are a = 1  b = 1  c = 1  and d = 1. confronted with nominal independent values  the system defines the intrinsic property k1 and assigns it values based on those of u1   v1. the ratio  u1   v 1  /k 1 is also defined and found  not surprisingly  to be 1. note that k1 is proportional to the inverse of m1  the mass of the second object. 

table 1. second level data obeying conservation of momentum. 
　after relating k1  v1  and u1  bacon.1 turns its attention to k   vv and uv by analogy  it decides to relate the values of  u1 v1 /k1 to those of  u1   v1 /k1  gathering only the data it requires. table 1 gives some values of these theoretical terms. the program immediately finds a linear relation between these higher level variables  this time with a zero intercept. the ratio k  u1 * v 1  /k 1  u 1   v  is defined and found to have the constant value   1. this expression is easily transformed into the second statement of conservation of momentum given above  bacon.s's search through the data space is identical in form to that for snell's law. 

table 1. highest level data obeying conservation of momentum. 
black's specific heat law 
　if one brings two containers of liquid having different temperatures into contact  their temperatures will eventually come into equilibrium. the quantitative relation is c1t1 + c1t1 = c 1 m l f 1 + c1f1  where t1 and t1 are the initial temperatures  f1 and f1 the final temperatures  m  and m1 the masses of the two liquids  and c  and c1 are intrinsic properties associated with various types of liquids called their specific heats. joseph black discovered this relation  usually called the specific heat law  in the 1s. the equation may be recast as c1 t1  f   = c1 f1 t1   which states that any heat lost from one body is gained by the other. 
　in this case  bacons is told about two objects  each with an associated liquid  taking nominal values sgch as water and oil   mass m  initial temperature t  and final temperature f. all variables are under experimental control except f1  which is the single dependent term. the final temperature of the first liquid  f   can be manipulated observationally by continuously watching the temperature of the first liquid. when the temperature reaches the desired value  then the temperature of the second liquid is sampled as well. thus  one need not wait until the liquids have reached equilibrium to discover black's law. 
joule's law 
　in the 1's james prescott joule set forth his law of energy conservation. joule tested his hypothesis in a variety of ways. in one experiment  he dropped heavy objects to turn a wheel  whose motion in turn heated a large container of water by friction. by comparing the potential energy lost by the dropped objects to the heat energy gained by the liquid  he found that the total energy remained constant. in a second experiment  the scientist sent an electric current through water and measured the resulting change in temperature; the total energy was conserved in this case as well. 
　bacon.1 can discover both forms of joule's law. in the first situation  the program is informed about two objects a heavy ball and a container of liquid. three independent terms are associated with the ball   its weight w1 the height h1 from which it is dropped  and n1 the number of times it is dropped. the liquid is also associated with three controllable variables - the type of liquid l1 occupying the container  its mass m1  and its initial temperature t1. in addition  a single dependent term  the final temperature f1  is associated with the liquid. 
　as in its discovery of black's law  itself a special case of joule's law   bacon.s begins by varying t1 and examining the resulting values of f1 the difference f1 - t1 is found to be constant  followed by m1 f1 -1  at the next level of description. still later  the intrinsic property d1 is defined  followed by the ratio m1 f1 t 1  /d 1 . at this point the program shifts to manipulating characteristics of the first object. since different variables are involved  it must rely on its data-driven heuristics instead of jumping ahead through analogy. when the number n  is varied  a linear relation with intercept 1 is noted; the ratio m1 f1 - t   / d 1 n 1 is defined and found constant. this process repeats itself for the remaining terms  leading first to the ratio m1  f1   t 1  /d 1 n 1 w 1 
　and then to m1  f1 - t 1  /d 1 n 1 w 1 h 1 this last expression has a constant value  and the resulting hypothesis is equivalent to joules statement that the loss in potential energy  1 1   is gained in heat energy  m1  f1 - t1 /d1 . 
　the form of this law is quite similar to that for conservation of momentum  and bacon.1's path of discovery is correspondingly similar. at the outset  the program groups terms associated with each object together  to simplify its analogical reasoning at a later stage. upon varying t1 and examining the resulting values of f1  the system finds a linear relation with a slope of 1. this leads it to consider the difference f1   t1  which has a constant value. when bacons varies m1 at the next level  it finds that f1   t1 decreases as m1 increases; their product m1 f1 -1  is computed and also found to be a constant. at the third level of description  the program finds itself attempting to relate nominal values to numeric ones. its solution is to define the intrinsic property d1 based on the values of m1 f1   t1 ; this new property is equivalent to the inverse of c1  the specific heat of the second liquid. the ratio m1 f1 - t 1  /c 1 is immediately defined and found to be the constant 1. 
　since it has discovered the relations between the four terms associated with the first body  bacon.s next considers the second liquid. the term m1 f 1   t 1  /d 1 was useful before  so it computes the values of m1 f1 - t 1  /d 1 for a number of cases and attempts to find a relation between the two expressions. as with conservation of momentum  the result is a linear relation with an intercept of 1 and a slope of -1. the ratio d1 f1   t1 /d1 f1   t   is defined and stored as a constant. this equation is a simple restatement of the second formulation of black's law shown above. 
　
1 
　
　in discovering joule's second relationship  bacons is presented with the same container of liquid and a new objecj  an electric circuit. the liquid has the same associated terms as before  while the circuit is associated with two independent variables   its resistance r and its current i. in generating its experimental design  the system recognizes a familiar situation. rather than varying the values of l1  m1  and t1 systematically  it decides to compute values of m1 f1 - t 1  /d 1 . this is done for a number of values of the current i  and the two sets of numbers are compared. although m1  f1   t 1  /d 1 and i1  increase together  the ratio m1  f1   t 1  /d 1 l 1 is not constant. however  the new term is linearly related to i  with an intercept of zero. the second ratio m1 f1 - t 1  /d 1 l is defined and found to be constant. when the resistance r  is varied next  a linear relation with a zero intercept is discovered  and the ratio m1 f1   t 1  /d 1 l 1 r t is defined. this complex term has a constant value  and bacon.1 has arrived at joule's second formulation of energy conservation. 
generality of the heuristics 
　in addition to the laws described above  bacons has rediscovered a number of other empirical laws. these include the ideal gas law  coulomb's law  kepler's third law  ohm's law  archimedes' law of displacement  and galileo's pendulum law and law of constant acceleration. these discoveries differ from those just discussed in that reasoning by analogy could not be used to reduce search. however  most of the remaining heuristics played a role in each of these taws. 
　the program's success on these tasks suggests that the primary goal of our research has been met: bacon.1 is a general discovery system capable of operating in many different domains. however  an intelligent system is only as general as the heuristics from which it is constructed. as we have seen  bacons incorporates five main heuristics: noting constancies; finding linear relations; detecting monotonic trends; postulating intrinsic properties; and reasoning by analogy. table 1 presents those heuristics applied in each of the program's discoveries. the degree of use indicates that bacon.s's heuristics are indeed general principles useful in discovering a wide range of laws. 

conclusions 
　in this paper we described bacon.1. a system that has discovered a number of laws from the history of science. the program incorporates heuristics for noting constancies  finding linear and monotonic relations  defining theoretical terms  and postulating intrinsic properties. we focused on a heuristic for reasoning by analogy  which significantly reduced bacon.s's search for data  theoretical terms  and hypotheses. this heuristic proved useful in discovering snail's law  conservation of momentum  black's specific heat law  and two forms of conservation of energy. 
several issues present themselves lor attention in the future. 
the first of these is noise. although bacon.1 s heuristics are capable of handling considerable noise  the control structure of the system is not suited for dealing with the increased search which can result. in its current form  bacon.s can consider only a single hypothesis at a time. future versions should be able to entertain multiple hypotheses  and design critical experiments to distinguish between them. another issue relates to the variables presented to bacon.s. in all of the discoveries we have discussed  the program was only presented with terms relevant to the final law. for example  in the discovery of snell's law  we carefully avoided giving bacon.s an extra term which would have let it define ratios equivalent to cosine 1 and tangent 1. the next instantiation of bacon should have facilities for dealing with many irrelevant variables  so that its input need not be so carefully crafted. 
　a final limitation involves the form of the laws bacon.s can discover. the current implementation finds product and power laws  linear relations  and complex combinations of these forms. however  we hope to attain much more complex functions by incorporating gerwin's  method of residuals. in this strategy  one formulates an hypothesis about the relation between  two variables  much as bacon.s does at present. but then one considers the residual variation left unaccounted for by the law. if this variation is random  the program is satisfied. however  if significant regularity remains  one searches for a new hypothesis to explain the variation. once found  the new law is incorporated into the original rule  and the system iterates by examining the remaining variation. 
　in conclusion  we feel that bacon.s's heuristics are general discovery principles with a wide range of application  and that the program has responded well in the areas it has been tested. in its present form  the system has certain limitations: it cannot adequately deal with noise; it cannot handle irrelevant variables; and the class of laws it considers is overly constrained. however  we feel confident that generalizations and extensions of the datadriven  baconian approach will suggest solutions to these problems  and that more interesting discoveries lie ahead. 
