 
　　　in this paper  a system is described that can understand a plot of a story on reference to both image and linguistic information. as input  a series of line drawings with colors and narrations in english concerning to these drawings are given to the system. 
　　　it searches the objects suggested to be in the scene by the narrations  finding relations among them  making the world model by using its world knowledge. its refernce to those drawings makes it easy for system to analize complicated structures in the narration sentences such as those of prepositions  and guides the process reasoning about the cd representation using rules and demons. at the end of this paper  a result on qa will be shown. 
1. introduction 
　　　recently the research on artificial intelligence has become widely practiced  and there have been many papers on story understanding. they are roughly categorized into two classes. the first one corresponds to researches done by schank  lehnert 1 wilensky1 and 
1
carbonell which infer causal relation among things using so-called common-sense such as scripts  goals or human traits etc. they are quite interesting in respect of the points that they contribute to better comprehension of the flow of events in the story. as 
　　　the other is on picture processings; its goal is to extract some meaningful actions by observing a sequence of movements in images. this research is also interesting because it may suggest any insight as to how we can recognize higher concept on actions from the view. but its consequence is not necessarily satisfactory as it is difficult to capture action with the help of movements in the scene alone. the reason for this can be well understood considering our cognitive methodology. 
　　　in our life  we utilize many sorts of knowledge sources to capture things surrounding us. we cannot well understand tv-movies without any narration  and an infant child cannot follow the story without pictures. thus  computer program should positively refer to these sources. 	. 
　　　concerning to this point  waltz1 has written a paper pointing out that pictorial knowledge often makes it easier to infer the relation not easily deducible from linguistic knowldge. but using the model as a default one  it has been not necessarily useful for the recognition of a real situation being at hand  because the verification has not been attempted if the predicted things can be well matched to those in the scene. 
seeing these progresses on al  it is convinced that 
the time has come when an integrated system that can understand both image and language is implemented. in this paper  by referring to both language and image data or knowledge  it is shown that a program can appreciate events which occur in the story. the method taken in this paper to correlate linguistic data with pictorial one can be considered relevant not only to the cognitive models required to simulate our epistemology  but also to the practical objective that picture processing programs should be used in more flexible styles by using natural language interface to access a proper portion of images. 
1. the overview of this system 
　　　in this system  at first a series of simple line drawings with color informations and narrations corresponding to these images are given to the system as its input. then the system tries to do reasoning about the plot of the input story referring to such image and language data. 
1 a cross reference to visual and linguistic information 
　　　though this system is partioned into an image data processing part and a language interpretation part  they do not work with their objects for themselves but interact with each other to take full advantage of the consequence brought about from the other part. this mutual reference leads the system to a better cognitive level than in cases they are used alone. it appears that such a behavior of the system well resembles to our daily behavior. 
　　　when we see a certain scene  it is sure that the entire information involved in that scene ends up on our sense organ  for all that there are cases where some of their features or even their entities are not explicitly realized unless they are specifically interesting for us. in other words  our cognitive mechanism is apt to cause something to be evaluated in order to keep them in view as a highly processed data if they are interesting  but something to be ignored because they deserve no attention. but this does not mean that such insignificant things entirely slip out of our memory but that they are held implicitly in forms of an unconscious low level data  more concretely in a coordinate value. as one of such triggers that focuses an attention on objects  an indication by language can be regarded. 
　　　for this reason  in the course of the inspection of objects in given scenes  a computer program should positively use language data closely related to those images  making it possible to restrict its search domain to a small plausible region  and leaving low level data intact in the form of coordinate values until they are needed. 

1 

　　　  visual information is regarded as an essential one for us to capture the complex relations among things  with respect to thier locations. for example  when we ask someone to show the way to station  if he illustrates the way showing a map  it would be easier for us to understand what he says. the computer program should utilize such a pictoral aid concurrently with referring to linguistic knowledges  and then it is easy to analyze the structure of sentences such as those between prepositional groups. 
　　　 * it is needless to say that the precise comprehension of the meaning of sentences or words with various kinds of sense requires some contextual informations and so-called common-sense knowledge  and there are many sorts of such contextual information. visual information can also be thought to be a member of such context builders. considering this : 
　　　　he takes the apple in the box. after reading this fragment alone  it is impossible to decide whether  take  means the action  eat  or  get  even in such a case  the appreciation of informations illustrating the scene leads the sentence analyzer to eas  settlement of such a problem. 
1 the assumption of the system 
　　　so far  we have written as if all things worked well by taking full advantages of both informations  in reality  however  several assumptions must be set up as in the followings. 
　 1  a situation that a line drawing illustrates corresponds to the time when the affairs described in the narration is completed in the aspectual sense. 
　 1  as a rule  unless objects are explicitly mentioned in the narration even if they are identifiable in the given scene  the program does not look for them in the scene and therefore they are not remembered in the forms of assertions as to be in the scene. 
　　　why the maneuver like this is taken here must be described. we have already mentioned the reason in 1 from one perspective  that is  interesting . and from another perspective  if such insignificant objects and all the relations among them were memorized in the memory  the combinatorial explosion on the management of such relations would be unavoidable  because a slight change concerning to one of such insignificant things would cause drastic reformation. to put it more concretely  if a person standing in a situation consisting of some rocks moves toward one of them  it is not sufficient to make an alteration only to the relation between the person and the rock. all relations between the person and the other objects in the scene must also be changed  because that person surely approached one of them  but simultaneously went away from the other of them. in case where a situation becomes more complicated  doing such works would make the system unmanageable. 
　 1  objects in the scene are looked for in terms of their colors and relations among their sub-parts. any rotational movements around any axis is assumed not to happen for the simplicity. the reason why these assumptions are required is almost clear considering the current state of art on image processing techniques. as this research is an experimental attempt referring to two sorts of knowledge sources  such topics are not taken into considerations. 
　　　in the followings  beginning with a data structure used in this system  moving through concrete explanation on programs  and ending with their implementation results. 
1. knowledge representation end dete structure 
       it is well known that knowledge is indispensable to our daily life  but this is also true for a computer when we let him appreciate an environment surrounding him. in this regard  the world knowledge  object models for an object identification  and dictionaries for language analysis are given to this system as its apriori knowledges  which are of vital importance to make inference about a plot of the given story. this reasoning process involves a generation of the description representing their causal chains among events  a construction of the world model in terms of their locations and that of the frame model containing several sorts of properties of objects  and these consequences will be used by our question answering programs mentioned in 1. in this section  the data 
structures will be shown. 
1 world knowledge 
　　　the implicit knowledge  which we feel we have  explaining various events in the world are built into the system in forms of the semantic network  with a hierarchical structure described in terms of general/specific relations. the network consists of objects or nodes representing their concept and linkages semantically linking them. the node is in the form of frame structure  which have several number of slots for properties or attributes that object will have  and the lowest node in the tree corresponds to the specific object as shown in fig.l. the linkage between nodes has a label-value pair which illustrates a relation with its score holding between those frames. as is the case with the ordinary frame system  some functions enable our frame to inherit information from the higher frame by following sis-a relations  see fig.l . 

1 models for object inspection 
　　　with respect to the inspection of object in a scene  the following two points are assumed. 
　　　 1  we permit the line drawing given as input to have some deep information with respect to the actor's movement toward fore and aft directions in the approximate sense. 
　　　 1  models are designed to make it easy to describe objects with respect to the mutual relations among their subparts and their colors  and their precise shape is not taken into consideration from the following reason: 
1 k 　　　when we observe fairly complicated objects in our daily life  we often capture them as the composite set consisting of their elementary subparts  and are not possessed with an awkward idea that they should be matched against their models in a strict sense. 
concerning to the object identification  taking this flexibility into consideration results in a robust program  that is  less subjective to several kinds of noise  and the program can  therefore  recognize what he sees. 
a format of the object models is shown in fig.1. 
as shown in this figure  the object to be inspected is framed with a rectangle just fitting the boundaries of the object. next  this rectangle is divided into 1 sub-regions  where each sub-parts locates and what relations it has among others are described in terms of these sub-regions. the assumption that no rotational movement occurs helps to simplify this framing process  as all of its edges are restricted to vertical or horizontal ones. 
　　　fig.1 shows a model for desks. at top of it  there is a declaration preceded by the symbol *pict  which says that the main property is a desk  and its subordinate statements  preceded by *subr  follows which means that a breakup operation of it into its subparts. 
　　　this breakup process can be repeated so that a hierarchical representation of models are built up. with respect to each statement  the subpart  its color  location and relations among other parts are put in their own places  and yet to each of such statements  a score is appended which is used in a decision whether the matching of object against this model succeeds or not. for an instance  a description  foot1 cout   r  d  
1  means the fallowings  
　　　  foot1 is located in a position shown in fig.1. 
　　　  a relation cout holds between foot1 and dsk which is its superior constituent of foot1  where the relation cout states that the body of foot1 is contignous to that of dsk and that it occupies a region outside of dsk. 
　　　  if all of these conditions are satisfied  1 points will be given as its score. 

　　　a suitable representaion must be selected so as to make it easy for a program to infere things which might happen and also to make it easy to follow his reasoning when asked some questions. the cd conceptual dependency  representation exploited by schank is adopted by the following reasons: 
　 1  the cd concept leads an evaluator to straightfoward resolution with respect to its interpretaion of ambiguous sense of words. 
　 1  the cd makes it easier to reason about the cause-effct relations among events in the story. 
　　　in favor of these  the following two dictionaries are used in this system. 
1.1 syntactic dictionary 
　　　this is a dictionary that is refered by mini-atn parser which generates a possibility list consisting of all plausible combinations among prepositional groups or fragements of sentence. lists of ideoms or syntactic roles of words  for some of which the case information  are stored in this dictionary. to date  nearly 1 words have been given their full definitions and more than about 1 words registered into memory in an inperfect form. 
1.1 cd dictionary 
　　　with the help of this dictionary  a surface structure of an input sentence is translated into the cd representation. each verb in this dictionary is given a set of rules evaluated by a pattern-directed invocation. for each of these rules  its premises and conclusions are listed in terms of the cd notion  with a demon to be created and procedures to be executed when this rule does a good job. in other words  each rule is in form of so-called production rule and functions are added to it to realize side-effects that is attended by this action. this demon is required to turn many thing into reality  especially to associate assertions believed to be in the cause-effect relation by going through all assertions  or adding some assertions deducible from this rule when neccessary. 
1 object frame 
　　　this is a most specific frame placed in the lowest position in the hierarchical tree  and represents an instance of its higher node. this object frame  abbreviated as of here after  has slots containing its properties  its location and all assertions closely related to this object. these slot structures deserve more explanation because of its idiosyncracy. 
　　　as a location of an object will be change when the object moves in a scene  its of must record the current location in a proper form. for this purpose  the slots must be categorized into two classes  one involving constant properties and the other for dynamic attributes such as its location  state  and actions that have something to do with this object. these dynamic properties are managed under the frame number of the scene  that is  the frame number is used as its leading slot. so the slots in an ordinary sense are secondary and can be used as a key to retrieve information  provided that frame number is known be careful not to confuse the meaning of these two frames . 
1. system organization 
　　　a rough sketch of our system is shown in the followings and we want to put them into perspective. 

1 
1 syntactic parser 	1.1 utilization of model 

　　　this is a well known atn parser  which refers to the syntactic dictionary when necessary. it does so-called the syntactic analysis  and on its completion several parsing trees will be generated in the form of possibility list  each of which shows plausible combinations of prepositional groups or others. for the simplicity  we dismiss this and proceed to next. 

　　　after getting parsing trees  they are tested which of them can give the most plausible interpretation for the given sentence by referring to the corresponding image data. to put it more concretiy  the verification is conducted to see whether there exist what are expected to be in the scene and also the relations suggested by this possibility iist hold among them. for example  let the following fragment given along with fig.1 
   a cat sees the clock above a box above a desk on the chair. 
it is clear that image information contributes to exclude interpretations failig to make sense. in this case  at first object inspector searches objects such as chair and desk  because they are probably sitting on the floor. then it is 
easy to see that a noun group  the clock  is modified by two prepositional groups of prepg1  prepg1 and that prepg1 functions as an adverbial phrase. a group of lists illustrated below fig. 1 shows an intermediate representation for this sentence and inner notations concerning to a location  which are recorded into the memory in terms of symbolic expressions because their relations are mentioned explicitly in english. 
       note here that if a sentence is so simple that no confusion arises in its analysis  the object inspector can utilize more directly the results from the sentence analyzer. and it should be also noted that the model inspector can use restriction that the case information of words will give to him. then the remaining objects are found. in this way  once real relations among them are found in the image  they help to decide relation among phrases. 
1 object inspection 
　　　as has already been mentioned  in object models their score are recorded along with their structural constraint  and the effective use of them can enable the pattern matcher to serve as a partial matcher. in this section  how such models are used with the matcher is first shown  and next we provide a simple example to make it easy for readers to be acquainted with matching process. 
　　　let assume that we are at a verification process if some object can be matched against the model given as in the followings: 

  evaluation of this model 
　　　matching is done with respect to some standard reference to the following inequality. 

in this expression  sca-i is to be a score a-priori given to this model and xa-i is to be a real score calculated through the method given as in the followings. 
　　　when this inequality holds  after taking all possible components described below into account  this portion of the object is said to be an instance of this fragment of model. the evaluation of the model itself is also done in a similar way to this method  but in that case the topmost statement of the description will be   pict a thsc . 
* computation of xa-i 
    1  for color statement in sl   a color of the object part is checked against the one designated as b in this illustrative model. if they are quite the same one  then set xa-1 to 1  otherwise set it to sca-1. this means that the color information plays a key role in the matching process. 
    1  for relational statement in s1 s1   the following three components must be taken into account. 
    verification of c. note that a description with respect to c will have also the same style as with the case for a. if the description for c is found successfully by going through the object beings currently inspected  then set y1 to a value given by the following equation  otherwise set it to sca1. 

    a contiguous relation between a and c must be checked out on this model description. when no discrepancy is found between them  set y1 to 1. if one of 

their relations is either cin or cout and the another is also either of these two specific relations  let y1 be l/1 sca1. otherwise  that is  if they are quite unlike 
each other  set y1 to l/1*sca1. 
    as is the case with   a locative relation must be also looked at. no difference between them implies that y1 should be set to 1. if a combination of their positional symbol with respect to a and c is a member 
1 

of the set   u c   d c   l c   c r    then equate y1 to l/1*sca1  otherwise set it to l/1*sca1 at last  xa1 is 
given a vaiue y1+ y1+ y1. 
　　　looking at its matching process in this light  it is easy for readers to understand that a considerably flexible partial matching is possible by fixing its appropriate threshold value. as a more concrete illustration  let consider if an object in fig.1 a is identified as the obaq  who is a famouse charactor in the japanese comic strip. as  hand1  is occluded by something  1 points will be reduced according to  in flg.1 c   this operation corresponding to the case  stated above. next with respect to  1*1 points will be also cut down because a real relation is  cin   which corresponds to  note that still more l/1*1/ 1  points must be reduced from the total 
points by taking the effect into consideration which are brought about an evalutation of  mouth   where 1*1 points have been taken off with repect to because of the mismatched relation  cin . as a result of this evaluation the score for the  body  becomes 1 points. this means that the score is over the threshold value  then the object in fig.1 a can be identified with the  obaq . 
　　　a process to identify objects assumed to be in the current scene is conducted by first extracting those object explicitly mentioned in the narrations. this indication by utterance means that their descriptions appear in the intermediate representations shown in 1. in advance to this execusion  it deserves to think of possibility if the plausible domain for objects can be restricted to a small portion of the image  because there are often cases where objects themselves or things related to them imply their existent environments. if such restrictive conditions are deducible  the object finding program can search them in this small region  in a top-down fashion. otherwise  that is  no such condition is found  the program tries to go through a relative narrow space for those objects by assuming that only a little or not at all movements occur from the place they were located in the preceding images  or that animate objects continue moving toward the same direction as in the latest image. if all of those methods fail to find the specified object  and yet it is confirmed that they are in the given scene  the program works on its exhaustive blind search for it. these are the practical use of pictorial constraint implemented in this system  but those with respect to so-called common sense knowledge are  of course  now in effect. the following description for overcoats shows such an example: 
o	v	e	r	c	o	a	t	w	e	a	r xman 	1  
 in xdresser 1  
 on %chair 1  
 wear %man -1  
a number put in the last position of lists represents the plausibility value for its occurence  where the most plausible one is given 1 points  whereas -1 for the least case as its score. as this description is self-explanatory  nothing might be needed. along with these maneuvers  it is also important for the program to pay attention to the circumstance around the identified objects in order to find things closely related them  otherwise  the program cannot know a bit but just objects explicitly stated in the narrations  which is too poor. for an example  if some objects are found in the region seemingly corresponding to the sky and yet they cannot be there  the program must infer that they must be supported by something. for apples  which appear in our experiment shown later  something might be a tree or supporter like a table. 
1 world model construction 
       each time an image is given to the system  the image processing program records all things identifiable as an object in forms of their coordinate values with respect to a new coordinate system. on completion of these operations for successive frames  it is necessary for him to put those systems together into one global coordinate system as far as possible  in order to capture the global relations among things appearing in the given story. since those images given along with narrations does not necessarily illustrate consecutive movement  a change in situation  like a case an actor enters a room from outside  often makes it difficult to tidy those systems up into such a unique system. in such a case  all frames following this situation are described with respect to this new system. the appreciation on the depth relations in the images is  in some sense  in effect by providing models with their standard dimensions as a clue to infer their approximate locations. 
　　　the procedure to implement the idea is like this: now assume that the program sees a n-th frame  and its coordinate system is con  we are working on it with respect to the standard system co a. 
    a  find an object that appears in both con and com  m n   and yet has a property  still  or 
 immovable  in its attribute slot. if such an object can be found  go to  b   otherwise  c . 
    b  calculate an origine of the con with respect to the coa by referring to coordinates of this object in the con  com respectively. then all object believed to be in this frame are put together with respect to coa. 
    c  suspend the current operation and defer this until the position of some objects is determined with respect to coa. 
    d  if there occurs a change in the situation  set a global system to this new one  say coa'  and a rough relation between the old coa and this coa' is recorded in the coa'  if possible. 
1 translation into the cd representation 
   we show a rough sketch of this translation process by referring to an example. see fig.1  which is an easy version with the help of english that is equivalent to the content in 1.1. now let assume that an intermediate expression  obaq take apple1  is derived from the procedure given in 1. this expression leads the translation process to the execution of rules  r1  r1 and r1 in this order  because their key pattern 
ip1 successfully matches to this expression. as to the rule r1  it is clear that this is not applicable to the case at hand because a pattern variable xobj1  now bounded to apple1  does not mean disease. then the next rule 
1 

r1 is checked for its legality. because the value of %obj1 is edible  a result in the form of 
 obaq =p= ingest -o- apple1 -d-  mouth 
stomach   
is reached from the portion of the rule labeled with 1  if it is comfirmed that the %obj1 does not exist anywhere in the scene  which clearly means that it was eaten in this case. note that the assumption on aspectual sense stated earlier in this paper is used here. the fact that the object is found to be as it was discourages the rule r1 from being attempted  and eventually rule r1 is activated. this is a so-called default rule  so that it concludes the following with no condition 
 obaq =p= atrans - 1 - apple1 d-  %%% obaq   on completion of execution of each rule  a demon  if attached to the rule  will be invoked in order to inspect causal relations among these cd descriptions asserted so far. 

　　　by using of informations derived from events stated in the story and things closely related to them  this system can answer some questions concerning to this story. 
1.1 query generation 
　　　this is easily accomplished by first translating an input sentense into a query by substituting pattern variables for unknown portion of the sentence  as is the 
case with the interpretation of narrations. 
1.1 matching strategy 
　　　a matching procedure used to answer questions differs from the conventional matcher in the following four points. 
    1  it is vital for him to correctly consider what portions of the story are interested in  because the plot proceeds along with time and actors can move around from place to place. 
    1  as precise locative informations concerning to objects in the scenes are not asserted in the forms of cd notation as a rule  a routine that computes them directly from their coordinate values is required. 
    1  with respect to descriptions stating the status of affairs  even if they were asserted in somewhere in the story once and for all  they are there as they have been until they will undergo some changes in their state in 
1 
the consecutive frames. our matcher must take care of this fact. 
    1  though assertions  in terms of the cd  first represent events that are stated in narrations or those observed in scenes  they are inserted additional relations among events when a reasoning process goes according to the plan that program should assert some facts with respect to causal relations or others. consequently  when a matcher is going to find expected answers  it must match the query against a proper portion of descriptions by keeping itself free from such clutter. s. experimental result 
　　　in this section  beginning with the illustration on the detailed process by which representation is built up from the given pictures and narrations  ending with a dialogue referring to its world model constructed through reasoning. 
1 world model construction 
　　　fig.1 shows a series of pictures and narrations given to the system. as a result of the story being interpreted  the inner representation as shown in fig.1  description concerning to object frame as in fig.1 and the world model in regard to the location of objects as in fig. 1 are obtained. the figure shown in fig. 1 shows a situation corresponding to first half of this story is stuffed into one global system. note that the dimension of objects are drawn by considering their standard demensions in depth. 
　　　at the first frame  denoted as #frame1  program tries to find the obaq and apples first comming out into this frame  whereas the rock  which isn't stated in words  is not regarded as to be inspected. the tree  however  is successfully recognized because program uses his common-sense knowledge that apples usually grow on trees. that is  in this case  the program first looks for a tree for the purpose of restricting the region the apples would locate  then find them by searching this tree region. from now on  when we refer to the descriptions given in fig.1  1  1  we use the number preceding them. 
　　　the floating point number in assertions 1 1 shows the position of apples on the tree1  and these apples are also recognized as a member of the object-group apple1  which corresponds to the word  apples  in the narration for the iframe1 
　　　at iframe1  the assertion 1 are derived through the rule which translate surface representation into the cd form  where  take  are successfully interpreted referring to the relation between stone1 and his hand. concurrently with this operation  a demon is activated  shoving a fragment of description having the form of  =r=  1   in the assertion 1. this is needed to record the fact that the action stated in 1 enables the 
event in assertion 1 to be caused. 
　　　at #frame1  a transformational rule required to capture the word  throw  is used  and its consequence is correctly predicted and verified  and the representation 1 and a demon d1 are generated. this d1 convinces the program of the fact that the apple1 fell down on the ground in the intervals from #frame1 through #frame1. this also causes a new assertion 1  which states the apple1 was fallen with the stone 1  to be gone into the representaion. in addition it to these  creates an another demon which devotes its attention to the apple1 for conformation of what might happen to it. 


1 

　　　at #frame1  there is nothing unmovable except for house1 in both #frame1 and #frame1  but as this house1 is recognized for the first time at #frames  it is used to relate #frame1 to the global coordinate system denoted as *base in fig. 1. here the reader must note that  the house  drawn in #frame1 is not perceived to be there as it is not mentioned in the narration at #frame1. consequently it is not found in #frame1 untill program look at things corresponding to house1 at #frame1 with utmost care  because house1 is the only object believed to be immovable at #frame1. 
　　　at #frame1  a change in the situation occurs and a new basic coordinate system is generated  in this case no relation between these basic systems is recorded  see 1-th list in fig. 1 . 
　　　here the table 1 in 1-th assertion was not mentioned in the narration  but is found to be in a scene  because its existence is predicted and verified through the location of apple1 and the fact that the action  put  suggests a place on which the object is placed. 
1 qa result 
　　　this program can answer some questions shown in fig.1  where a first few examples are listed along with the reason why the answers can be reached by the program. as with the section 1  we refer to examples with their number. 
    1  the question beginning with  how many  can be answered by counting how many assertions or descriptions match to the query. as to this  the context is recognized as #frame1. using  when obaq took the apple   and this context enables the matcher to find a query    pos   -apple on tree1  to be the same as the assertions 1. 1. 
    1  by finding that there is a description =e= in the 
1-th question  which indicates that the action stated in 1 causes the event in 1 to come about  it is known that the expression 1 gives the answer. 
    1  as with the above example  assertions 1  1 and 
1 are used as an answer simply by finding a descriptor =r= representating causal relations. in this version  how much detail should be given in explanation is not considered very much. 
    1  the 1-th assertion easily leads to this answer. it is easy for a program using the cd representation to match  eat  to  take   thus we believe that the cd concept fits well the sophisticated knowledge representation requiring many sorts of knowledge sources like our work. 
    1  a frame number is used to answer question. the level of an english generation routine it uses is not so strong yet that some answers are often given in this way. 
    1  there being no assertion concerning to the color of stone 1  this answer is derived directly through seeing a line drawing  itself. 
1. conclusion 
　　　the reference on both image and language enables the following effect to be realized. 
    1  an explicit mention of objects can simplify the objects identification process by first restricting the region they will exist to the small one  and by next infering things related to them. 
    1  the confinement of description of objects into the forms of coordinates contributes to a compact representation of events and a combinatorial explosion 

can be avoided that will occur when all relations among things in scene are asserted in words in the data base. 
    1  the relation found in the given scene can help the interpreter of language resolve interrelation among prepositional groups. 
    1  the usage of production-like representation for the translation from english into the cd description and avaiiability of pictorial information in this translation makes these operations quite straightforward. 
       on concerning to  l .the following must be noted: from the assumption stated first in this paper  there is a case where some objects are not recognized what they are  when they are not stated explicitly and yet not deducible from any facts known so far  even if they are identifiable when compared with their models. this point should be regareded as a good point rather than a defect  because the system at any time can answer questions about such things as the clock in #frame1. this clock was explicitly recognized at any time in the story  but the following question such as  is there anything on the wail   or  is there a clock anywhere   can be answered by ulitizing the words appearing in these questions as a clue to find and recognize objects. but there is obviously great deal more to be improved in order to completely acheive the goals of this research. 


1 
