a note on deduction rules with negative premises 
ivan kramosil 
institute of information theory and automation 
czechoslovak academy of sciences 
prague.czechoslovakia 

　　the so called frame axioms problem or frame problem is well-known to anybody who is interested in automatic problem solving.some information concerning this problem can be found in  1  or  1 .in  1  the author proposes to eliminate the frame axioms in such a way that they are replaced by a new deduction rule denoted as unless-operator.in fact this operator is a rule enabling to derive that something concerning the environment is valid at the present situation supposing it was valid in a past situation and it is not provable that a change concerning the validity of this statement has occured.for our reasona only the formally logical aspect of this solution is interesting es it leais immediately to a new and very interesting modification of the notion of formalized theory. 
　　the aspect just mentioned consists in in the fact that in  1  the author formalizes his unl .ss-operator in the f o l lowing form of a deduction rule: if a formula a is deducible and a formula b 
　　is not deducible ; then a formula c is deducible.written in symbols 
 1  
where of course. not  and     are symbols of an appropriate metatheory not the investigated theory itself. 
     the use of a deduction rule of this type may involve some doubts whether we are justified to do so.the first objection arises from the fact that any deduction rule including those of the type  1   is an integral part of the definition of the notion  deducible formula  ao this notion itself.neither in its negative form  not l- b  is not allowed to occur in a deduction rule.it is a matter of fact that in  usual  formalized theories the deduction rules are also written in the form using the symbol  e.g. 
 1  
if the modus ponens rule is considered. however it is a well-known fact that in this case the symbol can be eliminated so that the definition of the notion  provable formula  should be correct.lt is the g1l of this paper to investigate the deduction rules of the type  1  in order to see wheher a set of deduction rules containing at least one rule of 
the type  1  and considered together with a recursive set of axioms defines unambiguously and correctly e set of deducible formulas.the second objection concerning the deduction rules of the type  1  arises from the fact that when a proof is constructed we have at our disposal in every step only a finite number of formulas proved already to be theorems so we are never justified to apply a rule of the type cl  .first of all we shall investigate the f i r s t objection leaving the other one t i l l the end of this paper. 
　　consider a formalized language l based on the first-order predicate calcutus  fopc .let ax be a set of axioms.this set i s supposed to be recursive and without any loss of generality it may be also supposed to be finite and its elements to be closed formulas  i.e.not containing free indeterminstes   
　　moreover consider a finite set of deduction rules.deduction rule  generalized 'or purposes of this paper  is a metalanguage schema 
	 1  	
where b is a formula and every a. is either a- or not a- .a-cl.clearly   1  includes  1  and  z  as special cases.let us divide the deduction rules into two sets r and s. 
　　r  contains the deduction rules in whi~h every a. is of the form  a- f i.e. 
the  usual  deduction rules.suppose in 
the rest of this paper that r contains all the deduction rules usual in the first-order theories  and-maybe some other deduction rules derived from them . 
　　s contains the deduction rules in which at least one a- is of the form 

　　let us suppose for a moment that the set s is empty.in such a case the previous description coincides with the usual definition of formalized theories based on the fopc.the set of provable formulas  theorems  is then defined as the smallest set of formulas containing the set ax and closed with respect to the deduction rules.to make this formulation precise the following pattern must be used. 
1 
　　　in usual logical theories where only the rules of the type  1  occur all the deduction rules possess a property which is usually celled the truth-preserving property.this property consists in the following fact: if a rule of the type  1  is applicable to formulas a-j a1  . . . a and if these formulas are true in a model then also b is true in this model.in ot-
her words the truth-preserving deduction rules do not lead outside the set of true formulas.this property seems to be quite natural and necessary for any deduction rule if the formalized theory is expected 
to have a r e l a t i o n to the r e a l w o r l d   r e presented by a model.in other case the formalized theory becomes j u s t a pure play w i t h formulas.lt is why we t r y to generalize t h i s n o t i o n also f o r the ded u c t i o n r u l e s of a more general t y p e   n a mely   1   . 
     a rule of the type  1  possesses the truth-value-translating property if for every n-tuple a 1 a1       an of formulas to which this rule is applicable the following is valid : supposing m is any model such that if ai is a i t h e n ai is true in m and if a. is pot  ai  then a is not true in m  them b is true in m. 
     theorem 1  let l ax r s p p  and cn  ax/r  have the same meaning as above and let a l l deduction rules from r. u s possess the truth-value-translating property.if the set cn ax/r  is closed with respect to every deductton rule from s  then 

otherwise 

     proof. 	clearly  l e p and if x e p  then cn ax/r  c x.denote by a 	the conjunction of a l l formulas from ax -consider a formula ycl such that 
	where 	stands for the negation of y. 
the fact that 
	means that a 	is not a theorem 
of the fopc. a well-known theorem of mathematical logic states that this calculus is semantically complete.this yields that a formula is a theorem of the fopc if and only if it is true in a l l models. 
hence there exists a model in which a ;  y is not true so in this model  denote it m y  the formula  a -  y  is true.the  set 1r m y   of a l l the f o r mulas from l which a re true in the model m y  is clo'sed with respect to the usual deduction rules of the propositional and first-order calculi.the equivalence 

1 * 

deduction rules in fopc preserve the truth i.e. if the premises are true in a model the same holds for the conclusions. however the truth-velue-translating property assures that tr m y   is closed also with respect to  induction rules from s.this fact should be immediately clear from the definition let us prove it for the rule  1 . 
　　　let the rule  1  be applicable to formulas a  b c l  let a e tr m y    let b e l - tr m y t. then according to the truth-vatue~preserving property c is also true in the model m y; so c e tr m y    the way of generalizing this resutt to any rule from s is quite clear. 
     hence the set tr m y   c l;contains all the axioms from ax  since  at contains a   contains y does not contain  and is closed with respect to all the deducti on rules from r u s.this gives that 

and immediately we obtain 

where 

　　　the set cn  ax/r    b belongs to p if and only if it is closecf with respect to the rules from r u s.this is possible only if b is empty  i.e. only if 

if this set is closed also with respect to the rules from s then it belongs to p  in all other cases tehe set    p does not belong to p.the theorem is proved. 
     the result of this theorem is following: the quadruple  ll ax r s  defines a formalized theory if and onty if this theory is equivalent to that defined by the triple  l ax r  . in other words  the deduction rules  from s i.e.the rules with negrtive premises are  either useless or meaningless.this result agrees with our intuizive feeling that the rules of the type  1  are useless as we ere never allowed to say that a formula is not derivable having at our disposal only a f i nite number of formulas derived until now and not having at our disposal any metatheoretical assertions concerning the investigated theory as these assertions cannot be formalized end deduced before defining the notion of provability. 
     in order not to limit ourselves just to a criticism of the model suggested in  1  let us propose another way how to define a formalized theory using the deductive rules with negative premises.remember that in usual formalized theories it is possible to define first of all the notion of formalized proof and then define a formula to be theorem if and only if there exists a formalized proof proving this formula.let us follow this pattern and define the set d of formalized proofs as follows here x y1a b etc.belong to l. 

     now the set t of theorems can be defined as followst 

     theorem 1. the definition of the set of theorems is logically correct.the set i  of formalized proofs is recursive  the set t of theorems is recursively enumerable.  
     proof. consider the intersection of all sets of finite sequences of formulas satisfying a  b  and c .this intersection also satisfies a  b  and c  ao d is just this intersection and the definition of d is correct.for any finite sequence   x1    x1   . . *  xm  of formulas we are able to decide in an effective way whether it is a formalized proof or not so the set i  is recursive.the fact that the set t of theorems is recursively enumerable follows immediately from its definition and from the kleene's representation theorem  see e.g.  1  .the theorem is proved. 
     it can be easily seen that this definition of deducibility does not capture the intention explained in  1  namely  there may be formulas in t which should not be provable in the framework of the model developed in  1 .however the intentions explained in  1  are not correctly formalizable and we believe that certain difference between the author s 
1 

suggestion in  1  and our definition of the set t is a penalty the necessity of which fotlows from theorem 1.certainly  it would be interesting to ask whether theorem 1 w i l l be valid supposing the truth-velue-preserving property is om-
mited or to ask for some more properties of the set t defined above.however both those uesttons would be beyond the scope of the main problem to which this paper hns been devoted. 
