 concepts. concrete concepts are specified by a set of values 
of the features  these values are taken from certain fixed sets o f v a l u e s i s rep-
laced in the set of values by then this concrete concept has no such feature. classes are specified by certain attribution functions which depend on values of the features. the concepts of class may be made specific by specifying the name of that concept as well as by specifying the set of values of features. the set of names w i l l be denoted as and its elements as  abstract concepts are determined by certain texts. 
　　　elements of the set  are imperatives of the natural language. such as the words and combinations  go    a path should be traced  and others. 
　　　elements of the set  are metarelations of the type  go to . .     object - action    cause - effect    be simultaneously    have a name   etc. 
about the power of the set for a natural language there is a hypothesis that this set is finite- this fact is established for the italian  and russian language 
 to find the power o   texts in a natural language were studied and new relations were discovered that were introduced into the list oi relations found previously if these new relations were not expressed by super-position of relations found previously. this process was completed when about 1 various relatione were found in the list of basic relations. 
　　　let us use a simple example to show translation of a text in a natural language into that of a semiotic system underlying the gyronat structure. the natural text is:  nick and his dog left the house and went to the forest . the following notation is introduced - a n a n   a dog  nick  nick's 
	dog  	the forest  	the house  
　　　　- to have a name  	go from  - go to  	simultaneously  	after that. then the initial text takes the 

note  that the retranslation is not univalent. thus the text:  nick and his dog rushed from the house and ran to the forest  has exactly the same structure as the previous one and they are not distinguished in the gyromat. if this difference is essential  names of relations 
may be introduced. in this case the words  went    ran    rushed    dragged their feet   etc. will be different names of the relation  go to . 
　　　it is easy to see that practically any texts of the natural language may be represented by texts of the gyromat. if necessary  the set  can be completed with sets of modalities  estimates and fixation of emotional states related with the gyromat1 s ego. ref.  shows how this 
1 
is done. 
　　　let us now take up the rules for derivation of  . these rules be are divided into three subgroups. the first 
one incorporates rules for updating the 
facta  or rules of the form these rules relay on formal properties' of the relations and their semantics. formally the relations can have or have not properties such as reflexivity  symmetry or transitivity. the presence of such properties may be used to add relations to the text. for instance  the sentence  there are three rooms in the house and two windows in each room  establishes the relation of possession between the concepts of house and room and between the concepts of room and window. because of the transitivity the relations of possession of the rule 
will establish this relation between the concepts of house and window. the use of semantic properties of the relations may be illustrated with the sentences  in the evening birds fly low over the ground . in this phase there are relations such as  object - action    action - time  and  action - site . the relation  to be over  between the concepts of a bird and the ground is established through analysis of the composition and structure of relations in the sentence. for the russian language about 1 rules for facts updating have been found. 
　　　a second subgroup of derivation rules controls transformation of facts by introduction of derivative concepts and relations. new relations are introduced in three ways: by elimination of names of concepts and relations  by generalization in terms of the features  and 
by generalization in terms of relation structures. the elimination of names results in replacement of personified facts related to concrete concepts by facts related to classes. generalization in terms of features is performed by in-
troducing new classes using attribution eigenfunctions. this process is wellknown and described in many papers  e.g. in a monograph. this generalization leads to concepts such as  red    round and sweet   etc. generalization in term1 of relation structure will be illustrated with the following example. let ai 

this signifies that the people are rather dense in the square. the situation is easily generalized into a new concept of a  crowd in a square . the concept of a crowd is generated due to the presence of uniform relations between  and because these relations denote  being simultaneous  and  touching . if the relation is replaced by an orderliness of the type 
we w i l l have a queue rather than a crowd in the square. 
　　　unlike updating rules  the rules for generalization in terms of features and structures are not specified in advance but formulated during the gyromat functioning as a function of the set of ar-
tifacts. 
let us now take up the set of rules 
1   . divide the set of facts into two subsets  f1 and f1 let us assume that the appearance of an artifact  fi  ph  for which fi belongs to f1 is a favorable event whilst the appearance of the a r t i f a c t i n which f j belongs t o p1 an unfavorable event. then the r u -
les  have the following structure: if the application of  results in a favorable artifact  this is entered into the artifact store and the rules which were applied to the i n i t i a l text to obtain fi are assumed applicable to that i n i t i a l text  otherwise their application is banned. but because text trans-
formation is a multi-stage process  are of a more complicated nature described in rets  . 
　　　the gyromat was used in solving real l i f e problems such a goods handlii  
control in a seaport  solution of game 
problems  management  etc 
　　　to conclude let us note that a gyromat model is being successfully tested in man - computer dialog systems using a natural language. although not a 
sole implementation of a semi otic system  the gyromat demonstrates the potent i a l of such systems handling a r t i f i c i al intelligence problems. 
