 
     this paper describes the principal features of tulips program designed as a widely-oriented ai system that accepts natural language  nl  input. nl processor of tulips is guided by information represented in models of current  external world  domain and of current user and u t i l i z e s deductive and inductive mechanisms. these features allow the program: to discover the most relevant interpretation of an input  to extract the descriptions of user's goals from nl utterances  and to generate the so-called t-problems   t for tulips . having solved them tulips not only answers user's request but also learns new knowledge on i t s environment and improves i t s own mechanisms. 
introduction 
     it need hardly be said about attractiveness of nl communications with a program. tulips's user must not learn special interactive languages and can pass to a computer not a formali ed description of the algorithm but a description of the problem i t s e l f   an input f o r problemsolving block of the program    it must be especially emphasised that nl descript i o n of a problem can be of the p r e l i m i nary informal kind. for tulips is implemented as a dialog-system  user is able to specify and supplement this descript i o n in case of need. 
     thus tulips cardinally d i f f e r s from   t r a d i t i o n a l   computer program. it is not a detailed formal description of an algorithm for the current user's problem  but a generator of such algorithms. it receives as input not a command to a c t i vate known to user b t r i c t segment of a l gorithm  but only a description of user's problem   i . e . user sais what he wants without any specification how it bhould be done  . just this property of tulips - i t s a b i l i t y automatically solve the problem  being t o l d the wording of it allows to consider the program as ai system that automatizes so n o n - t r i v i a l functions of human intelligence as specifying of a problem to the well-formed one and solving of such well-formed problem. 
     highly i n t e l l i g e n t work does  however  not only the solver of tulips but also i t s analyser. i t s goal is to extract from nl  russian  input the descriptions of problem situations  user's goals  and own duties  represented in utterances both e x p l i c i t l y and i m p l i c i t l y   . to extract i m p l i c i t information the analyser should take into consideration a context  local and global  of the current communication process. a local context of nl utterance is an information extracted from the previous input expressions. a global context is defined by models of  abstract  user   external world  as a whole  particular users known for tulips  specific problem-domains  of user's a c t i v i t y      general duties  of tulips  and concret heuristics and other tools r e l a t ed to a concret problem-domain or user. 
     these kinds of models must be i n t r o duced because of tulips is a w i d e l y - o r i ented system. the program is to solve different kindes of problems in different concret domains and to adapt to subset of russian being used  specific features of problem-domains and users. this main feature of tulips - wide-orientation - determines a l l the other i t s features and  in particular  the approach to nl processing. 
approach to natural language processing 
     natural language is a social level sign system that is used as a means of intercourse. it exists in a social group of speakers of a given language o b j e c t i vely - every member of this group should learn signs of nlt rules of t h e i r combining - syntax  and the rules of i n t e r p r e t a t i o n and usage nl constructions - se-
mantics  sigmatics  and pragmatics. 
     however  subset of nl learned by any speaker is specific by lexicon  meanings  and syntactic rules. the process of such a subset forming is a natural phenomenon depending on psychicial and social fact o r s . at the same time speaker can't handle nl too a r b i t r a r i l y . if he violates language norms appreciably  humpty-dumpty may be mentioned   he w i l l not be understood by others. while language w i l l not perform i t s fundamental social function - function of a means of intercourse. 
     since a dependency of nl processing on a mentioned subjective factor is a 
     
1 
     
real natural phenomenon  it must be taken into consideration in tulips model of language processing. thus  on a conceptual level two basic concepts  meaning  and  sense  reflects  respectively  objective and subjective aspects of utterance content    
     the sense concept describes the aspects of the meaning that connects to an utterance current speaker  user  in a current real situation  whereas the meaning corresponds to standard objective tor a social level  links of sign and: 
1  frame and constituent sign structures 
- syntactic meaning; 
1  objects and relations of reality sigmstic meaning; 
1  peychicial  reflective  equivalents of these objects and relations - semantic meaning; 
1  activities  caused by speech acts and causing them - pragmatic meaning. 
     thus  in a language communication any speaker relates to an utterance only a portion  sense  of objectively existing 
meaning - a portion that is the most relevant to a current act of speakingwhile a hearer  no matter who a human or an a r t i f i c i a l system  is to extract from utterance just this sense  to learn not only  what the speaker is saying  but also  what and whet for he intended to say . 
     nl processing of this kind is referenced here as understanding. to understand an utterance stands for to find thous aspects and portions of a meaning that are the most relevant to a current context situation  to find speaker's i n tention and to relate it to goals and activities of hearer. 
     it is obvious that a necessary feature of nl understanding  in the sense defined above  is using of data not only on a language but also on a current speaker  concret problem-domain and hearer's activities. that is why the vehicles of an understanding program are to be enough elaborate. they should be able to handle nl utterances  underlying structures  linguistics rules and to be adaptable. non-trivial problem - in nl communication - is that of discovering an interpretation the most relevant  with respect to user and program  in a current intercourse act. 
the main blocks of tulips 
     to discover such the most relevant interpretation of an utterance  to learn sense associated with it by user  tulips analyzer - anal block - interactes with other blocks of the program. thus  nl processing invokes the deductive mechanisms of tulips  problem-solving a b i l i t i es  data represented in the model of external world domains and of user. 
interactions of anal with other 
blocks are two-way ones.anal block extracts en underlying conceptual content of an utterance and relates it to the models of current environment  while information represented in these models guides parsing and extracting of the conceptual content   1   . these interactions allow the program to insert nl processing in a total process of functioning. 
     the guiding of nl processing by context information is one of the fundamental features of the anal block. another characteristic feature of this block processing concerns a method of enalysis. anal and its sub-blocks - morp  morphological analysis  and synt  syntactic one  - handle corresponding fragment of an input utterance  being driven by data that describe  predicts  expected results of their processing. 
     having recieved a prediction a block checks if an input satisfy it or not. if a prediction is satisfied  a result is returned to a parent block.* otherwise a process of  failure-investigation  is initiated. it should be noted that the scheme of predictive analysis accepted predictions besides syntactic categories describe semantic ones  references to user's goals and responsibilities of the program - allows to realize the principle of conceptually driven analysis. 
     nevertheless a conceptual level o r i entation  orientation on the  supreme  aspects of a meaning - semantic and pragmatic ones  must not lead to ignoring of proper linguistic phenomena  that is 
why anal takes into account syntactic l e vel characteristics - order of words  projectivity  grammatical agreement  and lexical relations  the powerful apparatus of  lexical functions    1   is used . the vechicles of analysis implemented and detailed description of surface and deep levels of a natural language are the basis for discovering of subtle aspects of a meaning  that are hidden from both  non-intelligent  parser and   i l l i t e r a t e   ai system. 
     the tulips solver - solv - is the most intelligent block of the program. 
its main task is to plan a solution of a t-problem   i . e . a way to transform i n i t i al situation model - s - to a goal one g  and to execute actions planed. the solver can plan a solution in both directions. one of its main strategies is that of reduction of problems  basic general 
methods - analogy  induction  abstraction etc. 
     a problem-solving process is begining with analysis of s and g models  as a r u l e . at this stage the program makes a description of a problem - a pair  s g  -
 * as a rule  a prediction describes several possible results. any block of the program specifies a prediction  by comparing it with input phrases  and returns selected concretized result. 
     
1 
     
more exact. a well-formed t-problem obtained - a t r i p l e t  s f g  - includes references to relevant to a current problem -domain means  p  - problem-solving methods. the second stage of solving  planning  returns a set of operations that transforms s to g. it is to be remarked that during the planning tulips can try to specify a t-problem again. the aim of repeted consideration of s and/or g is to discover some implicit properties of the situations - properties that can be found useful for a solving process. sometimes tulips inquiere user for the aspects of real situations non-reflected in i n i t i a l wording  and  hence  in s and g . 
     the main duty of solv is to solve a t-problem that corresponds to a user's problem  i.e. to plan and acomplish  on the world models  the situation transfor-
mations he hab told to the program. however  the solver can show i t s own   a c t i vity  and generate t-problems represented in input utterances implicitly. the f i r s t kind of such a problem is a t-problem of sense discovering  the second - automatic extanding of linguistic knowledge to complete understanding of a new type phrase  nl adaptation . 
     the t-problems mentioned are generating during analysis of an input when anal appeals to the solv block. common for both nl processing and non-linguibtic domains is an implicit  super-problem  of teaching. the program's models of user and tulips i t s e l f contain assertions on a necessity of teaching. hence the explicit user directions to memorize some new fact are optional. 
     the synthesizer - synz - generates russian utterances adreseed for tulips's user  answers  requests etc. . synz is the least elaborated and for the present time temporary block  which uses a few standard patterns to be f i l l e d by concret words and phrases. 
     monitor-tulips - mtul - is  in fact  a problem-oriented extension of lisp for besm-1 computer. it implements flow of control among anal  solv  and synz and embodies some other functions that are characteristic for new programming languages for ai research   1  . moreover it accomplishes memory transformations  see below;. 
memory and teaching 
     the problems of knowledge representation  memory structure  and mechanisms for memory handling are especially significant for tulips. in a concret beance  the user fixed works with the program in fixed problem-domain  tulips utilizes only a small part of i t s knowledge. a lot of data items - ce  for a  conceptual element    are irrelevant and some components of relevant ones may be smoothly ignored. 
     to take into account the relevance and validity of data-items the memory structured set of ces - is broken into several sub-fieldb and every ce is marked by a special relevation tag - rt. in accordance with the f i r s t criterion for the 
memory breaking up permanent memory  psm  
that contains unchangable in a qeance  absolute  data and operative memory  osm  - for data valid during a seance are introduced. the second criterion relevance of data in a current domain is a basis for introduction psm zones. the total zone contains data that can be used in any seance. the particular zones describe specific properties of problemdomains and individual users. 
     information read by tulips from particular zones guides nl analysis. just this information is a vehicle to discover an utterance sense  to take into account both individual features of user speach and specific of language performance caused by problem-domain. 
memory transformations 
     to use data from particular zones and data represented in relevant ces from total zone tulips performs some operations on the memory. one of them is the activation that makes ces accesible to the main tulips blocks. active memory - a set of activated ces - contains only relevant to a current seance ces. this enables to speed up the necessary information r e t r i eval. 
     an activation is the f i r s t stage of any seance. this process is initiated on receiving the f i r s t user sentence. a next utterances being processed  the new operations on active memory are performed. one of them is the reactivation - activation of ces that were qualified f i r s t l y as irrelevant. thie operation corresponds to such a creative human intelligence operation as using of irrelevant  a p r i ory  information in a quite new domain. 
     another operation - refinement changes activated and already used in a current seance data-items. refinement as opposed to activation  that rejects or accepts ces as a whole  implies changing of cefs  body . it deletes irrelevant in a seance portions of ce and irrelevant references to other data-items. 
     the last type of memory transformation - adaptation - concerns changes of ces grounding on a new knowledge on the world objects and relations  that the program learns in a seance. 
teaching 
     the adaptation process changes only osm of the program - world model thai is valid during a current seance. for the new data-items to be available later on  a l l the changes should be memorized in the psm. such a memorizing - teaching i s   as a rule  accompanied by rather complicated actions: generalization  parti-
     
1 
     
cular zone determination  zone for memorizing  etc. that is why a teaching is a task of a special mtul sub-block that can invoke a l l the program abilities and starts on finishing a seance. the later tulips feature  as one can observe  makes the program teaching similar to human sleeping - period of sorting and memorizing during the day perceived information. 
     the adaptation and teaching processes may result in changing: 1  recomendatione on relevance - for unchanged data-items; 1  data-items as such- if the f i r s t kind of teaching takes a place  tulips changes either implicit recomendatione - l o c a l i zation in psm zones  or explicit ones rtb*. as a new ce should be memorized in some zone of psm and might be marked by rts  the same transformations are  as a rule  performed  the changed ces being memorized. 
     tulips may learn both nl processing and non-linguistic actions - in each of these spheres the same strategies and mechanisms are used. thus  if the program obtains unexpected result it is equally valuable for any sphere of i t s activity  and  failure-investigator  may be invoked in this case both by solv  planned set of actions is impracticable  e.g.  and by anal  prediction is rejected;. 
     in the later case tulips searchs for a  culprit . as the program  belives  user language competency  it tries to adapt a lexicon and grammar. if metagrammer - the model of morphological and syntactic rules  each rule has a description of i t s validity and changability  allows  the appropriate changes are performed. otherwise the program has to admit user as a culprit and to appeal to him with a request. 
     a seance is over  tulips sends new nl data into psm. the concret zones determination is guided by meta-grammer: individual divergences from language norms are memorized in particular zone  for a current user   new words and rules may be send into any zone. this strategy allows the program  later on  to take into account features of a current user language-model  
conclusion 
     for tulips - as for a widely-oriented ai system - both the sphere of problem-domains and language subset used have  in principle  no restrictions.that is why any a priory embodied knowledge can turn out insufficient. thus  an abil i t y to learn knowledge and to memorize them for future  teachability  proves to be a necessary feature of the program. 
 * rt markes not only ce as a whole but also i t s components. the later  internal  rts are taken into account during the refinement process. 
     at present tulips sucessfuily teachs both russian and the real situations model actions in the domaines: 
1  planning actions  of user  in the simplest l i f e situations; 
1  solving of word-formed primary-school arithmetic problems  the i n i t i a l version of tulips for this domain - the april program - is described in   1     ; 
1  russian-english translation  the new ad hoc version of synz is used . these domains having essentially different criteria of understanding  further experiments are of significant theoretical interest. to appraise the principles embodied  mechanisms used  and tulips universality more precisely the program should be taught to work in new more various domains. 
