 
       the paper deals with a number of problems involved in planning a robot's a c t i v i t y . a formalized statement of the planning problem is proposed and the theoretical principles of design and r e quirements to structure of the problem environment models and planning algorithms are discussed. a problem environment model is conoelved as a set of interrelated data on the real world of a robot's functioning that are necessary and sufficient for the solution of a l l problems belonging to a certain class. algorithm is understood as a generalised procedure defined on a problem environment model. 
　　　let us consider the functioning of a certain class of a r t i f i c i a l systems performing actions in a three-dimensional space. we shall introduce the notion of the working space of a system  conceiving it as the space which is physically accessible to the system f o r performing the actions it commits. then by robots 
we shall understand a class of functiona l l y similar automata having a memory and intended f o r executing directed changes of the properties of the components of environment or relations between these within t h e i r working spaoe by means of manipulations w i t h tools and  or objects. we presume the existence of potential f e a s i b i l i t y of manipulating according to any spacial law. 
　　　the simplest robots are devices functioning on the basis of a r i g i d program. programs are supplied to the robot to be subsequently implemented in the form of certain influences on the environment in a sequence which is in advance defined by man   i n the general case by a metasystem  i . e . system having a higher level of control as compared with the r o b o t   . moreover in some cases the choice of actions of the robot may be a d d i t i o n a l l y controlled by changes of i t s physi c a l state and resource capacity. the further sophistication of the robots accompanied by an increase of t h e i r autonomy necessitates incorporating in t h e i r control systems such mechanisms as affoxd during the choice of action automatically to take account of situations a r i s i n g in the robot's working space  and in more developed systems also situations embracing the entire problem environment of the robot is a pre-trained system class i f y i n g situations arising in the environment and choosing the a p r i o r i stated action sequences that are adequate to these situations. however  in complex environments involving a great number of components which affect the robot's acti v i t y   an a p r i o r i c l a s s i f i c a t i o n of situations may prove p r a c t i c a l l y imposs i b l e . in t h i s case the robot must be able to form independently the sequenoe of actions that would be adequate to any situation arising in the problem environ-
ment  i . e . it must be able to solve the planning problem. the control system of the robot must in t h i s case be p o t e n t i a l ly prepared for executing a great set of actions in perception control of movement of executive organs  decision making and dialogue with the metssystam. 
1 　　　in posing tasks for the robot and correcting i t s a c t i v i t y by way of d i a l o -
gue the metasystem proceeds from perception on analysis of a far wider problem entironment than is accessible for the robot. in this sense the more perfect robots should be endowed with the capacity of an interlocutor with the metasyetem or an active observer of some of the components of i t s problem situation so as to take part in the metaaystem's task setting process and sometimes automatically to perform such an adjustment of tasks set before the robot by the metasyetem as would be desirable for the latter in taking account of the metasystem's problem situation. 
　　　one can visualize a system having  maximum  potentiality in this sense as a certain idealized autonomous robot which  being capable of adaptation and learning  could be able in any situation independently to form models of the results expected of it by the metaaystem in keeping with i t s functional purpose and efficaciously to achieve these results. 
　　　efficient solution of the planning problem is a key aspect in the activity of any autonomous robot having a s u f f i ciently high level of development. a more detailed analysis of this problem is the subject of the following discuesion. 
　　　planning is understood as the task for the robot automatically to form a sequence of actions  by means of which it can influence the environment  as well as such corresponding subgoals achieved by fulfillment of these actions as would lead to the required goal. 
　　　to provide for the planning process  it is necessary to enter into the robot  before it begins to function  a model of the problem environment  henceforward pe 
model  and algorithm-like information  henceforward planning algorithm  reflecting the logic and information processing rules specified in the form of the pe model. in the general case the p♀ model or fragments thereof may be formed and entered either by human operator or automatically with the aid of learning mechanism during preliminary eimulation of the robot's possible activity. 
　　　the model of problem environment is a totality of interrelated data about the real world where the robot is functioning which are necessary and sufficient for solving a majority of problems of a certain class.  the problem class is determined by the designers according to the robot's purpose . since the p♀ model is developed for the solution of a certain class of problems  information it contains should be problem oriented in the framework of that class. however  in the general case it does not seem possible to take into account in a p♀ model a l l data that are necessary and s u f f i c i ent for solving a l l problems of a given class. furthermore since robot's activi t y takes place in a real environment  information reflected in the p♀ model is of a limited accuracy. therefore in real cases one should reckon with the fact that pe model is incomplete and inaccurate. 
　　　information contained in the pe model includes both data of a general nature that are valid for the entire problem class as well as special information 
valid solely for a given particular problem of the class. 
　　　the information of the former kind includes: 
- data on the regularities of the real environment  i.e. data on environment components  ties and relationships existing between these components; 
- data on the possible influences upon the environment on the part of the robot  actions  and the changes these cause; 
- data on the possible changes in the environment independent of the robot; 
- data on the robot i t s e l f and on i t s potentialities. 
1 
　　　
　　　information of the second kind which characterizes the conditions for the solution of a particular problem includes: 
- data on the environment components which are concerned by the particular problem posed; 
- data on the required solution result; 
- data on restrictions imposed on the process of solution of the problem under consideration. 
　　　the major difficulties to be surmounted in solving the planning problem spring from the necessity of efficient representation of information about the real world in the framework of a certain formal system  in other worlds from the choice or development of a suitable language for the description of the problem environment  and also from the necessity of elaborating algorithms adequate to this representation and implemented in the same formal system. one such system is described below using the notions of set theory. 
for description of the environment  
abstract finite sets  are in-
troduced which may be respectively interpreted as mapping  in the problem environment model  of the set of relations  characteristics  objects and situations existing in the real environment. for simplicity's sake  the terms situation  relatione  etc. will be henceforward referred directly to problem environment model without additional stipulation. each feature may assume a certain finite set of values which is 
either a subset of real numbers or an ordered set whose elements are qualitative descriptions. among the elements of there can exist the element  which designate the absence of a characteristic. 
     within the framework of the formal system the concept of structure is introduced. the simplest structure is a 
triplet 	which may be inter-
preted as a proposition. the other types 

object being sought for.  in substantial terms this corresponds to representing the object through its relations with other objects or as the set of characteristic values   

 in substantial terms this corresponds to a certain structure to which the name of a given object  is ascribed . 
1 　　　situation is understood as description of a certain situation in the environment taking shape under certain conditions. presumably it is permitted to consider as the problem environment not only situations obtaining by fixing a certain time point but also situations due to fixation of other environment parameters. examples of these are situation of hunger  thirst etc. 

in which substructures are distinguished that characterise the conditions of appl i c a b i l i t y of the given action  the consequences of its application and the parameters l i a b l e to change. in the structure of the action the objects to which it may be applied are also specified. 
　　　actions may be aimed at transformat i o n of the environment or at i t s explor a t i o n   i n particular  actions involved in perception of environment . in the l a t t e r case the result of application of the action w i l l be a change not of a r e a l environment but of the notion the robot has about i t . the presence of the l a t t e r category of actions is j u s t i f i e d by two reasons. f i r s t   for autonomous functioning of an integrated robot current information about the environment must be obtained d i r e c t l y from the perceiving system. in a broader sense  robot's a c t i v i t y in exploring the environment r e g u l a r i t i e s is due to the need of a periodic correct i o n and updating of the pe model. 
　　　a rational organization of the planning process c a l l s for a hierarchical organisation of actions: from simple   e l e mentary  up to composite  generalized actions of various levels.simple actions in t h i s case are conceived as those which 
w i t h i n the framework of a given pe model are not representable   i n contrast to composite actions  as sequences of more elementary ones. 
　　　the possible changes of environment independent of the robot may be incor-
porated by introducing input influences 

　　　the description of various environment components and relations between them  description of robot's actions and influences independent of it as well as the description of the components of the environment in relations to which the particular task is posed constitute the i n i t i a l model of the problem environment for a given task  which is henceforward denoted as mo   it should be emphasized that a l l components of the pe model are closely interrelated and expressed  explained  in terms of one another.constituting j o i n t l y with the planning algorithm an integrated system of knowledge. 
　　　the goal set before the robot by certain metasystem   i n a majority of cases  human operator  in the general case is to achieve a certain situation in the environment  which w i l l be henceforward referred to as the goal situation. in n o n - t r i v i a l problem environments the goal situation  is usually m u l t i -
component and such that the determination of i t s various components is of an unequal importance. accordingly  at the formal level the result is introduced as a set of weighted goal situations the weights may be determined w i t h 
the aid of the goal function 
however  in complex problem environments an exact analytical  or tabular  specif i c a t i o n of the goal functions may prove to be d i f f i c u l t . in these cases the preference scale of individual subsets of the set of goal situations  need not always specify clearcut boundaries of the variation of i t s values. that is goal situations may be estimated using such 
vague notions as  desirable   necessary  etc. 
　　　over and above goal situations  it is possible to define the set the unfavourable situations sh that the robot seeks to avoid  introducing to estimate them the functions 
1 
where sh is the set of unfavourable s i tuations  
　　　in expressions are subsets of real numbers or ordered sets 
whose elements are qualitative descriptions. with respect to the function h the same stipulation is valid as concerns the goal function fi . on the basis of the pe model and the planning algorithm the planning system must draw up a plan for the accomplishment of a particular task  i.e. it must state such a sequence of actions and their correspondent current goal situations which would lead to the result required by the given task. or  in more exact terms  specified for the robot's planning system are: 
- i n i t i a l environment model ho; 
- f i n i t e set of goal situations and unfavourable situations 
- estimator functions 
- algorithm-like information  planning algorithm . 
　　　the system is required to build a plan  which would maximise the f o l lowing functional: 


it is appropriate to note here that the planning process in a sufficiently complex problem environment may be practically  and a l l the more so  efficaciously  executed only provided it has a multilevel and hierarchical character. that is to say  at the generalized  composite  actions of the highest level should be found that would enable achievement of these subgoals. at the next level more detailed subgoals are specified etc. the planning process ends when the whole sequence of actions constituting the plan is composed of elementary actions alone. in relation  1  only two planning levels are represented for the sake or simplicity. 
　　　we shall now consider some principles of design and requirements to the structure of problem environment models and planning algorithms. 
　　　a prime requirement to fe model structure is that it should be build in keeping with the principle of generalization and aggregation  otherwise  given a high diversity of data  the model could become unmanageable . generalization is in these cases understood ae building the generic relationships between concepts  and aggregation  as ascribing names to certain structures. 
1 　　　aggregations and generalizations like the whole of pe model in the general case  may be formed either automatically by learning mechanisms or with p a r t i c i pation of man on the basis of a p r i o r i analysis of the class of problems that 
the robot w i l l have to solve. however  even in the latter case  over and above invormation introduced a p r i o r i   the pe 
model due to i t s incompleteness and i n accuracy must be updated and adjusted by information obtained both during the planning process and during the functioning of the robot in the real environ-
ment. this process  too  may be either automatic or performed by man interacting with the robot through a dialogue system. 
　　　it is admissible that information represented in pe model may be at i n dividual stages of system functioning redundant and moreover contradictory. the contradictory character reflects the insufficiency and inaccuracy of the knowledge about an object or phenomenon as possessed by the robot and it may work as stimulus for further exploration of the environment. by redundancy we mean the possibility for deriving one and the same information from various statements about a certain object or phenomenon that are comprised in the pe model. redundancy ia typical of a great many problem environments that are to some extent untrivial  especially if models of these environments are formed automatically during robot's functioning in the real environment. 
　　　in contrast to pe model where i n formation is predominantly assortive  knowledge in the planning algorithm is expressed only in the imperative. in other words  the planning algorithm is a generalized procedure or  more exactly  a set of procedures defined on the pe model. this procedure must be built as universal at least within the scope of a certain class of tasks to be decided by the robot and possibly within the scope of a family of classes. the latter means that the algorithm must produce a correct solution independent of the conditions of a particular task of a given class. 
　　　it is appropriate to note here that the division of information into knowledge containing the pe model and the knowledge expressed as algorithm is nominal and again to emphasize the i n tegrated character of the entire system of knowledge possessed by the robot. indeed one and the same information may be specified either in the form of prestated facts  and incorporated in the pe model  or obtained by way of a certain procedure  included in the algorithm . besides  the procedures included in the planning algorithm may be described similarly to actions and i n cluded in the pe model. the point is to provide such relationship between facts and procedures as would enable the system efficiently to perform the planning function. 
　　　the planning procedure must provide for a purpose-oriented activity of the robot. stimuli for such activity are a mismatch between the result required by a particular task and the i n i t i a l environment model and detection of uncertainties during comparison of the goal s i tuations with the i n i t i a l environment 
model. uncertainties are a l l those cases which necessitate additional exploration of the problem environment by the robot. the robot may accomplish this process by means of i t s own perceptor system  f a i l ing to do this  it must have the possibi l i t y of referring for explanation to the metasystem  human operator . in the latter case metasystem - robot interaction should be organized by means of a dialogue system. 
　　　a mismatch may be a difference in the values of characteristics  relations  etc. in the formal language adopted  the mismatches by characteristic values are determined by the conditions  1 : if the propositions and the propositions then the mismatch is fixed  provided that 
1 

　　　the solution of the planning problem can be presented as a sequence of cycles  in each of which the action  simple or composite  is sought that e l i minates  or reduces  this or that mismatch or uncertainty but in the general case requires  as a condition for i t s application  a new situation  which  in turn  appears as the current goal at the next planning cycle. the efficacy of this process largely depends on the choice of the current mismatch  or uncertainty  and the i t s eliminating action; this choice may be conveniently based on checking upon the applicability conditions of each  candidate  action and assessing the consequences of i t s application. the ultimate plan should be chosen on the basis of a criterion connected with the main functional  see relations  1  . by way of such a criterion it is possible to use  for example  the requirements of minimum time and power spent on problem solution. 
　　　we should like to note on conclusion that the planning problem as stated above may occur in various subsystems of an i n -
tegrated robot: the perceptor system  the effector system  and the central system. for instance  the planning in the 
perceptor system may be elaborating a sequence of operators affording  say to identify some body or establish relations between certain objects existing in a given scene. 
       the planning in a manipulator control system or locomotion control system may involve elaborating a particular trajectory of the movement of the  hand  or the carriage. in relation to the planning performed in the central control system  ccs   the planning in other subsystems is of a local and subordinate character in the sense that the goals of each local planning are formed in the robot's ccs and transmitted to its subsystems. consequently  similarly to the hierarchy of integrated robot's subsystem  one should speak also about the hierarchy of the planning problems arising in these subsystems. 
　　　
1 
