. the present report suggests 

and investigates a model of the two-legs walking. the walking apparatus is simulated by a heavy rigid body sypplied with a pair of multilink legs. the algorithm for solving the problem of the two-legs walking is composed. a number of the problems on construction of the two-legs walking are solved and analysed within the framework of the suggested algorithm. 
     today one of the actual problem is to create the anthropomorphous locomotion systems. i t appears the whole number of investigations concerning to the dynamics and the control of the twolegs walking   i-1  . this is a complex 
problem which has a great number degrees of freedom  a specific character of connections and controls. that is why the different dynamical models of the twolegs walking suggested earlier  even the simplest models  are very complex. it causes difficulties to analyse the problem. 
     meanwhile the problem of the twolegs walking as well as any problem of dynamics and control needs in a model statement which is sufficiently reasonable to describe the principle effects and peculiarities of the processes investigated. this model statement should 
be also sufficiently simple to assume an effective analysis. 
     the represented report describes investigations carried out in this direction. in a number of cases suggested statements allow to obtain the process description in the analytical form. 
they also allow to give qualitative and 
parametrical analysis  and to construct the effective and simple algorithms for the numerical calculations. 
i. let us simulate the anthropomorphous system by means of a heavy rigid body  body-beam  which is supplied by a pair of imponderable non-inertial multilink legs suspended in one point of the body  fig.i . the contact of a leg with a surface is point and the interaction of the leg with the surface reduces to the resultant force applied to the point of the contact. in this case the algorithm for the construction of the motion and controls can be described by the following system of equations: 


1 

of a support   refers to the leg going out of the stage of a support. the process of the support transposition from one leg to another one is described by the arbitrary bunction  which satisfies the conditions 
	r 	
where  is the beginning of a doublesupport phase of the motion and is the end of a double-support phase of the motion.  is a tensor of the body's inertia in the point of the leg suspension   is a vector of the immediate angular velocity of the body   is a vector fixed in the body from the point of the leg suspension into the center of mass of the body;  is a mass of the calculated by formulae  1 - 1 ; the function of time of the trajectory of the leg joints are given as explicit and satisfying connections  1 . according to  1  the controls are calculated forming the given motion. 
     let us note that basic equations  1  and  1  do not depend on the motion of the leg joints  and depend only on the footstep trajectory and the trajectory of the suspension point . it represents the different possibilities for the eyethesis of the controls providing the given motion. 
1. a number of problems on the construction of the two-legs walking are solved and analysed in the framework of the 

body; is a vector of a gravity force  
described algorithm. 
 /f is a sum vector of the reactions we call the walking comfortable if applied in the points of the leg supporthe point of the leg suspension moves 
ting   the vector of reaction    and uniformly and rectilinearly and regular 
are components of this vector-force if each coordinate of the footstep tra-
in each of the'supporting pointbi is jectory is a step function obtaining the 
a vector of control in the i-th joint of equal increments in equal intervals of 
the j-th leg  is a trajectory of the time. 
i-th joint of the j-th leg; is a 
let the walking be comfortable and 
length of the i-th link of the leg. the 
regular. assume also  the point of 
corresponding matrix function can be the leg suspension coincides with the 
introduced instead of the scalar funccenter of mass of the beam   and the beam 
tion aft  f and thereby it widens a class is dynamically symmetrical. then in vir-
of the possible motions  equations  1  tue of  i - 1  we come to the very simple 
will have some different structure ffoj     model of the walking. this modes allows 
alternativly if we assume a = / we shall the complete analytical description: it 
narrow a class of the motions up to the is accurate in the plane case and appro-
single-support walkings; in such walximate  but high-accurate  in the spatial 
kings there are no a stage of support on case. the angular motions of the body 
two legs. the single-support walkings are described by the three-parametric 
are a class of thei motions which is a family of the periodical motions. it is 
boundary between the eigen-walking and shown in fig. 1. the angle 1 describes 
running. sequence of calculations: the the normalized oscillations along the 
functions of time  the required trajeccourse counted from the vertical line  
tory of the point of the leg suspension the angle describes these oscillations 
and the footstep trajectory and    across the course. factually  the trajec-
are given as explicit; equation  1  of tory of a  summit  of the walker  upper 
the angular motion is integrated and view  is shown here. 
among a set of the possible solutions we 
1. at any the body vibrations 
select ones which have the given properwhen the system moves can be small. then 
ties  for example  the periodical soluequations  1  allow linearization. the 
tions ; the forces of reactions are 
1 

linear problems also allow the analytical solutions. so the problem on the comfortable motion by the steps and the inclined plane has been solved. the body vibrations in this case are described in the modified bessel functions  fig.1 . the shift of the average value of the body inclination at the expense of the inclination of the motion trajectory and the footstep path is demonstrative. 
1. the considered statement allows effectively to solve the manoeuvring problems as well as the problem of motion on the rugged terrain  the problem of adaptation to the surface roughness and some other problems of control. the existance of the free parameters in the motion of the twolegs systems is very important. such pa-
rameters are: the height of the point of the leg suspension  the supporting interval  the distance from the supporting point to the projection of the point of the leg suspension on the horizontal axis in the moment of change of the supporting leg . fig. 1 illustrates an influence the parameter  on the motion of the walker 
  is proportional to the supporting interval . if the apparatus walks with body inclination backwards on the 
average  if 	the apparatus vib-
rates on the average relative to the vertical line  if  it inclines  on 
the average  forth. the corresponding possible configurations of the walker at the beginning and at the end of the halfperiod  i.e. at the moment of change of the supporting leg  are shown next to. 
     thanks to the existence of the free parameters there is some possibility to optimize with respect to several of them. as an optimized value we can choose  for example  the work of the controlling moments during the corresponding angular movings for the halfperiod  i.e. during one step. the dependence of work on the value of the supporting segment for the plane model of the walker is constructed in fig.1- it is seen that at the fixed magnitudes of the remain parameters there exists some optimal value s minimizing the work. 
1- the development of the described model is an analogous model having the ponderable legs. in this model the whole class of the plane motions is studied in detail. the algorithm is investigated which gives the legs' kinematics. it calculates the motion of the point of the leg suspension. it construct the oscillational body motion  the algorithm calculates the reactions and the controls providing the fulfilment of the stated locomotional problem. on the whole the algorithm is reduced to the solution of the boundary value problem for one differential equation of the second order  describing the body vibration  and to the following calculations by the finite formulae. the boundary value problem can be solved by analytical way in the case of the small body vibration* then this solution is used as the first approximation to solve the nonlinear problem. 
     the parametrical analysis is obtained for the body vibration  for the control by the supporting and bearable legs  for the forces of reactions at the different kinds of motions. for the plane linear problem all motions and the acting 
forces are obtained in the closed analytical form. 
     fig. 1 illustrates the solutions for the problem of walking  for three types of walking  so called the  full  walking  i  symmetrical man walking  ii   non-symmetrical man walking  iii . for each type of walking above we construct the trajectories of the represantabie points corresponding to the supporting and bearable legs on the plane of variables  are the angles which are formed vertically by a hip and a shin . in the case of  full  walking the represantabie point corresponding to the supporting leg passes the are of ellipse 1-1 &nd the represantabie point corres-

1 

ponding to the bearable leg passes the arc of ellipse i'-1'-1'. la the case of the symmetrical man walking the repreaantable points corresponding to the supporting and bearable legs pass one and the same arc 1-1 but in the opposite directions. in the case of the nonsymmetrical walking the represantable point oscillates along the limitted segment of the ellipse arc. in a l l three walkings the bearable leg moves by  dragging  on the surface. it is not a matter of principle by the way. below we illustrate the corresponding configuration of the walker for the different moments of time.  unnatural  motions of the walker's legs in the case of  full  walking are the analiticity fee of the obtained solutions. dependence of the work on the period of motion is shown in fig. 1 for the indicated types of walkings  i  i i   i i i   . we can see that the non-symmetrical walkings are more economical than symmetrical ones. 
     pig. 1 illustrate some results of solutions of the walking problems for the plane nonlinear model; fig. 1 - for the symmetrical man walking  fig.1 for the non-symmetrical comfortable walking. pig. 1 showe the vertical component of reaction in the point of the support 
 ay depending on time  in the ha if period  . it should be noticed that ry is very close to the analogous component obtained while studying the man locomotion. pig. 1 shows the dependence of the controlling moments in the joints on time during one step. the controls in the supporting leg is one an order more than in the bearable leg. in this case the controls in a hip j-1 times more than the 
controls in a shin. pig. 1 illustrates a strong influence of value of the supporting segment on the value of work of the inner forces. depending on the value 
¡¡s the work can almost 1 times be changed. let us introduce the parameter   which is equal to the relation of the 
1 




