 level of consideration  which bears the title of generalisation in psychology  that la why the 
prooees of independent atatament of a problem  which la characteristic of higher forma of intellectual activity  may be characterised aa a generalising goal formation. this la already an internal goal formation. it is usually cannected with human work in several obieot fields and is a reault of transfer of relatione from one object field to another. 
1      of oourae both forms of emergence of the internal goal in human activity  motivated and generalizing goal formations  appear aa a unity  because there  ia a unity or regulation or motivational 
-peraonallatic and intellectual processaa proper  the mechani of goal formation aa a function of self-regulation of mental activity makes tba human bains as an autonomous system possessing own activity. tba problem of goal formation is ona of tba central problems in tba cybernatio theory. tba solution of tbia problem determines i n many raapecta tba lerel of practioal possibilities of automatic control bjbtime. leading with tba fundamental works of a.rosenblut and n.winer the cybernetic analysis of goal formation is  however  carried out within the frameworks of theoretical bases of behavior a l psychology. when working out rarlous versions of programs  goal is considered as a certain final site of a mama having a definite structure  ia to tba intellectual activity involved in achieving tba goal  it ia understood aa a movement in this maze. 
     the summarising book of p.akoff and f.rmmery devoted to the analysis of systems possessing purposefulness  yield nothing new in principle in psychology and cybernetics about goal formation  in complete correspondence with tba principles of behavioral psychology  the purposeful system ia considered in this work aa a mechanical system possessing of certain structural and functional possibilities. the external dynamic characteristics of this system connected with the choice of a behavioral pattern leading to a certain result are essential. at this approach  the ability characteristic of man to bui l d internal conceptual models of eurroutding world ia not considered at all.as a result  it turns out to be that goal  formation analysed in cybernetics is an external goal formation  ia a movement in the apace of goals which is set beforehhand and forms a ready maze. 
     some psychological regularities of goal formation revealed in the analysia of human mental activity may be used i n working out of the theories of cybernetic systems possessing properties of activity and autonomy  for instance  the modelling of internal goal formation  characterist i c of human being  in cybernetics presupposes a use of semantic language per-
mitting a meaningful decription within a cybernetic system of the medium in which the behaviour of a cybernetic system must be formed. 
     let us dwell upon the characteristic of this language more i n detail. the basis of semantic language is a semiotic engendering system imnitating processes of formation  generalisations and transformations  transpositions  of relations. the operational part of tba system appear formally as three sets:  x r g   where x is a set of baaic concepts; r is a set of the basic binary relations between concepts; g la a set of the rules of formation of derivative concepts when goals emerge. tba concepts of natural language such as words  expressions  sentences  etc.  characterising the moat general peculiarities of functioning of objects which are essential for goal appearance play a role of baaic concepts  for instance  in tba problem of aea port control such concepts are  moorage    storehouse   highway    roadstead    cabotage harbour   etc. the vocabulary of baaic concepts for a large sea port contains about 1 concepts of the indicated kind. the vocabulary of concepts depends on required completeness and predaion of the description of a controlled object. for instance  control over a separate vesael is connected with the necessity of having a detailed description of concepts characterising the structure of a reasel. such a deecription becomes unnecessary in case of control over sever a l vessels. here it la the concepts related to maintenance-technical characteristics of vessels that play an important role  i.e. the characteristics which determine transport possibilities of a reesel  the degree of flfcness to the performance of loading-unloading works  etc. since in each olass of controlled systems  for example  the class of sea porta  the problems solved are of the eame type  the vocabulary of basic concepts built for one system may be used with insignificant changes for another system of this class* 
     the elements of the set r characterise spatio-temporal and other relations which are established between concepts in problem solving  lor instance  an  object i is a part of an object i ; an  object x is an element of a claae y ; and  object x movee towards an object i ; an  object x ia situated over an object x without being contiguous with i t     etc. as distinguiahad from the basic concepts  the baaic relations are of a more universal character and practically do not chemge whan passing on from the solution of one problem to another. the results of analysis of many concrete control problems in the different classes of complex systems  technical  socio-economic  biological  etc.  showed a community of relations used in them. as a result  a universal vocabulary of basic relations containing about 1 elements was constructed. the derivative concepts are formed from the baaic concepts and basic relations in terms of thsee engendering gram-
mars: correlational  oategorial and transformational. this semantic language was used for describing the goal formation process whan controlling over i n dustrial systems 
     the set of microgoals of the problem to be solved ia enumerated in terms of correlation grammar. the idea of ezpresaing the sense of concept by the set of ether concepts which are in certain relations to a certain concept underlies 
     
1 
     

