 

　　a model of the neuronal structures of the auditory system is worked out to determine the direction upon the 1ource of the sound signal with steep-sided front. the direction upon the sound source is determined on the basis of a generalized parameter which is the result of two measurements:  i  moments of arrival of the signals at each ear;  1  amplitudes of these signals.the result i1 the precision determination of the direction upon the sound source. 
     the model represents a five-level neuronal structures  each level consisting of the elements of the same kind. the intormations about the direction upon the source of sound is encoded in the location of the excited region at the output level of the model. 
introduction 

     the system determining the direction upon the source of sound is able to detect exactly only with the use of 
the parameters 	  
where r  the distance from the source  is unknown. where ft is given  the deter-
mination problem may be solved with the 
uze either of  based on the equation  i    or  based on the equation  1     . under real conditions  however  the parameter r is unknown  so it is necessary to use the information about the difference of the 
moments of arrival of the signals and about their amplitudes  see  1   . 
     where the direction is determined on the base of the parameter  only and the information about the amplitudes is notused  it means the case the sound source is located at i n f i n i t y . but because of the finite value of r in this method of evaluating the greater error i s ' t e d the smaller is the value of r . 
　　　　living organisms determine by us:lng the parameters       a i . this conclusion is based on the f o l l o wing: i  if two signals differing in amplitude arrive simultaneouslly  via headphones  at the right and left ear  the subjective sensation is that the sourse is shifted to the side of the largest signal. 1  electrophysiological characteristics of neurons of the medial superior olivary nuclei  taking part in sound localization  are similarly dependent on the difference of arrival moments and the difference of signal amplitudes      page   
　　　　the main stages in the transformstion in the model. 

1 

the analysis of biological data warrents the assumption that this kind of estimation ie calculated in neural structures of living organisms with passive sound source localization. the evaluation is then produced in two stages  so that there are two structure- functional blocks in the model described below. 
     at the f i r s t stage in the block of monaural transformaclon  from both the right and left side  the amplitude of sound impulse  or the impulse front to be more precise  is transformed into an equivalent time delay. this time delay i s summed up with the actual moment of arrival from this very side. finally  some resultant moment  phase  of appearance of the standard signal is formed  from each side of model . this resultant moment i s determined by two parameters: i   the real moment of impulse arrivai at the given ear; and 1  the amplitude of signal coming from this side. 
     at the second stage  in the block of binaural processing the actual determination of direction on the sound source is produced by calculating of the resultant interaural delay  i.e. the difference between the moments when signals appear from each side of the first block. what is important here is that the difference between the resultant moments of appearance of the signals  determined in the f i r s t block  is calculated. so the result is the function both of the difference of phases and the difference of amplitudes. 
the model structure. 

　　the first level li of the model is formed by the receptive elements  mainly the internal hair cells of the cohlea  which perceive the vibrations of the basilar membrane. the basilar membrane i s represented roughly as a regulated set of frequency sensible elements  the inertia of the latter increases monotonously along the axis x  longitudinally along the membrane . 
     the consideration of the basilar membrane model  shows that the sound pulses differing in their stepness and duration produce the maximum in the different parts of the latter. the greater the steepness of the pulse and/or i t s duration the closer to the apical end of the membrane is the region of the 
maximum vibrations. on the strength of this property we assume that the membrane distributes the received sound signal over a great number of channels  the receptor being the beginning of each channel . as a result  the transmission of the information about the sound pulses differing in steepness and duration is produced through the different channels. the coordinate x of the working channel thus gives the concrete input signal. 
     each receptor - the element of the level l   of the model transforms the deviation of the membrane into the membrane potential. the receptor is connected with a column of neurons  their thresholds increasing monotonously along y. these columns of neurons in the model fill up a two-dimensional layer  the level ln  with coordinate axes i  along the m&mbrane  and y  the direction of the varying of the threcholds of the elements .  the level l1 corresponds to 
the spiral ganglion of the auditory system . each element of the level lp 
responds to the input signal with only one pulse  i.e. it works discretely. in response to the pulse sound signal an excited region appears at the level lp. 
this excited region dilates along the y-axis  a column with coordinate x   the velocity of the dilation depending on the type of signal - the steepness and the amj litude of the pulse front. 
     the neurons of the level l  are the speed detectors  or  more exactly  the detectors of a velocity variation law. 
each detector with the coordinates xfy   is triggered if in the inferior at the level lp  column  with the same 
coordinate x  the propogation velocity hae a peak about the point where j } ~ y | increases if y 1 y  and decreases if y1 y . the larger the coordinate j   of the point  at the level lp   where the propogation velocity curve reaches i t s peak  the greater is the corresponding coordinate t1 of the triggered detector at the level l . the result is that the triggering of the detector in channel x at the level l1 with the largest coordinate j1 determines the amplitude of the sound pulse at the moment when i t s steepness ie maximal. 
     the level l1 models the operation of the anterior division of the ventral cochlear nucleus. the presence of the detectors of steepness of sound pulse fronts in these nuclei has been established in electrophysiological experiments 
the fourth level of the model l  
 that corresponding to the superior medial olivary nuclei  consists of the neurons which are coincidence elements. the pulses from the right and left side arrive at the inputs of these neurons through the delay lines - the neuronal dendrites. here the neurons are also organized in ' columns   each having the coordinate x and oriented in y -direction. 
　　at the level l  the encoding of the sound amplitude in an additional delay takes place with the help of the follo-
wing connection between l  and l  .: the greater the coordinate y/of the neuron - detector at the level l1   the closer to coincidence element-  at l.  w i l l this detector signal be at the delay line  dendrite . thus  on the right and left inputs of the element the  resultant  moments of signal arrival 

1 
 and 	  are formed.the coin-
cidence element; responds with a probabil i t y equal to 1  if the difference of 
the moments  of 
signals a r r i v a l from r i g h t and l e f t is less than zero. the p r o b a b i l i t y of response of the element decreases monotonously as increases. owing to the difference in the duration of the delay lines on the right and l e f t in elements with different coordinates   the s h i f t of the above- mentioned characteristics occurs by a magnitude proportional to 
   . f i n a l l y   the d i s t r i b u t i o n of prob a b i l i t i e s of the responses of the neurons - coincidence elements - along axis y is equal to 1 if the difference of the resultant moments is less than or equal to and decreases monotonously . the co-
ordinate y1 of the point where the prob a b i l i t y begins to decrease is equal to the difference of the resultant moments 
at - this y* thus determines the direct i o n upon the sound source 
the designation of the 
 the analog of the i n f e r i o r c o l l i c u l u s   is to effect the. precision determination of coordinate  is brought out 
by s t a t i s t i c a l processing of the responses of a large number of elements at the level . this operation is carried out by neuronal structures with l a t e r a l couplings. 
　　as the f i n a l r e s u l t at the l e v e l  a local region of excited elements 
appears with coordinates  and 
the coordinate  describes the shape of the signal  and the coordinate the d i r e c t i o n upon the source. at point the determination of the d i -
r e c t i o n is completed. 
