 
how can computer vision systems be designed to handle unfamiliar or unexpected scenes  many of the current systems cope quite well with limited visual worlds  by making use of specialized knowledge about these worlds- but if we want to expand these systems to handle a wide range of visual domains  i t will not be enough to simply employ a large number of specialized models. i t will also be important to make use of what might be called  general-purpose models.  such models can be used to suggest reasonable descriptions for a given scene  e.g.  in terms of features or regions or groups of these  in the absence of specific context. 1  the need for gpm's 
　　　in recent years  many computer vision systems have been constructed. these cope quite well with limited visual worlds such as the blocks world  shirai   or office scenes  garvey and tenenbaum  . they do this by making use of specialized knowledge about the worlds in which they operate. an important goal of future computer vision systems is to expand this capability to cover a wider range of visual domains. but can this be done by simply employing larger numbers of specialized models  the contention of this paper is that i t will also be important to make use of what we have called  general-purpose models   gpm's . by definition  these are models which are applicable even when we have little or no a priori knowledge about the class of scenes that is to be analyzed. they include models for general classes of local features  edges  lines  angles  etc.  that occur in many different types of scenes  as well as models that describe how such features can be grouped into aggregates.  these aggregates may in fact not correspond to objects but they can serve as useful first guesses to guide later steps in the analysis.  questions which would aid in reducing the search for appropriate global frames  minsky  . an example of a general question might be  are there many straight edges in the scene   this could serve as a first basis for discrimination between  natural  and  man-made  scenes. the knowledge implicit in this question is a reasonable generalization that can be made on the basis of experience with a variety of scenes  and illustrates one way in which gpm's can be used in scene analysis. 
　　　because the types of pictures mentioned above are familiar to us  it is difficult to separate the effects of special purpose knowledge from those of general purpose knowledge. however  there are many types of pictures that are unfamiliar except to specialists -electron micrographs  for example. yet in spite of their unfamiliarity  if one asks people to sketch the significant regions in such a picture  the resulting sketches will usually be highly consistent. this ability to impose structure 
on unfamiliar scenes reflects another possible role of gpm's in scene analysis. the model  or class of models  implicit in this example can be motivated by observing that most scenes contain objects that differ physically from their surroundings  and this physical difference usually results in a visual difference. thus  we find it reasonable  in sketching an unfamiliar scene  to attempt to divide it into regions that are more or less homogeneous in brightness  color  or texture. 
　　　the line drawing shown below illustrates our point at a somewhat different level. here  the significant regions are already well defined  but gpm's can play a role in grouping these regions into rather schematic objects  and in perceiving the relations between these objects  e.g.  behind  next to . this 

                                                             process is independent of the interpretation of the objects in any specifie before describing gpm's in any de- domain. 
tail  we can illustrate the need for them by a few examples. imagine a computer vision system attempting to deal with scenes chosen randomly from a highly 
varied collection - pictures of rooms  buildings  faces  scenery  etc. it would seem a poor strategy for the vision system to start by asking specific questions such as  is there a chair in the scene   or  is there a tree  . by analogy with the game of 1 questions  a more reasonable strategy would be to ask general 
1 

1. the nature of gpm's 

　　　it is widely accepted that any scene analysis system should utilize whatever specific knowledge is available about the class of scenes that it is to  understand   see  e.g.  minsky and papert  . one of the fundamental problems facing the designer of a scene analysis system is the representation and effective use of such knowledge. several powerful paradigms have been offered to guide the designer in solving this problem - e.g.  those of winograd   procedures  and hewitt et al.   actor formalisms .  see also pylyshyn  for a review and critique of such representation schemes.  an important feature of these paradigms is the structuring of knowledge into models. for example  a model of a chair might specify that the chair has a seat  legs and a back  while a model for gravity could specify that any object must be supported. the conditions required by a model can be expressed as goals that a computer vision system can attempt to satisfy. programming languages such as planner  and conniver  were specifically designed to accommodate such goal-directed processing. 
　　　intuitively  there are many different types of goals. for example  the rather specific goal  find a table leg i think that the table top is at position  x y z   is different from the more general goal  find a straight edge.  corresponding to these different types of goals are different types of models. specific or specialized models correspond to things like cubes or chairs. these are useful when a good deal is conjectured or known a priori  or has been found in the course of previous analysis  cf. haber 1  for some important psychological parallels . gpm's  on the other hand  are models that are applicable even i f little or nothing is known a priori  and analysis has not yet begun. 
　　　it should be stressed that there is no sharp dividing line between specialized models and gpm's  nor is there even a simple linear ordering of models with respect to their degree of generality. one might at most hope for a partial ordering: e.g.  models for general classes of features or objects could be regarded as gpm's in comparison with models for more specialized classes. nevertheless  we have used the term  gpm  in this paper for the sake of simplicity. 
1 feature detectors 

　　　as already mentioned  an important class of gpm's consists of models for various types of local features - edges  lines  angles  etc. such features occur in a wide variety of scenes  so that detectors for these features will be very generally applicable. moreover  such features are often relevant to the description of the given scene  because they usually arise from objects that are present in the scene. indeed  since objects are distinct from their environment  there should be a discontinuity of some sort where an object ends and the background begins. in particular  there is likely to be a change in brightness or reflectance  so that visual edges will be present. edges can also serve as a basis for a simplified description of the scene  since regions in the scene can often be approximated by specifying their edges and the colors  or textures  of their interiors.  for evidence that the human visual system may encode regions in this way see cornsweet .  in summary  models for edges are an important class of gpm's because  a  they are widely applicable;  b  they often serve to delineate physical objects; and  c  they provide a basis for giving a simplified description. 
　　　similar remarks can be made about models for other types of local features. angles  for example  represent abrupt changes in slope  just as edges represent abrupt changes in gray level  color  or texture. they are thus likely to be significant features of the shape of a region. at the same time  as pointed out many years ago by attneave   angles provide a basis for giving simplified description of shapes  since the shapes can be approximated by polygons whose vertices are located at the angles. in the light of these remarks it is not surprising that detectors for local features such as edges and angles have been found in many biological systems . 
1 grouping rules 

　　　gpm's should also encompass mechanisms that can deal with the abundant information obtained from feature detectors and put this information into a more useful form. such mechanisms might  for example  serve to group features into regions   or to select salient features. julesz  has proposed a clustering scheme in which proximal points having similar feature values group into clusters. such a clustering process is similar to many of the region growing schemes proposed for scene analysis systems  e.g.  muerle  . rosenfeld  has suggested a process of best feature size determination and non-maximum supression that can be used to select locally salient features such as edges  spots  and streaks. 
　　　the gestalt psychologists  notably koffka  and wertheimer   provided demonstrations for the existence of gpm's of these general types in human vision  although they did not offer adequate mechanisms for these models. their 

1 

organizational laws of good continuation  similarity  closure  and proximity describe qualitatively how the human visual system prefers to group features into aggregates. the julesz clustering process mentioned above can be considered a first step toward modeling similarity grouping. beck  has conducted studies of the factors that determine similarity grouping and has related these factors to the concept of peripheral discriminability. these ideas can also be incorporated into even more comprehensive texture models  zucker  . 
　　　the gestalt notion of good continuation deals with intersecting curves. it can be interpreted as a preference for pairing off the curves at an intersection in a way which minimizes the total curvature. the importance of these more global  yet s t i l l rather unspecialized  mechanisms for organizing even just a brief  glance  at a scene has recently been demonstrated by weisstein and harris 
 . 
　　　the gestalt laws  like the feature detectors  can be rationalized a s being well matched to certain aspects of physical reality. objects are often physically homogeneous  and a similarity grouping is thus likely to arise from a single object or population of related objects  so that it is sensible to perceive the grouping as a unit. physical objects are normally compact  so that a 
　　　proximity grouping is likely to arise from a single object  and it is thus reasonable to perceive it a s a unit. discrete physical objects must have closed boundaries  so that the law of closure is also a sensible heuristic. thus  models whose effects are similar to those of the gestalt laws would be useful as gpm's  since they would be widely applicable  and would give rise to regions that often correspond to objects  or useful pieces of objects. at the same time these models would provide a basis for further simplifying the scene description  by determining aggregates of features that can serve as proposed constituents for attempting a more realistic semantic interpretation of the scene. in other words  these models serve to significantly reduce the combinatorics involved in determining the possible groupings of the features in a scene  by making only a few combinations easy to  see   while the other combinations are  hidden figures.  
1 depth cues 

　　　as another class of examples of gpm's  we will briefly consider some of the cues  and the associated processing  which can be used to deduce depth relationships of objects in a scene. these gpm's are somewhat more specialized than those discussed previously  since they are predicated upon having delimited objects of some sort. our discussion of the simplifying nature of gestalt laws and depth cues in sections 1-1 is based in part on hochberg   
　　　the visual field is two-dimensional; many different spatial arrangements of objects can give rise to identical visual images. nevertheless  under normal circumstances one has little difficulty in judging the three-dimensional positions 
of objects  even from a single monocular visual image. in making such judgments  one uses a variety of cues which help to structure the visual field in an unambiguous way with respect to depth. familiarity is certainly important in determining depth relationships - if we can recognize an object  then we know its actual size  and can calculate its depth from its apparent size. many depth cues  however  do not depend on familiarity; rather  they reflect generalized knowledge about objects. if two similarly shaped objects have different apparent sizes  we tend to judge the smaller one as farther away. this amounts to assuming that the two objects are actually identical  and are therefore the same size. this first order default option is useful in the absence of any other information. note also that this assumption leads us to a  simpler  description of the scene as containing two identical objects at different distances  rather than two dissimilar objects. similar remarks apply if we have two regions containing the same type of texture  but with one more coarsely textured than the other. in this case the simplifying assumption is that both objects have identical textures  but one is farther away. 
　　　more generally  if an object is asymmetrical  but can be regarded as a three-dimensional rotation of a symmetrical object  we tend to judge it that way; for example  we can interpret a trapezoid as a rectangle seen obliquely. this perspective interpretation yields a simpler description of the object  namely symmetrical but rotated  rather than asymmetrical. at the same time  the perspective assumption is a reasonable one to make  since it would be an improbable coincidence for an object to appear symmetrical when rotated  if the object were not actually symmetrical. analogously  if we have a region containing a texture whose coarseness varies from one side to the other  it is easy to see the region as uniformly textured  but tilted. this gives the scene a simpler description  consistent with our knowledge of the physical world. 
　　　as a final example  suppose that an object has an irregular shape  but that it could be symmetrical  or congruent to some other object  if we regarded it as 

1 

partially hidden by a neighboring object; then we w i l l tend to conclude that this is actually the case. this interpretation in terms of interposition yields a simpler description  and it certainly represents a situation that frequently arises in practice. interpositions are often  but not always  signalled by local cues such as  t-junctions**: the object whose edge lies along the leg of the t disappears behind the object whose edge lies on the horizontal bar of the t. the disappearance and reappearance of one object from behind another may be indicated by the presence of  matching t's : t-junctions whose legs are good continuations of each other. it is clear how these cues generalize our experience with real objects. 
1 gpm's in human vision 

     analogs of gpm's can be found in many models of visual perception developed by psychologists. bruner  theorized that early stages of clue extraction and object isolation direct later stages of processing. preliminary operations of this sort on the stimulus  that produce the objects which later mechanisms will fill out and interpret  have been called pre-attentive processes by neisser . an important function of these processes is to  form the units to which perception may then be directed... visual objects are identified only after they have been segmented  one from the other. this permits the perceiver to allot most of his cognitive resources to a suitably chosen part of the field... since the processes of focal attention cannot operate on the whole visual field simultaneously  they can come into play only after preliminary operations have first segregated the figural units involved. these preliminary operations... correspond in part to what the gestalt psychologists called 'autochthonous forces'...   neisser   pp. 1  1  1 . of course  it should be stressed that the  objects  extracted by the preliminary operations may not be the same as the final objects obtained by subsequent analysis. 
     the belief is certainly widespread among psychologists that the early stages of visual information processing do not depend on one's knowledge or expectations   perceptual set   about the particular situation.  the effects of perceptual learning consist of changes in where you look  and of how you remember what you saw  but not of what you see in any momentary glance... most of the attempts to demonstrate the effects of motivation and of set on perception... were memorial rather than perceptual   hochberg   p. 1 . thus  some of the operations performed by the human visual system can be thought of as corresponding to the use of gpm's at the early stages of scene analysis. 
     in thinking about gpm's in visual perception it is sometimes useful to 
1 
imagine that they evolved as generalizations of more specific models for concrete physical situations by a process which gradually relaxed the domain-dependent context  so that semantic notions gradually acquired a syntactic flavor. in other words  semantics became  fossilized  and turned into syntax. 
1. the role of gpm's 

　　as the universe in which computer vision systems operate becomes richer  the initial expectations of the systems 
will have to become less specific. thus these systems will have to rely more heavily on gpm's  especially during the initial stages of scene analysis.  thinking always begins with suggestive but imperfect plans and images; these are progressively replaced by better -- but usually still imperfect - ideas   minsky 
 . 
　　to further illustrate the use of gpm's  as well as their interaction with more specialized models  consider shirai's  scene analysis system. this system operates in the blocks world  and presupposes that any block will sharply con trast with the background. this knowledge is embodied in a gpm of objectsurround contrast which performs a kellylike  edge detection of the outer boundary of the set of blocks. next  it is assumed that a l l curvature maxima on the outer border of the set of blocks indicate vertices of blocks. each hypothesized vertex is examined by procedures that contain specialized knowledge about the forms of vertices in the blocks world. these specialists can  in turn  suggest internal lines and vertices. these suggestions invoke gpm's for angles and lines to discover the hypothesized  but as yet unverified  internal features. the dynamics of this system's operation illustrate clearly the interplay between specialized models and gpm's. 
　　shirai's use of gpm's is based on the sharp contrast of the blocks with the surround and the fact that a l l angles correspond to salient features in the blocks world. for example  early in the processing an  object  interpretable as the outer contour of the collection of blocks is found. in general  scenes are not this simple  and the notion of what constitutes  saliency  is rather elusive. how might specialized models and gpm's interact in more complicated situations  
　　the more specialized the knowledge that we have about the scene to be analyzed  the more efficiently the analysis can be performed using specialized models. in an extreme case  if we know what objects are supposed to be present and in what positions  the analysis reduces to a simple verification of these facts  perhaps by template matching. 

this is an example of a situation where gpm's would be unnecessary. more commonly  however  we may know the allowable types of objects  but not their positions  as in the blocks-world situation - or  we may know only that some sort of objects may be present  but not what shapes  or textures  these objects will have  as in the random slide show situation of section 1. as hae been already mentioned  one could  in principle  run through many  thousands   of specialized object models  applying each one to the scene in turn. a more efficient strategy would presumably be to initially apply highly general models  
where the chance of success is greater. 
　　　by definition  gpm's should be useful in a relatively wide variety of cases. in fact  it may turn out that the most efficient way to start the analysis of a scene about which specialized knowledge is available is still on a general level. for example  in analyzing scenes containing polyhedra  it is more efficient to begin by looking for edges  as shirai did  rather than for long straight edges or corners. this is because it is computationally more costly to detect corners  etc.  than edges  and these detectors will have to be applied over large regions since we do not know in advance where the polyhedra are. once edges have been found  the more specialized knowledge that is available can be brought to bear by checking the edges for straightness. thus  gpm's  because of their relative simplicity  are likely to be useful even when we do have special knowledge about the situation. 
　　　it should be apparent from this discussion that the use of gpm's does not presuppose any particular type of control structure in the given scene analysis system. a system that employs gpm's need not be  bottom-up  or hierarchically organized. gpm's are equally compatible with heterarchically structured systems  such as shirai's. furthermore  they are not necessarily the lowest-level goals in such a system  but may occur throughout. 1. concluding remarks 

　　　line drawings such as that shown at the end of section 1 constitute a possible domain for the study of gpm's. here the gpm's would structure the drawings into  unfamiliar  objects having a limited set of properties  e.g.  opaque/ transparent  blob-like/elongated  and satisfying a limited number of relations  e.g.  in front of  inside  hole in  etc. . a system for this type of line drawing analysis has been proposed by one of us   and work on this system is in progress. it is hoped that the development of such systems will facilitate our understanding of gpm's and their role in sclmio analysis. 
