 
       responding to natural language requires performing two major tasks: information processing  cognition   and decision making  conation . in order to motivate and best guide an entity performing such complex tasks  motivation must originate in the self-interest of the entity. this motivation guides cognitive and conative processes at the lowest possible level by assigning values  measures of importance  to various process components and using them in making process decisions. through such a motivational mechanism  every decision taken will be to further the entity's self-interests. we describe a model for such a mechanism and the affect process which embodies self-interests. 
introduction 
       analyzing natural language input to determine its underlying semantic content is but one of the tasks necessary for an entity  human or non-human  to use natural language. responding to natural language input requires two major tasks: 1  deriving facts about the input and the situation in which it is expressed  based on perceptual information  on the input itself  and on previous information  cognition ; and 1  establishing goals for satisfying the entity's needs  desires and interests  deciding upon a plan of action to satisfy these goals  and executing these actions  conation . the motivation for the entity's actions arises not from within these two functions  but from a third function known as affect  emotion . affect provides motivation for the entity by embodying all experience that has immediate meaning or significance to the entity. these experiences in turn motivate the cognitive and conative tasks. 
       we shall describe a model of the affect process and its role in motivating cognitive and conative processes. these processes are part of a model of a person whose thought processes are dominated by the paranoid mode of thought. paranoia is diagnosed clinically from the linguistic behavior of an individual. thus  the major task of the model is to respond to natural language input. as a result  the processes described here should be useful both in simulating cognitive processes and in natural language understanding systems. 
background 
       in simulating the linguistic behavior of a paranoid person in an interview situation  we found three considerations indicating the importance of modelling affect and its influence on other processes: 1  the requirements for an entity participating in an interview  1  the centrality of affect in the theory of paranoia we are modelling  and 1  the desirability of making our theory more complete and consistent. 
　　　　the requirements for an entity to participate in a psychiatric interview motivated our interest in cognitive  conative  and affective processes. when participating in an interview  a person brings many preconceived ideas about the purpose of such interviews and what happens in them. he also has expectations about how the interviewer will respond to his actions. he has needs and desires that originate from a global self-interest for survival. these motivate his interview participation by specifying goals that he wants to accomplish during the interview. he has a conative ability to structure these goals  form plans about how he intends to satisfy goals  and execute actions to carry out plans. he has a cognitive ability to observe and evaluate the actions that are taking place to determine whether his goals are being achieved or whether he must cope with some new situation. his needs and desires are tied to the success or failure of his actions as well as to the interaction of the participants in the situation. finally  he has the ability to posit new goals and new courses of action  possibly altering the course of the interview. as he attempts to steer events  he continues to perceive the ongoing situation and measure the success of his actions. note that the motivation for a person's participation originates in his self-interests  and expands to motivate other processes. 
       affects are central to the theory of paranoia we are modelling  colby  1   in that affects may radically modify the workings of other processes. in the paranoid mode  a person cognitively scans natural language input  as well as the inferences from that input  looking for evidence that judges an action  desire  or state of the self to reflect an inadequacy or defectiveness of the self. upon finding such evidence  the person simulates acknowledgement of this inadequacy. if the inadequacy were accepted or acknowledged as true  the  painful  affect of humiliation would result. the detection of this impending humiliation in the simulation serves as a warning not to execute an acknowledging procedure. instead the conative ability attempts an alternative simulation in which wrongdoing is attributed to others. since no warning signal of the affect of humiliation results  the procedure for blaming others is executed. the outcome of this alternate strategy is 1  to repudiate that the self is to blame for inadequacy  and 1  to ascribe blame to other human agents. this transfer of blame is reflected in the ongoing linguistic behavior of a paranoid patient in a psychiatric interview. note the central role of affect in the paranoid process. 
       finally  in striving for completeness and consistency in our model and its underlying theory  we recognized the importance of modelling all of the phenomena in one formalism  from the very top-level global strategies to the simplest cognitive operation for a theory to be complete  it must explain all behavior associated with the phenomena being modelled. a person dominated by the paranoid mode is nevertheless subject to periods of normalcy  and this normalcy must also be adequately modelled. also  a person has a general background strategy behind his interview participation strategy. a person in an interview situation not only has specific desires and goals of what he wants from the interview  but also has an general strategy for survival which is motivating all action in the system and must also be modelled 
       for a theory to be consistent  it must explain similar phenomena in similar formalisms. thus the normal and paranoid modes of processing should be modelled in the same formalism. this principle also applies to the two functions of cognition and conation - present in some form in almost any task involving human thought processing. for consistency  we would like motivations for one type of task   find all x  moon rocks  blocks  bacteria  for which p x  is heavy  is red  is toxic   represented and structured in the same manner as other motivations   whenever an input is typed on the teletype  process it  or  if x is a new rule of inference  store it for later use  . a single strategy should motivate all cognitive and conative processes in a similar manner. 
	affeot: 	the model 
       our model of affect  emotion  is derived from differential emotion theory  izard  1 . according to that theory  affect is one of the five subsystems of personality  the others: homeostatic  drive  cognitive  motor . the function of affect is to provide the principal motivation for human behavior  by invoking and directing other processes the affect system consists of : 1  several discrete affects  each having its own distinct motivational and phenomenological properties   specifically  the distinct sets of phenomena that activate them and their distinct motivational responses ; 
1  a strategy for choosing which affects to favor in order to maintain and enhance the state of the self; and 1  a process that activates individual affects  applies the choice strategy  and invokes other processes as a response. the eight affects we distinguish  tomkins  1  are three positive: enjoyment-joy  interest-excitement  and surprise-startle; and five negative: fear-terror  anger-rage  distress-anguish  shame-humiliation  and contempt-disgust. the terms positive and negative are not meant to convey an ethical judgement  but instead express a global strategy of self-maintenance and self-enhancement. the affects refer to pleasure and pain  either physical  mental  or emotional pleasure or pain  e.g.  fear of physical pain  interest in emotional pleasure . the strategy is to maximize positive affects and minimize negative ones. this self-interest strategy determines how affect will respond in directing other processes to satisfy affect requirements. 
       affect has complex chemical  neurophysiological  neuromuscular  and phenomenological aspects. affects are activated by perceptual activities such as perceiving an object or situation of importance in a person-environment interaction  or by cognitive activities such as memory or imagination of previous and future events.  we postulate that both activities function as activators in the same manner.  less common affect activations result from spontaneous motor  endocrine  or neuromuscular activity. activation entails establishing patterns of electrochemical activity in the nervous system  through the limbic system  for a particular affect. these patterns initiate neuromuscular activity  primarily in facial activity and facial patterning  and secondarily in body response. 
       when' this activity is sensed at the phenomenological level  it becomes a conscious experience of a discrete affect which is meaningful and significant by itself. the power of affect is in this experience; the experience is intrinsically rewarding for positive affects and punishing for negative ones. the experience is conscious  in the sense of being 
1 
independent of cognition  not as opposed to subconscious : here we find the distinction between drive and affect. drives constitute needs of the system  but drives only motivate through affect. drives send information about the entity's physical needs to the affect process. affect may amplify  attenuate  or ignore the information  thereby modulating the impact of the drive on consciousness.  without the conscious experience of the need  the need has no motivating influence.  thus affect can motivate without drive  but drive cannot motivate without affect. 
       being the only motivational process  affect must match the complexity of the cognition and conation processes it motivates. the complexity of the affect process arises from a  the variety of cue-producing facial and body responses for each of the eight discrete primary affects  and b  the complex response of affect in interacting with the processes affect motivates. the cues from facial and body reponses are used by cognition to determine the cause of the affect  the experience itself does not indicate the activator  although past experience may be used as described in the next section  and to determine a best possible plan by conation. the richness of cue-differentiation allows cognition to distinguish among the phenomenologtcally distinct significant experiences of affect. we shall see the complexity of the interaction of affect response with other processes in the next section. 
       for our task of simulating human behavior  it is necessary and useful to model affect as it occurs in human personalities. to construct any entity with a task to perform  it may be useful to construct an affect-like process representing the entity's self-interests. the requirements of such an entity typically entail finding and executing a  best  sequence of actions to perform a task. for the entity to strive to do its best  it must perceive its relative success of performance. the relative success of performance must then take on importance and be significant to the system. the experience of this significance is an immediately rewarding or punishing experience  as in affect. such experiences become synonymous with the entity's self-interest. using an affect-like process  motivation for all action would stem from this self-interest  and insure that all action would be taken for the purpose of enhancing the original task. finally  if the entity performs a task that is complex  we would expect the motivation of the entity towards its task  and more specifically its self-interest  to be equally complex in guiding the entire system. 
	a f f e o t 	a s 	m o t i v a t i o n 
       in discussing affect as motivation for the entire system  we shall concentrate on the motivation affect provides for cognitive and conative processes. we define cognition as the process by which information is stored in memory  extended  typically by inductive or deductive processes   transformed from sensory input into an internal representation  and made available to other processes as seen from other processes  the function of cognition is to provide information relevant to some task. we define conation as the process by which goals are established  decisions are made as to what actions will satisfy these goals  and the derived actions implemented by performing the appropriate task. conation is not necessarily a conscious process. 
 subconscious decisions about subconscious goals can be made because the goal and decision is common  driving a car   or because of extreme affect conditions to be described later. to make the distinction clearer; we theorize that conation is the decision-making and -implementing function of the system for any decision that is not in the hardware of the system. cognition is the information-translating function of the system  translating sensory input into cognitive structures  manipulating structures internally  and translating cognitive structures to motor output. conation may establish a goal and call cognition for a plan to satisfy the goal. cognition may call conation to establish subgoals as part of a plan. note that part of what usually is termed cognition  e.g. establishing a goal of proving a conjecture and then initiating an attempt of the proof  we term conation. affect motivates these processes through 1 types of interaction:1  affect initiates the processes  and interrupts them on condition of extreme affect levels. 1  when interrupting the processes  affect associates significance values  measures of importance  with the new goals or actions  or the new information that caused the interrupt  for later use. 1  whenever choices are made about the importance of a goal or action  in conation   or importance of information  in cognition   the criteria of importance used to make the choice are from current affects or from significance values originally determined by affect. 
       affect's most direct form of motivation stems from its ability to initiate and interrupt other systems. the motivation for the model originates in the rewarding or punishing experiences of affect. when these experiences occur  the affect strategy determines the most important affects to satisfy. if there is not already a conative activity in existence that is satisfying more crucial affects  then affect initiates the conative process to determine and fulfill a goal of enhancing current positive affects or reducing negative affects. conation  optionally  initiates cognition as part of its processing to determine goals or actions  or to perceive the results of actions. as an example  in its simplest sequence of processing  the affect process detects the presence of extreme negative affects and initiates a conative process for reducing those affects. conation immediately chooses an action and executes it  without any call to cognition  e.g.  crying after being hurt . a more typical sequence is for affect to note that affect levels are normal and then initiate a conative process with a goal of finding a plan for enhancing positive affects. conation then uses cognition to determine the plan and monitor the execution of the plan. 
       once conation and cognition have been initiated  affect may interrupt either process due to extreme affect levels. such an interrupt may initiate an entirely new process or redirect an existing process by adding new affect information to a current process. adding affect information entails attaching importance to a step in a current process based on the intrinsically rewarding or punishing experience of current affects. affect information provides the criteria for redirecting processes  depending upon the significance of the affect response. for example  if cognition constructs a new belief that invokes a sharp change in affect  affect may interrupt to cause conation to assign to cognition a new task of examining the inferences that led to the belief. similarly  if conation executes an action that invokes sharp affect change  affect may interrupt conation to derive a new goal more suitable to the new affect conditions. 
       the homeostatic and drive systems are only indirectly influenced by affect. the homeostatic system is separate from the other systems and carries on its functions according to its own needs. the requirement of those needs is to attain or return to preferred states of the system in spite of repeated oscillations out of the states. affect's only influence upon this system is from facial and body changes of affect responses. drive system needs satisfy tissue demands for food  water  air  etc. drive needs are cyclic in nature and let their needs be known to affect through affect-activation. because drive needs are only one class of affect activator  other activators may cause affect to ignore drives  attenuate drives  or amplify them  depending upon the other concurrent activators. affect's response to the drive system is limited to directing conation and cognition to satisfy drive needs. 
       when interrupting another process  affect assigns significance values  measures of importance  to the various process components that caused the interrupt. by process components we mean beliefs and inferences for cognition  and goals  plans and actions for conation. significance values are the vehicle for attaching significance or importance to process components. these values originate in self-interest  in the affect experiences that have immediate meaning for the entity. significance values are the measure of importance of a particular process component to process decisions - importance in terms of the self-interest of the entity. for example  when cognition infers a new belief that activates intense affect  the concept  event  situation  rule of inference  or deductive path that led to the new belief will have a significance value associated with it. later cognitive processing of the same concept  etc. will detect the importance of the concept from the previously assigned significance value  which may invoke a memory of the associated affect  or may reinvoke the affect itself. similarly when conation structures a goal  determines a plan  or executes an action that invokes  or releases  intense affect  the goal or action may have a new significance value associated with it. when later the same goal is established or the same action executed  its importance and significance to the entity will be determined by the previously set value. significance value mechanisms are not part of cognition  but are an inherent part of the decision structures within the processes themselves. 
       the most complex and intricate aspect of affect's motivation is the use of significance values in ongoing cognitive and conative processing. after significance values have been associated with previously-referenced process components  the processes use these previous values  and significance values from current affect interrupts  to guide their processing  in order to best reflect the self-interests of the system. 
       in cognition  such guidance takes the form of determining relevant information  relevant to the entity's self-interests  about a situation to be perceived or a problem to be solved. the two sources of decision criteria for process guidance are; a  the global statement of the cognitive task to be performed  and b  information discovered by local processing as the task is performed. these criteria are used in guiding which inference path to try next  which concept to elaborate  or what strategy to use for a particular task. specifically  one task of cognition is to perceive a particular situation to obtain whatever facts are most relevant. significance values from the global statement of the task are consulted initially to determine the facts to focus attention upon  and again whenever the statement of the task is reviewed to refocus attention. additionally  the association of significance values with perceived objects or concepts provides amplification or attenuation of interest in the current local perception task as a source of locally-obtained information. another cognitive task is to solve a given problem. affect provides the significance of the solution as the criteria 
1 
for decisions about what inference rules to use or which beliefs to expand upon. as beliefs or rules of inference are used  their importance is determined by their previously set significance values  generating local information for process guidance. 
       in conation  guidance from affect help1 determine goals and actions  and control the execution of actions. the top-level goal with which affect initiates conation is a product of the currently activated affects and affect's global strategy. this goal is given its significance value  importance of satisfying the goal  by the current affects. when subgoals of this goal are established  they take their significance values from previously assigned values for this particular subgoal  and the current value for the supergoal. the criteria for choosing the appropriate action to satisfy a goal are the value given to the goal  and the values of the possible actions. there exists a set of actions associated with the current goal each having significance values previously assigned. these values are from previous executions of these actions that attempted to satisfy the goal. in determining the appropriate action  cognition may be called to find a new set of actions or examine an already-determined 1et of actions to find the best plan. cognition returns its candidate plans  and values associated with them. the entire set of values  from cognition  from previous actions  and from current goals  are used to determine the appropriate action.  note that the significance value is the criteria. thus a decision may be made in spite of strong contrary  rational  evidence. or the value from the goal and one previously used action may be so strong as to bypass cognitive planning altogether and instead execute the extreme-valued action.  when the execution of an action is monitored  the results of the actions may invoke new significance values through perception of their effects. these may change the commitment to finishing the action in terms of resources allocated because of a new evaluation of the potential for satisfying the original goal. 
       the interaction between affect interrupts  assigning significance values upon interrupt  and later use of the values gives the entity the ability to determine importance in making process decisions. this importance derives originally from the fundamental self-interest of the entity  and therefore gives the entity the motivational intricacy it needs for complex 
tasks 
application: the paranoid mode 
       our task of modelling a paranoid person in a psychiatric interview situation provides a rich field of examples for the theory. we shall concentrate first on the interview situation and then the paranoid mode. 
       a typical motivation for a person to participate in an interview is for the reduction of an ongoing condition of distress. this distress could be due to an unsolved problem or unresolved conflict in which: a  the conflict tends to evoke one  or more  of the five negative affects periodically in a person's life  and b  the goals or actions that the person applies are not adequate or appropriate to reduce the negative affect. periodic discomfort activates the affect distress-anguish. one plan for reducing the affect distress is to eliminate its cause by getting help from someone  thus motivating participation in an interview. 
       once in an interview  a person generally has a strategy for interaction to help achieve his goal. we envision the goat to be to get help  with subgoals of setting up the interview  going to the interview  and participating in the interview. a typical strategy for interview participation is: 1  establish rapport with the interviewer by answering questions and talking with him  1  explain the self's problem  especially the discomfort from certain situations  1  seek confirmation and support for himself  and 1  get specific instructions for the solution to the problem. as the person embarks upon this strategy  he monitors its progress. for example  before telling about his problem he must perceive whether the interviewer is able to understand him and help him  that is  whether rapport can be established. 
       when establishing rapport with the interviewer  typical goals are to answer the interviewer's questions  to volunteer demographic information  and to follow the interviewer's direction. to answer the interviewer's question  the person uses a plan to listen to the question  and then try to answer it. this plan calls a motor action to physically listen to the interviewer for his question  store it in a cognitive structure  and then determine what information the interviewer is seeking. if the input from the interviewer is a command  the plan involves determining what action is to be taken that will satisfy the interviewer's request within the context of the goal of trying to establish rapport with him. as the person acts to satisfy this goal  he monitors his actions to see if they are accomplishing his intentions. in this case  he examines the input from the interviewer to see if the interviewer is understanding him and accepting him by performing in the expected role. note that the motivation for all of these actions  including accepting a natural language input and interpreting it  stems from the original goal of relieving distress. 
       once a person is establishing rapport successfully with the interviewer  at least according to the conclusions of his cognitive processes   he can initiate the next action in his plan for interview participation  that of explaining his problem. the plan calls for relating events and situations to the interviewer from cognition  and listening for and interpreting the interviewer's responses to evaluate whether rapport is being maintained. throughout the remainder of the interview the interaction continues in a similar manner -- the original plan motivated by affects is executed  resulting in subgoals by conation of listening to and interpreting the interviewer's input  cognitively determining the intervewer's abilities and intentions  explaining the problem to the interviewer and answering his questions  and monitoring the conation process at various levels to insure that goals are being satisfied. 
       as the participation plan is being executed  other affects modify the plan. three examples are anger  interest  and fear. when establishing rapport  if the interviewer does not act according to his expected role but instead starts an abnormal sequence of actions  e.g.  telling about his own problems   the person's anger may be activated. such anger may provoke an action of verbally attacking the interviewer  a conative decision that could be made automatically without cognition  or refusing to participate further  a conative decision made on the basis of a cognitive judgement that the interviewer doesn't want to help. the strength of the affect response stems from a significance value attached to similar previous experiences in which a person expected a favorable situation to occur and was prevented from experiencing it. 
       interest comes into play in an interview as an auxiliary affect to be enhanced. a person participating in an interview receives attention from the interviewer. the importance placed on that attention depends on the person's attitude towards the interviewer  the current need for attention  and the strength of other affects being satisfied. if the interviewer shows interest in some aspect of the person's life  the interest affect may interrupt the current conative process to put more importance on relating well to the interviewer so as to enhance the affect interest. the conative process would resume its former task with a newly acquired tendency to interact positively with the interviewer. this tendency would remain strong until satisfied or until another affect  e.g.  fear  interrupts and becomes more important. 
       fear in an interview refers to fear of emotional harm  in order to get help  a person must reveal much of himself to the interviewer. as a result  it is easy for the interviewer to lower the person's self-esteem  causing emotional pain. the fear affect is sensitive to emotional pain  particularly if the fear affect has previously placed great significance on the ability to perceive when such pain may occur. if the interviewer shows an intention of proving the person wrong  fear may interrupt and place a high value on telling only facts that defend the person. later  if it is established that the interviewer only wants to prove the person wrong to help  and if fear has subsided  a high value may be placed on telling the rest of the truth. 
       thus  the interview task requires numerous decisions in the cognitive and conative processes due to different motivations. these motivations are applied to the decisions by the value mechanism based on affect. 
       the theory of the paranoid mode of thought provides an example of the direct control of affect over other processes. within the context of a psychiatric interview and its ongoing goals and actions  a person dominated by the paranoid mode uses his cognitive ability to look for potential humiliation in the input  as one of his goals in an interview . the past experience of the person makes humiliation so painful that not only insults will activate shame  but al1o the slightest evidence of an inadequacy of the self implied by the other person will activate shame. we envision an ever-widening sphere of concepts within the cognitive process acquiring significance values leading to shame over some time span in the life of the paranoid person  until  in severe cases  almost everything in the person's life activates the shame affect and the person breaks down. 
       once shame is activated  it becomes extremely disruptive to cognitive and conative processes because of the high significance placed upon the goal of removing shame's activator typically the activator is a statement of belief or leading question by the interviewer implying an inadequacy of the self. the paranoid person seeks an alternate explanation  such as to posit an alternate belief about the interviewer's incompetence or evil intentions. the incongruence of this new belief with the current processes  and the strong facial and body response of shame lead to disruption of the current processes and initiation of new processes. these new processes seek to extract the person from the uncomfortable situation  either by quitting altogether  partially withdrawing by refusing to answer questions  or attacking the interviewer. the end result of affect's direct control is for a new plan of survival to be implemented based on a belief of danger and controlled by the highly excited affect state. 
1 
       
implementation 
       a prototype of the model has been implemented in lisp  taught  colby  and parkison  1  also colby  parkison and faught  1  and is currently being tested according to a multidimensional analysis. the current implementation is available for interviewing at the stanford artificial intelligence laboratory through the arpa net. the prototype contains simulations of the affective  cognitive  and conative processes  but the interaction among the processes is still too primitive. for instance  the value mechanism of motivation by affect is implicit in the data structures used by the processes  and is static over the duration of an interview. 
       our intention is to implement conation  cognition  and affect in a production system. a mechanism to handle significance values will be implemented by dynamically ordering the production rules for rule selection. each set of rules with the same beginning token is ordered when the matcher selects among them. each rule has a significance value  a vector of the affects and their strengths when previously used. when a set of rules is called  the calling token has its own set of significance values. this global information is used to order the rules. local information is provided when a rule matches. in this case  the local value modifies the catling value after the rule has been applied  modifying the value of the token that called the rule. 
       the major thrust of the implementation will be to model the conation process at the lowest possible level  making sure that any action that occurs in the system which is not at the hardware level is a specific conative process. in this way we will insure that the affect process directs all goal-directed processing towards the entity's self-interests. 
summary 
       in order to motivate and best guide an entity performing complex tasks  motivation must originate in the self-interest of the entity. motivation must guide cognitive and conative processes at the lowest possible level by assigning significance values  measures of importance  to various process components and using them in making process decisions. through such a value mechanism  every decision taken will be to further the entity's self-interests. 
acknowledgements 
the author would like to thank dr. kenneth colby and 
roger 	parkison 	for 	their 	helpful 	comments 	and suggestions 
this research is supported in part by grant phs mh 
1 from the national institute of mental health  and in part by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense under contract dahc1-c-1. 
the views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies  either expressed or implied  of the national institute of mental health  the advanced research projects agency or the u. s. government. 
