artificial intelligence and aesthetics 
	james gips 	and 	george stiny 
department of biomathematics 	system science department 
university of california 
los angeles  california 1 

introduction 
　　　firschein et al.  describe some products that can be expected to result from research in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. one of these products is  creation and valuation systems  which they describe as computer systems  capable of creative work in such areas as music  art  painting  sculpture  architecture   literature  essays  novels  poetry   and mathematics  and able to evaluate the work of humans   and presumably the work of other  creation systems  .  creation  and  valuation  in the arts are discussed traditionally in terms of  design  and  criticism . in this paper  we review some of the work we have done to provide a basis for the development of systems  algorithms  capable of doing design and criticism in the arts. 
the goals of our research include: 
 1  the development of a simple  basic structure for criticism algorithms and design algorithms in the arts. 
 1  the investigation of traditional issues and approaches in aesthetics and art theory in terms of this structure. 
 1  the development of specific criticism algorithms and design algorithms for restricted art forms. 
　　　this paper is concerned mainly with our work on goal  1 . an overview of the basic structure developed for criticism and design algorithms is presented. preliminary work on goal  1  is reported in  1 . issues in aesthetics and art theory that are being investigated in terms of the developed structure for criticism and design algorithms include - the definition of  work of art ; different ways of understanding objects as works of art: notions of  form and content   
 representation   and  expression ; different ways of evaluating objects as works of art: notions of  unity and variety ; problems of copies  multiple performances  forgeries; found objects. important parts of specific criticism algorithms and design algorithms  work on goal  1   for number sequences and for non-representational  geometric paintings having generative specifications  have been developed. work on number sequences can be found in  1 ; work on paintings can be found in  1 . a comprehensive treatment of our work on aesthetics is expected to appear in . 
criticism and design 
　　　the task of criticism algorithms is taken to be the production of a statement of how a given object is interpreted and evaluated as a work of art. the task of design algorithms is taken to be the production of an object as a work of art in response to some specified initial conditions. the overall structure postulated for criticism algorithms is given in figure la  for design algorithms in figure lb.  for an interesting  early  but neglected discussion of systems with receptors  internal'reasoning'components  and effectors as models of thought processes see .  
criticism algorithms 
     the schema for criticism algorithms given in figure la consists of: 
 1  an object as a possible work of art. here the notion of  object  is used in its widest possible sense to include  for example  musical or theatrical performances as well as paintings or novels. 
 1  a receptor consisting of a sensory input transducer  shown schematically by an  eye   and linked algorithm. for example  a possible receptor for music is described in   
 1  the output of the receptor: a description  x λ  of the object. for example  for music  drama  literature  or architecture  λ could resemble the score  script  text  or plan. 
 1  an aesthetic system  an algorithmic specification of the viewpoint or knowledge used in some approach to art. the aesthetic system encodes the conventions and criteria needed for the determination of whether an object is considered a work of art and if so how it can be interpreted and evaluated as a work of art. the structure of aesthetic systems is described in a subsequent section. 
 1  an analysis algorithm. the analysis algorithm uses the knowledge encoded in the aesthetic system to interpret and evaluate the object as a work of art  if possible . the task of the analysis algorithm is described more precisely in a subsequent section. 
1  1  the output of the analysis algorithm: the interpretation and evaluation of the object as a work of art. 
 1  an effector consisting of a transducer  shown schematically by  hands   and linked algorithm  
 1  a statement of how the object is interpreted and evaluated as a work of art. 
design algorithms 

     the schema for design algorithms given in figure lb consists of: 
 1  some initial conditions  e.g.  a person whose portrait is to be painted or the injunction 
 write music for the royal water-party between 
whitehall and limehouse to be held on august 1  1.  
 1  a receptor consisting of a sensory input transducer  shown schematically by an  eye   and linked algorithm. 
 1  the output of the receptor: a specification of the i n i t i a l conditions. 
 1  an aesthetic system as in criticism algorithms. 
 1  a synthesis algorithm. the synthesis algorithm uses the knowledge encoded in the aesthetic system to construct the description of the best possible object which satisfies the i n i t i a l conditions. the task of the synthesis algorithm is described more precisely in a subsequent section. 
 1  the output of the synthesis algorithm: the intended description  a   of the work of art to be produced. 
 1  an effector consisting of a transducer  shown schematically by  hands   and linked algorithm 
1  1  the object produced by the effector. this object is the work of art produced by the design algorithm. 
approaches in criticism and design 

     criticism and design in the arts can be done in many different ways. the variety of actual 
approaches in criticism is apparent when two different observers interpret and evaluate the same object as a work of art in two different ways. for example  consider the disparity among opening night reviews of a given broadway play. the variety of actual approaches in design is apparent when two different artists produce two different objects as works of art in response to identical initial conditions. for example  consider the disparity between the commissioned portraits of l.b.j. 
     the aim of our work is not to produce any single  authoritative criticism algorithm or design algorithm  as we consider any approach to art legitimate. rather  we postulate a structure for criticism algorithms and design algorithms in which a variety of approaches to art can be represented. the practice of criticism and design in the arts can be done in many different ways and still be modelled using the postulated structure for criticism algorithms and design algorithms. different approaches in criticism or design might result in differences in any of the components of criticism algorithms or design algorithms. for example  aesthetic systems corresponding to several different approaches to nonrepresentational  geometric paintings have been suggested  1 . each of these aesthetic systems 
would encode different conventions and criteria for interpreting and evaluating paintings as works of art. the interpretation of a painting using one of these aesthetic systems would be done in terms of the shapes in the painting  using a second in terms of the colors in the painting  using a third in terms of the associations attached to the painting  etc. of course  there can be many different aesthetic systems allowing for the 
interpretation of paintings in terms of shape  color  or associations. similarly  the evaluation of a painting using one of these aesthetic systems would be done in a variety of different ways. if these aesthetic systems were used in criticism algorithms  different statements of how a given painting is interpreted and evaluated would be produced. if these aesthetic systems were used in dealgn algorithms  different paintings would be produced in response to some given initial conditions. none of these aesthetic systems is taken to be definitive. again  any approach to art is considered legitimate. our interest is in investigating the many possible approaches to art in a uniform way. 
aesthetic systems 

     the key component in both criticism algorithms and design algorithms is an aesthetic system. recall that an aesthetic system is an algorithmic specification of the viewpoint or knowledge used in some approach to art. an aesthetic system encodes the conventions and criteria needed for the determination of whether an object is considered a work of art and if so  how it can be interpreted and evaluated as a work of art. 
1      an aesthetic system consists of four algorithms': an algorithm a which defines a set of interpretations i.   a reference decision algorithm r   an evaluation algorithm e   and an evaluation comparison algorithm c  see figure 1 . here we are not concerned with the internal structure of these algorithms but rather with the characteristics and inter-relationships of their inputs and outputs. 
     the algorithm a in an aesthetic system defines the set of interpretations i. . the set 
a 
of interpretations ia consists of a l l input-
a 
output pairs  for the algorithm a  see figure 1 . an interpretation in the set i. is a possible way of understanding some object as a work of art using the viewpoint or knowledge specified by the aesthetic system. for example  one component of an interpretation may be a description a of an object and the other component may be a specification of how that description is construed. the case where the output component     of an interpretation is a description of an object provides an interesting paradigm for the study of  form  or  internal coherence  in the arts. the case where the input component  a   of an interpretation is a 
description of an object provides an interesting paradigm for the study of  content  or  external 
 vocations  in the arts. 1  
     whether an interpretation refers to an object  i.e. is an interpretation of an object. is 
determined by the reference decision algorithm r in an aesthetic system  see figure 1 . the input to the reference decision algorithm is an interpretation in the set i and the description a 
a 
of an object. the output of the reference decision algorithm r indicates whether the interpretation refers to an object having the description   . 
     the set of interpretations i. and the reference decision algorithm r provide the basis for determining whether an object is a work of art for some aesthetic system. an object is a work of art for an aesthetic system if and only if there is an interpretation in the set i. which refers to the object using the reference decision algorithm r . we believe this definition of work of art has important implications for a variety of current issues in aesthetics and art theory . 
     it must be stressed that a given object may be considered a work of art using one aesthetic system and may not be considered a work of art using a second aesthetic system. further  when an object is considered a work of art using two different aesthetic systems  its interpretation and evaluation in each of these systems may be quite different. 
     aesthetic value is determined by the evaluation algorithm e . the evaluation algorithm assigns an aesthetic value to each interpretation n the set ia  see figure 1 . how an object is evaluated as a work of art depends on how the object is interpreted as a work of art. an interesting evaluation algorithm has been defined in terms of the relative lengths of the components of an interpretation. this evaluation algorithm provides a paradigm for the study of  unity and variety  in the arts and can be characterized in terms of algorithmic information theory . these topics are explored in  1 . 
     the relative merit of two aesthetic values is determined by the evaluation comparison algorithm c . one interpretation is aesthetically superior to a second interpretation in an aesthetic system 
when the aesthetic value assigned the first interpretation is determined by the evaluation comparison algorithm to be superior to the aesthetic value assigned to the second interpretation. an interesting issue is whether the evaluation comparison algorithm should be an order  and if so  whether it should be total or partial . 
     specific aesthetic systems are being developed for number sequences  1  and for nonrepresentational  geometric paintings  1 . the computer implementation of important parts of a fully developed aesthetic system for painting is 
described in  a . additionally  some traditional aesthetic viewpoints for s variety of art forms are being examined in terms of aesthetic systems. 
analysis and synthesis algorithms 

     in a criticism algorithm  an analysis algorithm is used in conjunction with an sesthetic system to specify how an object having description 
x is interpreted and evaluated as a work of art 
 see figure la . the task of an analysis algorithm is to find the best way to interpret the object as a work of art. for a given aesthetic system  the task of an analysis algorithm is to find the interpretation in the set ia which refers  using the 
a 
reference decision algorithm r   to the object having the description x and which is assigned an aesthetic value by the evaluation algorithm ♀ which is maximal in the sense of the evslustion comparison algorithm c . the interpretation found by the analysis algorithm is the best way to understand the object having the description x in terms 
of the viewpoint or knowledge specified by the aesthetic system. 
     in a design algorithm  a synthesis algorithm is used in conjunction with an aesthetic system to construct the description of a work of art  object  satisfying the given i n i t i a l conditions  see figure lb . the task of a synthesis algorithm is to construct the description of the best possible work of art which satisfies the initial conditions. for a given aesthetic system  the task of a synthesis algorithm is to find a description x of an object for which  1  the specified initial conditions are satisfied and  1  there is an interpretation in the set i. which would refer  using the reference decision algorithm r   to the object and which is assigned an aesthetic value by the evaluation algorithm e which is maximal in the aense of the evaluation comparison algorithm c . the descriptioi found by the synthesis algorithm specifies the best 
work of art  in terms of the viewpoint or knowledge given by the aesthetic system  that satisfies the initial conditions. 

1 

     special purpose analysis algorithms and synthesis algorithms have been investigated. analysis algorithms have been studied for use in conjunction with restricted types of aesthetic systems. heuristic search methods have been suggested for synthesis algorithms to be used in conjunction with the aesthetic system developed for paintings having generative specifications  1 1 . 
problems and prospects 

     the problem of constructing particular criticism algorithms and design algorithms can be extremely d i f f i c u l t . the process of c r i t i c i z i n g or designing a work of art may be very complicated and can involve a full range of mental abilities. the ability to specify a criticism algorithm or a design algorithm may well presuppose the a b i l i t y to formalize a wide range of perceptual and cognitive s k i l l s and a wide range of knowledge. for example  a criticism algorithm which allows for the interpretation and evaluation of raphael's school 

of athens may involve the a b i l i t y to recognize 

painted shapes as people  the a b i l i t y to recognize those people as representations of greek philosophers as well as portraits of italian artists of the 1th and 1th centuries  the ability to associate these people into groups in terms of their philosophical points of view as greek philosophers as well as their spatial location in the painting  the ability to relate the painting as part of art history  the ability to relate the ideas associated with the painting with the ideas in some cultural context  the ability to identify the emotions evoked by the various aspects of the painting  among many. formalizing even the first of these a b i l i t i e s would be an extremely d i f f i c u l t task at the present time. 
     in    creation and valuation systems  were predicted to be one of the last a r t i f i c i a l intelligence products to be developed. this prediction seems well-founded i n light of the 
difficulties involved in the specification of particular criticism algorithms and design algorithms and the need to include a wide variety of other a r t i f i c i a l intelligence products in this specification. our hope is that our work provides a productive f i r s t step toward the goal of developing  creation and valuation systems  as well as the basis for better understanding general questions of aesthetics and art theory. 
