. in controlling the locomotion 

of the walker there appear problems associated with the necessity of constructing coordinated motion of the body and legs which ensures accomodation to irregularities of the terrain being overcome. the paper considers algorithms for selecting supporting points for legs and for gait synthesis at a prescribed curvilinear motion of the walker over the terrain with complex relief. introduction* in case of a uniform rec-

tilinear motion of the walker over a plane it is most natural to select the gait  footholds and leg motion schedule on the base of some principles of regularity  using  for example  periodic 
walking  step-to-step   with constant velocity /i-1/. 
     while walking over the terrain with complex relief it is sometimes impossible to realize such a uniform motion.indeed  footholds may be arranged on the terrain irregularly  as there exist areas forbidden for placing the legs  clefts  steep slopes . if the distance between footholds is long and the transfer time is so short  that the transfer velocity turns to be higher than the allowable one  the walker should decrease the velocity of i t s motion over that segment of the trace. thus even if the surface irregularities are quite negligible for the walker's body to move keeping a horizontal position without touching them  a uniform motion may appear to be unrealizable. 
     if surface irregularities are rather appreciable then it is necessary to designing the body motion lest it should touch them. in this case linearity of the body motion is disturbed 
and uniform motion becomes unrealizable too. 
     if information about the terrain is being obtained during the motion then such cases may take place when it is impossible to predict motion for lack of information owing to the terrain irregularities intercepting field of view.this 
problem may be solved by organizing interaction  a kind of dialogue  between the information system and motion design system  mds . the interaction leads to adrupt decelerations and to disturbances of regularity and uniformity of motion. 
     thus  principles of regularity  periodicity and uniformity of legs-andbody motion usea for constructing the gait  the leg motion schedule and for selecting footholds may be appreciably at variance with the requirement that the walker should be accommodating to the terrain relief. to solve the problem of the best accommodation of the walker to the relief accidents it was found necessary to develop algorithms for 
selecting the gait  footholds and leg motion schedule without any restrictions  associated with a prescribed pattern of motion. 
1      algorithms for selecting the gait  footholds and leg motion schedule depend appreciably on the availability or lack of adequate information about the terrain at the moment when the motion is being formed. if the information about the terrain is adequate it is possible to predict footholds forward along the trace to the extent which doesn't permit to get into  blind alleys   i.e. into positions when the walker cannot proceed 
with its motion in the scope of the prescribed gait. the algorithm of  wave gait** synthesis /i  1/ otters a simple way of designing the walker's motion which does not lead to  blind alley  situations. however  the algorithm reguires predicting for so a long distance forward along the trace that in case of unavailability of adequate information about the terrain this algorithm may be found to be unrealizable. 
     in 