 
     the development of a model of motion control for walking robots is reported. the goal of the project is the elaboration of methods to construct the tree main levels of a control system of the robot's motion and a program complex to realise the robot's behaviour simulation in complex topography. 
     a notable amount of achievements has been reached by now in developing the model of behaviour control for robots in various  activity areas . most of the models  however  are  to our mind  too  deterministic  . the hope to obtain interesting results in the field with a model based  in a sense  on the principle of  maximum indetenninism  gave rise to the project 'discussed in the present paper. 
     the corresponding ideology has been almost literally transferred here from the asynchronous programming theory; as to the  walking   it was chosen as a model domain because it offers combination of both general and special problems. 
introduction 

     there are two fields of study within the frames of the project. 
　　　　middle level - look-ahead for several trajectory steps in the direction of the route fixed by the upper level. proceeding from the complete information of the robot's capabilities the middle level takes into account a l l given values of output parameters of the motion regime  speed  balance reserve  the platform height  etc.  and the local features of the relief in the direction of the motion. in the space of a l l feasible positions of the robot on the relief this level of control points a  corrictor  formed by the set of paths allowed under the given combination and internal conditions. 
　　　　lower level - of control plane a concrete sequence of elementary  for the g i ven level  acts of motion  the sequence is so chosen that the corresponding movement through the area should keep to the  corridor  limits fixed by the middle level. the lower level chooses in what sequence the legs step on  fixes the points on the ground to put them  determines the moments of taking off and setting for each leg the intervals for speed switching etc. 
 1  the development of a mathematical realizes these trajectories  for a model      it is understandable that even lower levels of control exist; e.g. the level which determines the concrete form of motion trajectories for legs and platform in accordance with the parameters specified by the third level; and the level which 

model for the three upper levels of the control system for the robot's behaviour. this field is the principal one; however  it was agreed that the model should be testified in the conditions close enough to the real ones which brings about the necessity of the research in the other field. 
      1  the development of a computer system for simulating the robot's behaviour in complex topography. 
the system of motion control 
     the control of motion for a walking robot is considered to be an interacting system of three principal levels: 
　　　　upper level - the planning of route. this level is not connected directly with allowing for different sorts of errors . these levels  however  will not be considered in the report because of the natural space limitations. 
model 

     as the project is purely experimental in character  it has been decided to carry out the research for a sufficiently wide range of models with intention to shift the accent from simpler models to more complex ones   f i g . 1a b c d  as soon as a deeper understanding is felt. 

the specificity of  walking . in principle the problem here does not differ from the route planning for a wheeled robot. the only important factors for the control on this level are the general characteristics of the robot's capability to suxmount different particular variants of relief. 
1 


     the two simplest models are two dimensional  plane . the legs have two degrees of freedom each  they can move in the plane of movement without being caught in each other or in the platform  they can i n t e r s e c t   . the remaining two models are three-dimensional  the legs having three degrees of freedom each. a l l four versions are considered to have no mass but they have a center of g r a v i t y  legs are weightless . 
     the f o l l o w i n g r e s t r i c t i o n s are i m posed on any model; 
　　　 1  the s t a t i c balance conditionjthe v e r t i c a l projection of the g r a v i t y center must cross the supporting segment f o r the 1-d models and the supporting polygon f o r the 1-d models.* 
　　　 1  the bearing  of a bearing leg  cannot move along the r e l i e f   i . e . the robot is not allowed to  drag i t s legs . 
　　　　 1  every step  i . e . the operations of taking o f f   transferring and setting a l e g   requires an i n t e r v a l t of time  where  is a constant and is chosen by the model randomly w i t h i n the l i m i t s of r e s t r i c t i o n s  1  and   1   . 
generator of behaviour 
　　　for each model  a set of variables is f i x e d which completely describes i t s inner state. for example  the 	variables f o r the simplest model  see f i g . 1a  are fixed as followss 
- coordinates of the bearing 	w i t h respect to the g r a v i t y center  
- the time which has passed since non-bearing legs took o f f   
- v e r t i c a l and h o r i z o n t a l v e l o c i t y constituents of the g r a v i t y center. 
     s t a t i c a l l y unstable states are excluded from a l l possible sets of variable 
values. each model is specified by a couple of  q a    where q is the set of a l l s t a t i c a l l y stable states and a is the set 
the convex figure  reduced to a segment for the 1-d models   formed by a round of projections of leg bearing onto a horizontal plane  is referred to as the supporting one. 
of simple operations managed by the model. for instance  la model manages the following simple operations: 

     any set of simple operations that can be applied simultaneously tonne a complex operation. let a be the set of a l l operations- simple and complex ones-defined by a; generally  when a simple or complex operation is applied  the model passes i n t o a next state which  in i t s t u r n   
may or may not belong to the set q. 
     thus  f o r any model a corresponding oriented graph g may be constructed whose -vertices are the states of the set q and the arcs are the respect i r e operations from a. the set q is now naturally d i v i d ed i n t o three non-intersecting subset si 
- c y c l i c states which belong to at least one cycle from g; 
- input conditions which have at least one path i n t o c y c l i c ones; - deadlock states. 
　　the subgraph obtained by excluding the deadlock: vertices from g is called the generator of behaviour. 
　　we can next select subgenerators from the generator of behaviour which satisfy certain restrictions imposed on choosing the states from q. there is  for instance  a eubgenerator with a given lower or upper limit of the velocity range or a given minimum of balance reserve  a subgenerator of motion on a horizontal plane  etc. to meet this  vertices are selected in the generator which satisfy relevant restrictions  deadlock vertices are excluded from the subgraph obtained. 
     let the model  q a  be in a given point of the relief with its inner state any sequence of the robot' s ac-
tions for this initial position defines a corresponding sequence of the inner states each couple of 
the adjacent states ql  assuming the realization of an operation a * 
. any sequence of the model's actions on the relief is re-affixmed by at least one path in the behaviour generator* all paths beginning in a given q* in g may be divided into two paths - with the position on the relief fixed - 1  those corresponding to a sequence of actions   feasible  on the relief and 1  those   infeasible  on the relief. we can next select paths from all  feasible*' ones that satisfy certain restriction imposed on the choice of states  it is evident that the set of such. 

1 

paths is the same as the set of * l i  feasible  paths in the corresponding subgenerator. 
     we shall select paths from the set of a l l  feasible  paths going through q* in q which correspond to the robot's motion on the relief in the direction to some goal or sub-goal  specified by a superior level. this set of paths  satisfying the leading directions  foxms the  be-
haviour corridor  which contains  in i t s turn   narrower  behaviour corridors satisfying different restrictions imposed on the choice of state. 
general scheme of control 

     let us return to the general scheme of the model control. a set of control parameters is chosen whose values are specified from outside  by even higher control levels or by a human operator   e.g. velocity  balance  oomfort  limitations imposed on the manoeuvre by velocity and the movement of the platform   etc. 
　　　　upper leveli parameter values essentially affect the estimation of relief and  respectively  the choice of route by the upper level of control. two versions middle level marks out the metion corridor for several steps ahead. only the principal relief components are taken into account; minor relief elements are supposed to be treated by the lower level using the manoeuvrability within the corridor. 
     the fixed values of control parameters determine a corresponding subgenerator of behaviour for which the oorridor is constructed. if construction proves impossible the value range is extended for certain parameters  provided it is permissible ; this enables the use of a more extended subgenerator. when the corridor is marked out for an acceptable set of the parameter values  the control passes to the lower level; i f   on the other hand  the try did not succeed  the  conflict  is reported to the upper level since it has been caused by*an error of the latter. 
of this level are effected in the project: 　　　　lower level: the set of values of the parameters for which the corridor has been marked out determines the subgenerator of the lower level. when inside the corridor  the lower level is able to control the motion taking into account the details of relief for the nearest step only  i.e.the robot is walking  looking at its feet . 

　　　　 1  static version. right from the start the robot disposes of a detailed plan of the territory it knows its coordinates and the coordinates of the goal. the problem of routing is completely solved before the movement begins. the terri-
tory plan is divided nto homogeneous areas similar as to their practicability factors  i.e. slope  height  surface condi-
tions  screen  marsh  etc. . the values of control parameters considered  these it operates as follows: any point of setting of the next leg is selected inside 
the corridor  the level chooses a path in the subgenerator  optimal or quazi-optimal ; this path has to be permissible for the relief and to lead from the current state to any other state in the corridor corresponding to the setting of the given leg into the given point and allowed by 
the corridor; after that a decision is 
areas are given a concrete estimation upon etc. made as to which leg will step next  the point of setting is planned for this leg  

which an optimal route is determined with the help of the well-known methods  algorithms of bellman   nilssen  .this version  as can be seen  means that the upper level does not work during the motion along the route. 
　　　　 1  dynamic version. the robot's knowledge or the territory comprises only what it sees and what it has seen since the motion began. in addition the robot knows its own coordinates and the coordinates of the goal.  functions of the eye  are not simulated; the robot is supposed to have  ideal eyes . for any given position on the territory  a zone of direct vision is determined  the corresponding part of the plan is considered as known 
to and memorized by the robot. the discussed operations of dividing into areas and practicability estimation are carried out for the known portion of the plan. there upon the tactics of movement are determined and the following stage of route is 
marked out. the static version is now completely realized; as for the dynamic version  a tentative model is at xhe debugging stage. 
     we have now a working 1a model for a black - and-white plane relief  black no treating  white - treating allowed . the development is being completed for la model on an arbitrarily complex  flat  relief  as well as for 1b model and black and - white relief. certain results are obtained in methods of automatic synthesis and compact computer presentation for the generator of behaviour. 
the simulation system 

     in this preprint we shall only enumerate some of the most general functions of the simulation system. the system consists of two principal parts. 
      1  a dialogue system for synthesis of complex relief. the system usee a display and a plotter. the system constructs a two or three - level model of a complex relief  on demand   using only a minimum of directions from the operator. 
      1  the operation system  wziic'u enables: 

1 



