session 1: robots and productivity 
technology 
active semantic networks 
in robots with independent control 
n.m. amosov  a . m . k a s a t k i n and l . m . kasatkina 
department o f b i o c y b e r n e t i c s i n s t i t u t e o f cybernetics 
u k r a i n i a n academy of sciences 
	1 	k i e v 	ussr 

a b s t r a c t 
     an approach to the construction of integral robot control systems is suggested based on the employment of information value characteristics. a method for representation of the value characteristics and their dynamics is decribed. a certain elaboration of the semantic networks idea forms the basis of the method. specific examples illustrate the use of the suggested approach. 
introduction 

     considerable specifics is inherent in problems of constructing the control systems of robots designed tor functioning in the natural environment. here elaboration of such decision procedures proves to be necessary which can operate not only under conditions of unsteadiness and variability of initial data of the problem being solved but also under conditions of simultaneous existence of many problems whose urgency is in constant change. hence the stringent requirements that the robot control systems be versatile and autonomous. moreover  they must function under conditions of real time and considerable deficit of information. approaches based on the traditional methods of decision-making  theorem proving  etc.  seem to be not very effective. to the best of our belief the promising direction is associated with the development of such decision-making systems which are based on the employment of mechanisms of  inner activity  in the sense of the term meant when speaking about the motivation of human behaviour- it implies  however  the development of a method f i t for the new tasks. 
     this paper offers the description of a possible method of the kind. a certain elaboration of the idea of semantic net-
works forms its basis. ways of the method application in constructing control systems for robots are discussed and examples of specific developments are given. 
sign s.ystems and information 

the chosen approach 

     it is characterized by two main features. the first: we construct the robot control system on the basis of knowledge and hypotheses on processes of information handling by the human brain which affects the behaviour we would like to observe on the part of a robot. initial hypotheses are given in . it does not at a l l mean that we shall be engaged in the modeling of the thought or other psychic functions. it is only required that the constructed system control the robot efficiently. we use the study of psychics of an individual affecting the control only as the heuristic basis for incorporation of one or other functional subsystems or structures into the system. 
     the second feature consists in our employment of the semantic network  treated as a sign system  as a device for the internal representation of information in the system. 
     in works of different authors the semantic network appears in quite different modifications  i.e.  from facilities for representing meanings of lexical units in  by r. quillian to  a state-of-theworld graph  in  by g. hendrix. the semantic network we deal with is an oriented graph whose nodes and arcs are marked by names of some notions. the network nodes are considered as the signs whose denotata  i.e.  objects corresponding to them  actually existing in the real world  are both objects and phenomena of the environment as well as images  notions  feelings  emotions  etc  existing in the inner  psychic world of an individual being a prototype of the constructed control system. the network connections are treated as the signs whose denotata are relations actually existing among the denotata of nodes or among their concepts . thus  the representation of interactions among essences quite different and far from one another becomes feasible in a 1ingle system and in a single language. each sign is put in correspondence with a designatum  
i.e.  a notion or concept of an actual obgect. nodes and connections of the semantic network are marked just by the names of these notions. what may be said about syntactics and semantics of our system is more or less obvious. let us dwell on its pragmatics. 
pragmatic closure 

     in the general sense pragmatics includes the set of relations between the sign system and its user or of sign-interpreter of the sign relations. our sign system is  so to say   a brain  of the device designed for autonomous functioning. therefore  it is also an independent control system. this creates a particular s i -

1 

tuation when the sign system is  strictly speaking  its own user  its own interpreter  since it organizes its behaviour employing the sign forms of representation that exist in xtself- this circumstance lends distinguishing features to the pragmatic aspect of the study of such systems. to emphasize them we define systems of that kind as pragmatically closed in contrast to the traditional systems - pragmatically open - where the sign system is something different from its user. it is  apparently  reasonable to consider the system of human thought as the pragmatically closed one. we believe that independent systems of artificial intelligence must be inevitably the pragmatically closed systems. 
     one of the most interesting problems treated within limits of pragmatics is that of value. 
information value 

     the notion of value is complex and multicomponent. however  if the study is carried out in comparatively narrow bounds of the field of pragmatically closed artificial systems  then i t turns out to be possible to limit  to begin with  a volume of the information value notion including in i t   at the first place  such components as significance of atoms of information  a degree of their involvement into the decision-making process  and a degree of their interconnection. here it is of importance that information value characteristics should not be specified to the system beforehand but be determined by the system itself in the process of functioning with due account of its own state  external situation  and  motives   i.e.   subjectively . to solve this problem we introduce the notion of semantic network activity. 
representation method 

activity in semantic network 

     let us assume that in an environment  for instance  a stone lies on the way of a robot  that the latter percieves and recognizes i t . if the robot  knows  what a stone is  then a robot marked by the corresponding word should exist in its semantic network. let such a node exist. thus  the stone is on the way  it can hamper the movement  i t is the reality. accordingly  information about i t   hitherto stored in the memory passively  becomes significant. in the semantic network the node stone is a  key  to this information. this is the node that must be actively used by the control system now: the reality of the stone must be transformed into a rise of a certain activity  into a growth of the figure of significance or  in the general case  of value of the corresponding atom of information  to tne necessary noue. 
     we shall assume that the assignement is performed by the specific perception procedure whose way of realization will not be considered here. thus  assume that the perception procedure has ensured some excitation of the node stone  has escited i t . one node is connected with many others in the semantic network. let there be a connection marked by the name belong to class relation that goes from the stone to the node obstacle. the robot actually perceives only the stone. however  it is quite natural to require that the semantic memory give i t the possibility to  understand  correctly the meaning of what is being perceived and enable it to operate with this meaning. in other words  i f the atom of information stone is significant the atom of information obstacle must also become significant  as though the vaiue of the f i r s t induces the value of the second through the connection existing between them. 
     it is possible to reason similarly about other connections of the node stone in the semantic network. thus  the connection is a part may connect this node with the nodes mountain or  say  sckee. and though the mountain or scree themselves 
might not yet be perceived by the robot  the value of corresponding nodes should be induced by the stone and that will ensure the activity of the relevant information and its participation in the decision-making. the same is with connections of the type entails  for instance  rain-entails-
bad passability of soil   has  etc 
     a constructive representation of the value inducing process discussed is the process of excitation transfer along a connection in such a way approximately as it occurs in electric circuits or neuron structures. here the connection has a certain weight characterized by some number. the weignt is an analog quantity playing the part of the coefficient of a decrease or increase of excitation transfered along the connection or  in other words  the part of the index of correlation between value characteristics of connected nodes. such indeces can be not only positive but also negative  as  for instance  in the string bad state op soil - hampers - rapid movement -connections may be reinforcing or inhibiting  respectively. 
     therefore  excitation of even one node can result in excitation of many others connected with i t directly. prom these others the excitation can propagate still further and  as a result  the value characteristic can be obtained by very ma-

value of notion of a stone. a means of this ny  in the general case by a l l   atoms of process representation used by us consists information stored in the network. 
in assigning some value of a specific analog quantity - an excitation - which is a 
1 

activity sources 

bet us recall that we construct our 
semantic network not only as a system for storing the robot's knowledge on the world but also as  a model  of some individual being a prototype of the control system constructed. it enables us to include into the network fairly specific notions  such as notions of feelings  desires  aspirations  etc. the general scheme of reasoning in their derivation looks approximately as follows. 
     if problems that a robot faces were tackled by a man then in the given situation such and such emotional state  or an aspiration  an image  etc.  would occur in him. it follows from such and such data of the psychology  or obtained by us during a specific experiment  or  finally  it is obvious intuitively . very good. let us introduce a sign of this state into our network  mark it by a name of the notion of this state  and connect this sign  i.e. the node  with other nodes of the network in such a way that is based on psychology   an experiment  intuition  data. 
     such a scheme permits to assimilate into a single system a set of knowledge of different kinds on psychics - the most efficient of control systems existing in nature. this scheme does not  however  compel us to imploy in succession a l l such knowledge and nothing but i t . we need only that is actually useful in construction of an efficient system. 
     the described method application allows in an active semantic network to represent structures corresponding functionally to the structure of human motivation mechanisms and including notions that describe needs  aspirations  sets towards smth.  etc. 
     the nodes corresponding to such notions can be excited in the network primordially and their excitation value can change comparatively slow. it is  so to say  the absolutely valuable information determining the global set of the systems. from them excitations propagate on a l l other nodes of the network giving them some initial  set  value. this initial distribution ie superposed by another constantly changing distribution generated by work of the perception procedure and reflecting situations in the environment. both these processes undergo a constant activity regulators. sri 

     one of the activity regulators are the network inhibitory connections whose influence on each of the nodes opposes constantly to the exiting influence of the reinforcing ones. a trend  realized by functional characteristics of the node  to a spontaneous decrease of its own excitation in absence of input effects   the memory   is another regulator. however  the special system for reinforcement and inhibition  sri  is the basic mechanism of network activity regulation. 
     the sri principal purpose is to provide the domination of one atom of information over a l l others at each time instant. sri affects the positive excitation feedback in the network giving an additional excitation to the node most active at this moment and inhibiting all the others proportionally. sri - is a dynamic system constantly switching i t s extra activity from one node to another changing here the level itself of an additional excitation and inhibition. 
     the sri construction reflects the adopted by us ideas about the attention mechanisms structure whereas the sri role in network operation is compared with that of attention in the thought process. this comparison serves as one of the instruments of both the analysis of processes taking place in the network and the synthesis of the network itself in that part of it which is based on psychology data-
     an important role in the network activity regulation belongs also to the learning and self-organization processes securing a constant change of weights of the connections available  occurrence of new connections  change of forms of functional characteristics of nodes  their  memory   in particular   as well as  a growth  of the network on account of occurrence of the new nodes corresponding to new notions that are formed in the network. development of a l l these processes is determined by a character of final 
results of behaviour generated by the network and is directed to keeping an optimal relation of excitations of the special nodes pleasant and unpleasant reflecting the general estimate of state of the 
motivation sphere. 
mutual influence. thus  a sequence of some and the composition of the suggested net-
specific perceptions can change the exci-	work are sufficiently specific to justify decibion-making the method of building  employing 


tation of nodes corresponding  for insta-
nce  to feelings and influence the activity of one or other motives through them. such a process of mutual influence determines  the subgectiveness  of information value characteristics. 
introduction of a special term for the designation of semantic networks with an 
activity of the decsribed type. let us 
call them m-networks. the m-network is only a device for solving particular problems. specific control systems built as m-networks and possessing sri are defined as m-automata-

1 

     let a robot control system be constructed as the m-automaton. consider basic processes taking place in it during its functioning. 
     the perception procedure transfers into the network information about a current situation of an environment by the exciting of corresponding nodes. it is obvious that not a l l m-network nodes may be excited by this procedure. those of them whose excitation is controlled by the perception procedure are called the receptor ones. thus  the node stone 
was a receptor one in the above example. 
     prom the receptor nodes the excitation transfers into the network where mixes with excitation going from permanently active nodes representing inner motives of the system. value characteristics of a l l atoms of information stored in the m-network are formed as a result. the process of excitation propagation is controlled by sri. a certain image  a notion  a feeling  etc.  is  singled out by the attention  and dominates at each time moment. it is  so to say   a thought  of the system. continuous switchings of sri form a flow of such  thoughts   while the switchings themselves appear as associative transfers. nodes that are not singled out and are  accordingly  inhibited by sri compose  a subconsciousness  of the system to which additional excitations inflow constantly along connections from the nodes singled out by sri and where a continuous  competition  takes place for the  attention  capture. in the network during these processes stable excitation centers come into being  exist a certain period  and disintegrate  which can be also sluggish  and latent  and  realizable . from time to time the flow of these processes is perturbed by a new portion of excitations brought into the network by the perception procedure when external situations change. therefore  the distribution of excitations in the network is dynamic  i.e.  continuous correction and reestimation of the value of information available is performed in the  thought  process. 
     there are nodes in the m-network which correspond to notions of those real actions that a robot is able to carry out in an environment: execute turn to the lept.takk object x  etc. let us define such nodes as effectory. there are also nodes corresponding  so to say  to generalized actions  e.g.  avoid encounter with object y  no instructions here how to avoid . as a rule  connections with greater weight are established from nodes of that type to the effectory ones- if sri single out an effectory node or node of generalized action in the process of m-automaton functioning and if such node begins to dominate over the others we say that the system has made an appropriate solution. if sri singles out an effectory node it is interpreted by the system as a command that the corresponding real action be executed by the robot. we shall assume that the corresponding action is executed by some execution procedure. depending on the specific robot construction and specialization this procedure may have an access to subsystem of direct control of its actuators  manipulators  etc. 
     thus  the general structure of processes realized by the m-automaton is as follows. the perception procedure reflects information about an external situation into the m-network. the process goes of reestimation available in the network- checking of the environment state is performed during this process. a decision is made at some instant and the execution procedure realizes an appropriate action. it results in a change of environment  the new situation is reflected into the m-network  and the whole cycle is repeated. during multiple repetition of such cycles the robot's behaviour is being formed. 
specific developments 

     refinement and investigation of the described approach was carried out by creation and study of possibilities of a number of functioning m-automata realized as digital computer programs. as an object of modeling the information handling processes performed by a man when organizing a purposeful motor behaviour in static natural environments were selected. on the one hand  these processes are sufficiently complex to ensure the check of  a strength  of the applied methods  on the other hand  a number of interesting practical problems - in particular the control of robot motion - are reduced to the problem of purposeful motion organization. the developed m-automata imitate actions of a robot in an environment with objects that are to a various extent useful or dangerous to i t . motives of the robot behaviour depend on its striving for selfpreservation and achievement of a global goal. the robot studies the environment  chooses a motion objective  constructs a plan for its achievement  and then fulf i l s i t   performing actions-steps and actions toward transformation of the environment  comparing obtained results with the planned ones  amplifying and correcting the plan in accordance with existing situations. 
     the detailed description of a l l developed m-automata is given in the monograph  and works  1 . there are developments of technical realization of the robot control system  1 . 
m-networks and neuron ensembles 

     there exists one more independent way of the suggested method argumentation. 

1 

it is associated with treatement of m-network nodes as elements corresponding to ensembles of neurons in cerebral cortex. such ensembles  the idea of which ascends to hebb   are treated here as cortical information models of elements of an individual 's inner and external world. in this case the m-network appears as an apparatus for the description of an integral inner  cortical  model of a world of a man and the m-automata as psychophysiological and psychological cognition models. a number of our investigations is completed within a such interpretation  1 . simultaneous existence of two independent to such an extent processes is  in our opinion  quite an interesting fact. it allows  in particular  to suggest  not but speculatively for the time being  that processes of activity of cells and greater brain formations studied by neurophysiologists may be described adequately as processes of execution of procedures of subjective estimation and reestimation of elements of the inner world  i.e.  procedures which underlie the behavioural reactions formation. when developed a such approach would serve the cause of narrowing the gap between sciences studying the brain and behaviour. 
conclusion 

     semantic networks are traditionally employed to represent a system knowledge on the world in artificial intelligence systems. we endeavoured to use them in representing our own knowledge not only on the world but on mechanisms of behaviour formation  too. having preserved the constructivity of information presentation we gained an opportunity of using the developed apparatus in artificial systems  in robots in particular. having introduced the notion of semantic network activity we obtained the possibility to imitate the inner activity or motivation of a robot. processes of motives-knowledge interaction were represented in the dynamics of information value characteristics. complexity and diversity of behaviour forms which were observed during the experimental study of the developed m-automata convince us in the efficiency of the used approach and in expedience of its practical employment in efforts to develop integral robots. this may offer great possibilities of representation of complex and intimate behaviour mechanisms knowledge on which may be drawn from the psychology. 

1 
