 
     a system of programs has been constructed to process the television image of a hybrid circuit* this system is capable of  inspecting  the circuit image regarding defects. to achieve this a procedural model of the circuit is developed. the computer  sees  the image and interprets what it sees with the procedures in the model. in this manner it is able to determine certain important characteristics of the image in its view. it appears that this procedural approach can be useful to many domains of visual image processing 
and object recognition. 
1. introduction 

     one stage of the manufacturing process of hybrid circuits which is not automated is a visual inspection of these circuits  tills paper describes the development of a system to demonstrate automation of visual inspection by using the techniques of computer vision  and in particular  the principle of procedural models. 
     hybrid circuits are built on a rigid  insulating substrate  generally some ceramic material. resistors and conductors are painted on using paints  which  when dry  have different resistivities. transistors  capacitors  and integrated circuits are then mounted with either solder or glue. finally  wires are attached which make the connection to some sort of holder-
     in hybrid circuits factories  the visual inspection is generally performed by peering through microscopes. one major purpose of the human inspectors is quality control. it is desirable to determine not only if a circuit is defective  but why it is defective so that corrective measures may be taken. another important use for visual inspection is to detect defects in partially completed products so that the defective part may be rejected early in the assembly process  before it has become part of a much larger and consequently more expensive product. 
     the inspectors check for missing  misplaced or misorlented parts  bad solder bonds  etc. this inspection has not been automated previously because the manufacturing process introduces numerous i r regularities in normal circuits. for instance  in the soldering process the solder rosin may flow in unpredictable ways  discoloring the substrate and producing extraneous edges. 
*research supported by the joint services electronics program  u.s. army  u.s. navy  u.s. air force  under contract daab-1-c-1. 
     the first objective of the development of the circuit inspection system was to provide a context in which to examine the principle of procedural 
models. the system provides this context in three different ways: 
1  inspection provides an application of the topdown approach to vision  and of the procedural models which incorporates this approach. 
1  the problem of re-training the system for inspection of varied circuits provides an exercise in automatic generation of procedural models. 
1  the fact that identification of certain circuit components may be dependent on the identity of neighboring components provides an instance to make use of the power of procedural models whereby one model may call another model for assistance. 
     another objective was to develop a system which could run under  reasonable  assembly line conditions. since hybrid circuit assembly lines have considerable accuracy in positioning  a certain amount of predictability was assumed in location of the circuit. it is also reasonable to assume a degree of control over direct lighting  but control over ambient light could not be assumed 
1. basic characteristics of the system 

     the heart of the system is a procedural model. this model consists of the overall circuit model and several component models. the system understands the characteristics of each type of component via the component models; while it understands the topological and structural relationships via the circuit model. 
     the operator positions a circuit under the lens of the television camera and starts the system 
which takes five pictures: two grey-scale pictures with the lights turned at different angles  and three with color filters. these five pictures are stored on disk files for convenient later reference the operator then uses graphics to specify the circuit details. 
     the output of the initialization phase is a model for the entire circuit. this model includes a data structure and a control structure in combination which when compiled and loaded become the inspection phase of the system. 
     in the initialisation of the system another picture  representing the hue  is computed from the three color pictures and stored. another plcure  the  masked difference  picture used in the wirefinding algorithm is also computed and stored at this time. 
     since wires can obscure other components  they must be identified prior to any other compo-

1 

nents. thus  wires are located first and their locations remembered for the other component models to check. 
1. procedures as models for visual objects 

　　　this section contains a discussion of some of the problems associated with the creation and use 
of models for visual objects and presents the concept of  procedural models.  when using such models  recognition of an object becomes equivalent to executing the appropriate model. instead of having a multiplicity of models for objects stored in a data base and some general purpose program for choosing and using these models  the models them-
selves are programs. 
procedural models in the circuit inspection problem 

　　　in the analysis and inspect ion of hybrid circuits  procedural models can become involved at three different levels: in component recognition  that is  answering the question  is x a resistor    in circuit recognition  answering  is this circuit what it should be   and in a combination of these  component/circuit identification with a symbolic model.   i n this section  program examples will be presented in a meta-language for ease of reading. in fact they are not implemented in this form.  
component recognition 

　　　in a resistor model data is passed in the form of pointers to picture points and what the intensities should be at those points resistors are the simplest of this type of model. other more complex mode s make use of backup  color information  region growing  etc. 
　　　another more difficult problem arises when the appearance and/or location of the component cannot be known in advance. in that case  the model must f i r s t locate the desired object and then inspect i t   
or  in failing to successfully locate i t   report it missing. this problem arises in the hybrid circuit 
inspection system in the case of wires. 
circuit verification 

　　　the second type of model is similar to the first  i n that the circuit is described in terms of a coordinant-based model. in this case  the circuit model might look like this: 
process circuit x  begin 
　　　%x is assumed to point to a list structure describing where components should be located. the process findcomp analyzes this structure to select a descriptor and returns i t % 
declare own y; 
z ---
rtest:begin 
declare backup true: 
y --- findcomp resistor x ; 
if y eql false then leave rtest with true; 
　　　if not resistor y image  then fail;end; if z eql false then begin 
type 'defective resistor at' ; 
type getprop y.xcoord  ' '.getprop 
 y ycoord  ;end; 
end 
this simple process uses backup in a limited 
form to verify all the resistors on a circuit board. the list containing the desired locations of the resistors is passed as an argument  x. findcomp finds an entry on x which has been marked as describing the location of a resistor. findcomp 
returns false when ft cannot locate any more resistors. if resistor locates a defective resistor  i t marks the property list of its argument  y  with the coordinants of the defective resistor and returns false. i f resistor returns true  then the conditional if not resistor fails  and control backs up to the find to locate another component to try. 
symbolic representation of circuits 

     the final form of procedural model in the case of circuit analysis makes use of a symbolic 
or schematic representation for the circuit and performs the analysis in terms of that representation. in this case  the problem is: given a schematic representation of the circuit  one in which the components are simply described as  rl  for some resistor  etc.  and given an image of a real circuit which implements the schematic representation  perform the correlation between the components of the image and the symbols in the schematic representation. 
     let us consider such a representation of the circuit shown below. 

	f i g u r e 	1. 	a simple c i r c u i t 
process 	symcircit+begin 
delcare backup true; 
r1 -findregi1n dark 1    ' . f i n d any o l d dark r e g i o n 
	f a i l t e s t   r l   ; 	i c a n ' t 	f i n d 	one  	q u i t 
	if resistor ri  	then y1 -findregi1n adjacent  
r l   ; 
if conductor yl  then r1 ---findregion  adjacent  
y1  
	if 	resist1r r1  	then y1 ---findregi1n adjacent  
r 1   ; 
	if conductor 	 y1  then c1 ---findregion adjacent  
y 1   ; 
if capacitor cl  then y1 ---f indregion adjacent  
c i   ; 
if c1nduct1r y1  and adjacent y1 r1 then succeed;end 
　　　this process embeds the structure of the circuit into the process without resorting to data structures. first  the assumption is made that the dark region found is rl  and search is made for regions bordering rl which might be the conductor leading to r1. in case of failures  the process backs up  changes i t s hypothesis  and continues. some of the intricacies which could easily be added 

1 

include a more sophisticated search  remembering partial results  rather than this essentially depth-first search. 
     a reasonable approach to the problem of generating procedural models is to allow the system to learn new models by examples. this is the approach taken in the system implemented and described in the next section. the model which the system generates is a process description for identifying the various components and checking that those components are properly located within reasonable assembly line tolerances. the model is them compiled  and can be used to check for defects on other  similar circuits. 
1. componen t mod els 

resistors 
     resistors are typically so dark as to have no significant color but can be distinguished easily by the fact that they are so very dark. they usually  but not always  have borders which are straight lines. they border either conductors or the substrate  both of which are bright regions and thus  except when obscured by wires or pads  resistors have easily distinguished borders. 
     the setup phase  when told where a resistor is located checks the intensity of the region and locates the borders. it then sets up the model of the circuit it is building to look in the appropriate places when i t is inspecting circuits. 
     the type of capacitor for which the system was developed has two metal plates at either end of a region of homogenous intensity. 
     first the central region of the capacitor is located and its color determined. then  an out-
ward scan is made using the hueckel  operator in an effort to locate the end plates. these metal end plates suffer from the same problems as wires  reflections. end plates  however  are parallel to each other  thus when the edge detection operator locates an edge  it verifies that it is parallel to a corresponding edge on the other side of the capacitor. in this way  improperly mounted capacitors can be detected  as well as those that are 
missing or dirty. 
wires 

     because wires are flexible and can be bent in a variety of different shapes while maintaining good contact with both lugs  their location is unpredictable. in addition  they are threedimensional in that they may pass over other components  thus obscuring those components from view. 
     wires are  shiny.   they are essentially convex mirrors.  the shiny property of wires can be described as follows: 
1  wires have no characteristic color; their color is totally dependent on incident light and angles 
of reflection. 
1  depending upon the angle of the wire  light source  and camera  a wire may possess highlights the camera . a wire thus typically appears as a set of long  thin bright areas running in a more or less linear fashion from one lug to another. a highlight on a wire may pass over a portion of the substrate which is white  and effectively merge into a region of uniform  high  intensity. 
　　　an interesting characteristic of highlights is that they move when the viewing angle la changed  or the light source is moved. thus one way to identify a highlight is to note its motion when the light source is changed. 
　　　since all the components are generally i r regular and noisy  identification of an object 
whose sole characteristic is that it reflects these irregularities and noise isn't easy. however  
since we are given the starting and ending points of the wire with reasonable precision  it is possible to detect i t . the visual properties described suggest the following algorithm: first  a  masked difference  picture is generated from two pictures taken with different lighting angles. a new picture is created where each point in the new picture is equal to the absolute value of the difference of corresponding points in the two pictures. in this difference picture  the regions 
which are most significant are those in which the illumination has undergone a large change. this effect is maximum in the case of nulls  highlights  and shadows. the difference picture is then used as a mask to accentuate the highlights. 
　　　three routines  wirefi  wire  and makewire  call each other in the wire-finding process. the flow of control is shown in the figure below. 

figure 1. flow of control during wire-finding 
　　　wirefi sets up the desired end points between which there should be a wire. 
 direct reflection of light source into the camera  calls makewire. 
and nulls  reflection of a very dark region into 
1 　　　wire searches between those end points and off at different angles  using either no a-priori information or possibly using  hints  passed from makewire to direct its search. it calls a region grower to locate regions and makes tentative decisions about whether or not a region might be part of a wire. when its search is completed  wire 
　　　makewire uses higher level knowledge to operate on the list of regions passed iroin wire to decide whether or not the information given is sufficient to identify a wire. if there are large empty spaces between regions  i t can call w1ref1 to examine these spaces i n more detail. 
　　　one interesting problem which arises in the region analysis is that of finding the extrema of arbitrary regions. it is computationally unreasonable to compare a l l points on the boundary of a region  two at a time. a search algorithm was developed which usually converges in three iterations and returns those two points on the boundary 
which are a maximum distance apart. 
performance of the system 

　　　though the system was written i n bliss  many lisp features were carried over. for example  the functions car  cdr  etc.  and garbage collection 
were implemented in bliss for the sake of convenience. the use of lists allows for easy and rapid 
implementation of fairly complex data structures. in exchange for this ease of developmental programming  one pays a high price in efficiency. 
　　　because the time required to perform the verification depends so strongly on the complexity of the particular circuit being analyzed  it is difficult to estimate. the most time consuming part  the wire finding  with its accompanying region growing  takes just under a second for an average wire  longer for longer wires. 
　　　the accuracy of the system in detecting defects is also a function of the training procedure. since the system only looks where it is told to look  it is always possible to invent a type of defect which any particular model could not detect. in general  a large class of defects could be detected by checking the wires  the resistors  and the capacitor. 
bibliography 

 brice  c. and fennama  c.   scene analysis 
using regions   stanford research institute  menlo park  california; artificial intelligence group technical note 1   1 . 
 ejiri  m.  uno  t.f mese  m.  and ikeda  s.   a process for detecting defects in complicated patterns   central research laboratory  hitachi ltd.  kokubunji  tokyo  japan. 
 finin  t.   tracking wires on printed circuit boards   working paper 1  mit a r t i f i c i a l intelligence laboratory  october  1. 
 harlow  c. a.  henderson  s. e.  rayfield  
d. a.  dwyer  s. j.   automated inspection of electronic assemblies   unpublished manuscript  image analysis laboratory  department of electrical engineering  university of missouri  columbia. 
 hewett  c   description and theoretical analysis  using schemata  of planner: a language for proving theorems and manipulating models in a robot   ai memo no. 1  mit project mac  april 1. 
 hueckel  m.    an operator which locates edges in digitized pictures   stanford 
university  artificial intelligence memo 1  stanford  ca. for a more recent and improved operator  see journal of the acm  october  1 . 
 krakauer  l.   computer analysis of visual properties of curved objects   mit  mac tr-1  cambridge  mass.  1 . 
 lozano-perez  t.   finding components on a circuit board   vision flash 1  mit a r t i f i c i a l intelligence laboratory  september 1. 
 simon  the sciences of the artificial. 

 shirai  y.   a heterarchial program for recognition of polyhedra   mit  al memo 1  cambridge  mass.  1 . 
 winograd  t.   procedures as a representation for data in a computer program for understanding natural language   a1tr 1  mit  cambridge  mass.  1 . 
 winston  p.   learning structural descriptions from examples   mit  aitr-1  cambridge  mass.  1 . 
 yachida  m. and tsuji  s.   application of color information to visual perception   
pattern recognition  1  pp 1   1  
 yakimovsky  y. and feldman  j.   a semanticsbased decision theory region analyzer   proceedings of the third international 
joint conference on a r t i f i c i a l intelligence  
stanford  ca.  1  

1 





