 

we have constructed a computer algorithm that finds the contours of the dorsal and ventral portions of the images of ribs in chest radiographs. 
the following are a few of the expected uses for the automatic detection of rib contours: 
1. rib images contribute false positives in tumor-detection algorithms. hence  detecting the rib contours should facilitate removal of these lalse posltives . 
1. the ribs provide a frame of reference for the description and location of lesions within the thoracic cavity. 
1. the envelope of the ribs provides a more accurate basis for computing the boundary of the chest cavity  referred to as the  lung boundary  in other papers  than other known techniques. 
our algori thtn consists of a  high-pass filtering of the digitized picture  b  local  edge  detection by a combination of thresholding  laplacian  and gradient operators  c  selection of edge elements in accordance w1th their angular orientation  d  matching straight line segments and conic sect ions to the selected edge elements  e  construct ing strips centered on the straight line segments and conic sections  and f  heuristic search within these strips. 
1 .  tnt roduction 

　　　the delection of the contours of ribs in a rad iograph by computer is particularly difficult for a number of reasons. 
　　　the optical density changes significantly as one progresses along a contour  and in some instances  parts of a contour disappear. in a chest radiograph  additional problems are imposed by the intersection of the images of ribs  as wel1 as tlie presence of the images of other objects  such as blood vessels or tumors  which may be superimposed in a disturbing way over the soughtafter images of ribs. 
a high-pass digital filter  1  1 . we refer to 
this step as a  preprocessor.  the input and output pictures of step 1 are illustrated in figures 1 and 1  respectively. in these figures the dorsal port ions of the ribs are concave downward  and the ventral portions are concave upward. it can be observed in figures 1 and 1 that the dorsal portions of the ribs are more distinct than the ventral portions. this is a result of the attenuation of x-rays by the lung tissue lying between the dorsal and ventral portions of the rlbs. 
　　　step 1 is a loca1 edge detect or cons 1sting of a gradient   a i.aplacian and a threshold ope rat i on. 
       step 1 f i nds boundaries on a global ha sis by matching conic sections to the contours of the dorsal portions of the ribs and straight line segments to the contours of the ventral portions oi the ribs. 
　　　step 1  the last step  uses the conic sections and the straight line segments of step 1 as a plan   or obtaining ref i tied cont ours . the f 1 na 1 result i s shown in figures h and 1. 
　　　far her work on automatic rib detection has been reported by tot iwaki et aj    1   . the i r t echnique  however  a  is restricted to a central strip in each half of the thoracic cage and  within that strip  is effective mainly in the middle subset ot ribs  b  seems to be seriously degraded by tumors and lesions that overlap the rib images  and c  the lower contours of the ventral portions of tinribs are not detected. our algorithm seems to 
have none of these weaknesses. in particular  our a igor i thm has successfully detected ribs that are par t in 1y obscured by a 1arge t umor. 
  . i'reproecss i nj  

       in our image analysis laboratory the chest radiograph is reduced photographically from 1'i   mm x 1 mm to 1 mm x 1 mm. the reduced picture is digitized by a rotating-drum scanner into a rectangular array of 1 by 1-blt p i -
xels  s p a c e d . each pixel is an 1-bit 
digitization of 	where i. is the incident 

light intensity at a circular spot  and 1 is the 
t ransmitted 1ight intensity at the spot. the d ia-
meter of the spot is 1 mm. to conserve storage space for data and to eliminate some of the noise introduced by the scanner  a consolidation operation is performed. the consolidation operation replaces every 1-by-1 square array of pixels in the digitized picture by the average of the picture function in that array  thereby reducing the size of the digital picture to 1 by 1 pixels. figure 1 displays the digitized picture after scanning and consolidation. 
　　　to enhance the edges  a high-pass filtering in the spatial frequency domain is carried out. 
1 

　　　the rationale behind this high-pass f i l t e r i n g is that high spatial frequencies are due primarily to sharp changes in gray-level densities  i.e.  

to the edges present in the picture. 
     the digitized chest radiograph obtained by the high-pass filtering operation is illustrated in figure 1. 
1. local edge detection 

     the rib contours are smoothed  low-curvature curves and hence may be approximated by a chain code . we refer to each element of this chain as a locfll edge element. the detection of local 

edge elements is a major task in the detection of rib contours because the vascular tissue deteriorates the sharpness of the local edges. as a result  only edge elements that satisfy several criteria simultaneously are selected by our a l gorithm. 
     our local edge detector  described below in detail  consists of a  the modulus and the direction of a digital approximation of the spatial gradient  b  a digital approximation of the lapla-
cian  and c  thresholds applied to the results of the gradient and the laplacian operations. 
1 computation of the gradient 

     the picture of the modulus of the gradient is computed by eqs. 1 through 1. here p i j  denotes the digitized measurement of y log  i /i   
at pixel  i j   g i j  denotes the modulus of the digital approximation of the gradient at  i j   and y is a constant. 
thus the gradient operation provides us with the following information at each pixel   i   j   of the grid: g i j   d i j   and q i f j . 
	1 	computation of the laplacian 

     many digital approximations of the laplacian have been proposed . we computed the magnitude of the laplacian by eq   1 . here l i j  
denotes the laplacian calculated at pixel  i j : 
1 


     the reasons why both the gradient and the laplacian are needed are as follows: 
a  the gradient does not take account of the 
gray-level at the pixel itself  whereas the laplacian does; 
b  the edges of the picture function depend 
primarily on the first two derivatives of the picture function; and 
c  it has been shown that the eye can detect 
only low-order derivatives. 
     the picture m i j  contains information about where reliable edges exist in the given picture  a direction picture r i j  is built from the binary picture m l j  by replacing each 1 in m i j  
fi.e.  each edge element  by i t s quadrant 1 j . 

thus  

figure 1 shows the output of step 1  where 
 here we display only the 
lower boundaries of the ribs in the right and left lung i.e.  those pixels where the gradient modulus and laplacian are bigger than prespecifled thresholds. the directional picture r i j  is represented in our figure by fish-shaped edge elements 
 swimming  in the direction of the boundaries. as the  fish swims  i t sees on its left a region of greater light intensity than on its right. 
     the edge elements of the lower boundaries in the right lung are characterized by quadrant q = 1  
whereas the edge elements corresponding to the lower boundaries in the left lung are characterized by quadrant q = 1. figure 1 displays a window taken from the right lung  showing images of dorsal and ventral ribs intersecting. 
1. global boundary detector 

     the edge elements produced by step 1 have three principal shortcomings as respresentatives of the rib contours: 1  some portions of the contours are represented by overly thick  roads   1  some portions of the contours are not represented at a l l   i.e.  there are gaps in the con-

tour estimates  and 1  a few edge elements are 
not true edge elements and thus constitute noise. 
     the function of the global boundary detector is to overcome a l l three of these shortcomings: 1  it thins the thick portions  1  it f i l l s the gaps  and 1  it eliminates the noise. 
     the global boundary detector is a curve fitting procedure similar in concept to the hough line detector . each pixel in m i j  is transformed into a curve in a new parameter space  p* every point on this curve in p-space uniquely represents a specific curve passing through   i   j   in the original  i  j -space. we call this procedure an accumulator array procedure  because we 

can think about the p-space as a d-dimensional array and each cell in this array accumulates the number of pixels where m i j  - 1 and which l i e on the same curve in  i j -space. 
     we applied the hough technique of detecting straight lines to the images of the ventral ribs. in the picture shown by figure 1  we can distinguish seven ventral ribs  fourteen contours  in the right lung and six ventral ribs  twelve contours  in the left lung. from the total of twenty-six contours  twenty-one were found directly from the hough detector  two ambiguities were solved based upon the thickness of the surrounding ventral ribs  one correction was made based upon the approximate thickness of a ventral r i b   and two contours which were missed by the hough detector due to the absence of enough relevant points were found by an extrapolation from the thickness and the location of the neighboring 
ventral ribs. 
     to find the contours of the dorsal portions  ve extended the hough concept to the detection of conic sections  parabolas and ellipses . we assumed that the images of the dorsal rib contoura can be approximated by conic sections  and that each of these conic sections has a maximum ordinate with a zero derivative. we applied an accumulator array procedure which detects small regions within the rib cage which are most likely to contain the foci of the conic sections. this algorithm uses the relationship between the points on the conic sections and the parameters of these curves. from the gradient direction at a given pixel  i j   we compute a small range of admissible directions for the conic sections passing through that pixel. we use the range of directions rather than the single computed direction of the gradient in order to overcome the effects of noise and quantization. consider the pixels obtained by step 1 and having the configuration *  1  or  1  where 1 * quadrant and for the right lung and  for the left 
lung. for each of these pixels  our system computes the foci of conic sections passing through the pixel and having the directions in the range defined above. i.e.  our system computes those 

conic sections whose d i j  belongs to the com-
puted range. 
     the array of accumulators is initialized at the value zero. each elementary computation finds a possible focus  a b  and increases the contents of the corresponding accumulator by 1. eventually the algorithm provides us with high-valued accumu-
lator cells. these cells are the foci of the most 

1 

likely conic sections lying on the boundaries. these conic sections are then constructed by our system of algorithms. 
     exploiting symmetry along the sternum  breast bone   we use the same program for both the right and the left lung. the maximum ordinates were found by using accumulator array techniques to detect short horizontal line segments. ambiguities 
due to the hilar region were solved based upon the surrounding dorsal ribs. 
1. refinement of rib boundaries 

     in a session dedicated to robot problem solving at the 1 ijcai  sacerdotl pointed out that a problem domain can be represented as a hierarchy of abstraction spaces in which successively finer levels of details are introduced . the ration-
ale behind this hierarchy of abstraction spaces is that in order to be efficient  our problem solvers need to make extensive use of different heuristics at different stages of our problem-solving process . examples of implementations of this concept are the top-down programming approach as well as the  the  operating-system of dijkstra . our system of algorithms exploits such a rationale. 
     step 1 approximates the rib contours by conic sections and straight line segments. in step 1 small strips are centered around the curve segments found by step 1. these strips constitute a  plan  in the sense of ballard-sklansky . by using a heuristic function h  with a small look-ahead  we f i t the best curve to the rib contours. subsequently  a smoothing algorithm provides us with a smoothed curve. in this way we find a rough appro-
ximation of the rib contours at a higher level and we introduce the details at a lower one. 
     now we w i l l describe step 1 in detail. in particular  we will answer the following question. from a pixel  i j  on the rib boundary  how does step 1 choose the next pixel by using the heuristic function h  
     step 1 operates as follows. a small tree with a look-ahead of three is built having the pixel   l   j   at i t s root and a l l the paths through this tree are evaluated. 
     we then choose as the next pixel on the curve that successor of  i j  such that a maximum accu-
mulation of h is achieved for a path passing through  i j . h i j  is defined as follows: 
     in the above definition g i j  and l i  j  are the magnitude of the gradient and of the laplacian respectively  a being constant  usually 1 . fr is a penalizing constant which is zero for points lo-
1 
cated in the middle of the strip and is increasing as we approach the border of the atrip. the use of $  forces the path to l i e within the desired atrip. as we go along the refined rib contour  new information is gained and a new and improved plan could be built. baaed upon the last pixel added to the rib contour and the location along the same contour  a next pixel can be predicted. the effect of ba is to keep us as close ae possible to this next predicted pixel. 
     {c.} la a set of conditions which assures us that the pixel   i   j   can be located on the 
curve we are looking for. the conditions  cj  are the following: 
     c 1   i . j   belongs to the configuration  q 1  we are looking for  
     c1: by choosing   i   j   the connectivity c r i terion is satisfied  
     c1: the curve which is going to pass through  i j  is going to be a monotonically nondecreasing function up to the maximum location of the dorsal rib and afterwards a monotonically nonincreasing function until it reaches the lung boundary  and this should hold for the image of a dorsal rib contour  and 
     c1: the curve which is going to pass through   i   j   is going to be a monotonically nonincreasing function for the images of the ventral ribs. 
     termination conditions as boundary pixels are provided. in the case of the images of the ventral ribs  we stop going along the contour when there is a lack of pixels showing the triplet corresponding to the ventral contours and where supposedly the costal cartilages are starting. 

     figure 1a  b  c displays the effect of step 1 on two intersecting rib contours  a dorsal and a ventral one . we can distinguish the plan obtained by the third step  the rib contours  after refinement using h  and finally the same rib contours after smoothing. the pictures have been recorded at a magnification of 1 in order to display the 
results more clearly  i.e.  each pixel is shown as 1. 1. ieee transactions on audio and electroacoust lca  1   au-1  no. 1  june 1. 
tenenbaum  j. m.   on locating objects by 
their distinguishing features in multisensory images   a. i. center  technical note 1  sri project. 
a 1 x 1 matrix . figures 1 and 1 show the result of applying step 1 to the output of step 1. this 
is also the final output for the input shown in 1. duda  r. 1.  hart  p. e.   use of the hough 
transformation to detect lines and curves in pictures   comm. of acm  january 1  vol. 
figure 1. 
earlier use of heuristic curve following has 1  no. 1. 
rosenfeld  a.  picture processing by compu-
been reported by martelli  and ballardsklansky 1   but to our best knowledge  this is the f i r s t use of look-ahead in heuristic curve following. 1. 
1. ter  academic press  new york  1. 
sacerdoti  e. d    planning in a hierarchy of abstraction spaces   ijca1 proceed-
ings-

 hows how several concepts of artificial intelligence have contributed to establishing the feasibility of a system of algorithms for a difficult task in machine vision.  one must recognize that 
 difficulty  depends on the sophistication of the 1. ec-1  vol. 1  pp. 1  june 1. 
martelli  a.   edge detection using heuristic search methods   computer graphics and imape 

processing  vol. 1  no. 1  august 1. problem solver. a   d i f f i c u l t   problem often be-comes  easy  after one becomes familiar with its solution.  
     the rib contours detected by our system agree closely with our perception of these contours. 
     improvaments in our technique for rib detection may l i e along the following directions! 1  texture analysis of lung tissue and the bone struc-*ture of ribs  1  building an explicit world-model representation of the rib cage  and 1  computerradiologist interaction. 
1. acknowledgments 1. ballard  d. h.  sklansky  j.   a ladderstructured decision tree for recognizing tumors in chest radiographs   tp-1  
university of california  irvine  1. 1. summary and concluding remarks 

the automatic detection of rib images in a 1. dljkstra  e. w.   the structure of the  the  multiprogramming system   comm. of the acm  
chest radiograph requires a sophisticated system of algorithms. in this paper we describe such a 
system. one of the special attractions of our system is that it can be implemented effectively on a small computer  a  minicomputer   having only eight thousand 1-bit words of core memory and 1 million 1-bit words of disc memory. this paper also 1. 
1. may 1. 
nilsson  n. j.  problem solving in a r t i f i c i a l intelligence. mcgraw-hill  1. 
freeman  h.   on the encoding of arbitrary 
geometric configurationb   ire transactions  
this research was supported by the national 
institute of general medical sciences of the u.s. public health service under grant no. gm-1. 
     we are grateful to dr. b. j. o'loughlin of the university of california  irvine  college of medicine for his comments and discussions. 
1. 