 

a visual input is likely to play an important role in many future mechanical handling and inspect ion systems. this paper w i l l describe one experimental implementation of a machine of this type; an automatic printed circuit board drilling machine in which a tv camera is used to view the board and a small computer is used to process the tv image. the computer controls the machine using only the information extracted from the picture. 
introduction 

　　　it is becoming increasingly difficult for industry to find people who are willing to do dangerous or monotonous jobs. those who are performing boring or repetitive tasks are liable to become frustrated and error prone. problems 
of this type together with the increasing cost of manpower provide strong incent ives for industry to automate their produetion lines. 
　　　with the advent of computers  traditional fixed automation is being selectively replaced by programmable numerically cont rolled machines. these machines nevertheless follow a fixed set of instructions  and in general they cannot cope with a change in their environment. as computers have become cheaper and more powerful it has become possible to introduce into factories more intelligent machines  1  which are aware of their envi ronment and which are capable of reacting to changes in that environment. examples of this type of machine include hitachi's visually control led bolt tightener  and general motor's system for placing wheels on hubs  1 . in this paper we are concerned with machines which examine their environment with visual sensors and which we call visually controlled machines. much of the discussion however would apply to machines equipped with other types of sensor. 
justification for visually control led automation 

　　　it can be argued that there should be no need for visually control led machines in the ideal automatic factory. consider for example  the problem of automatic assembly. if the orientation and position of a l l components were preserved from the point of initial fabrication  where they are well known  to the final assembly into the completed product  then 'blind automation' would be quite satisfactory. in practice however there are many reasons why this desirable goal cannot be achieved. it may often be necessary to met go' of parts   for example when small sheet metal pressings are plated or deburred   and to store t hem between manufacture and assembly. if the components are stored in a 'loose' state  then either a person or a machine is required to feed the component to the automatic assembly machine. in many cases  this problem is solved by ingenious mechanical designs such as bowl feeders. some components however provide harder problems for the mechanical designer and it is in these circumstances that a visually controlled machine is useful. 
　　　thus visually controlled machines may be cost effert ive when i t is uneconomic to keep components in jigs  when frequent product changes make complete programming expensive  or when it is important to detect drifts in the product or 
machine  1 . 
the application of visual control to drilling 
printed circuit boards 
　　　the drilling of printed circuit boards  pcbs  under visual control is a problem in which both the mechanics and the scene analysis are relatively simple. the solution to the problem could however have genuine practical application. 
　　　in research laboratories and other establishments in which pcbs are made in very short runs of small numbers of boards  the boards are often drilled by hand using a single spindle drilling machine such as that illustrated diagrammatically in fig.la. 

1. the manual drilling of printed circuit boards 
the operator views the board through the eyepiece  which contains a crosswire indicating the position of the drill  fig.lb . to drill a hole  he moves the board until the point to be drilled coincides with the crosswire  and then actuates the drill. the experimental equipment buiit at mrl to automate this process and replace the human operator by a computer vision system  is illustrated diagrammatically in fig.1 and by the photograph in fig.1. the board is viewed  via a halfsilvered mirror  by a tv camera which is interfaced to a honeywell 1 computer. the tv video signal can be sampled with a maximum resolution of 1 x 1 picture elements  pixels  over the field of view of the camera  and each pixel can be digitised to 1 bits. 

1 

means of stepping motors which are also computer controlled. the function of the crosswire in the manual machine is accomplished by projecting a graticule  a maltese cross  into the field of the tv camera. this also allows for automatic compensation of any drift in the tv system. 
the structure of a practical visually controlled machine 
　　　the type of visually controlled machine in which we are interested  fig.1  can be characterised by four main attributes. firstly the 
machine is assumed to be working on a defined task within a limited real world environment. a conceptual description of the task and the environment is given to the machine as a-priori informat ion. 
1 

     in general the state vector includes those model parameters which might be changed when new 
information is received from the sensors. in the case of the d r i l l i n g machine  state vector elements include the current location of the table  the d r i l l   and the projected graticule in the field of view. also contained within the state vector is a histogram of the grey levels in the picture being processed. if at any time  the machine fails to calculate a value for any part of the state vector  it may either call for help or u t i l i s e the 'default value' which is included within the a-priori information given to the machine by the operator when he sets it up. the use of visual feedback 

     as well as using sensed information to determine a course of action  the sensors can also be used to monitor the progress of the action  1 . if the action appears to be incorrect  this may be because the motor control is faulty  the mechanism is inaccurate  the 
machine's vision is distorted  the world model is incorrect  or the a-priori informat ion was false. 
     the machine can probably compensate for errors in the motor control or the mechanism by observing the results of the action and giving new instructions. this suggests that machines equipped with visual feedback may require less accurate mechanics. if the corrective actions do not succeed it is probably because the world model is no longer valid  perhaps the magnification of a zoom lens hs changed . if the main control decides that it is the world model which is at fault then it can enter a model updating phase similar to the model initialisation phase  section 1 . false a-priori information or distorted vision are likely to be hard to cope with  and in practice would probably result in calls for external help. 
hand-eye machine in university and industry 

     hand-eye machines of the type described above developed in various artificial intelligence laboratories. in many cases the aim of these projects has been the development of intelligent 
machines for their own sake  although the ideas have sometimes also been applied to practical problems in order to demonstrate the versatility of the system  1 . 
     in industry  the situation is reversed. we are trying to solve real problems at the minimum cost and we only use machine intelligence where it offers a real advantage. instead of trying to make machines solve complex problems  we try to make the problems and the equipment required as simple as possible. these differences in approach w i l l be illustrated by the description of the visually controlled d r i l l i n g machine. 
strategy and program 

     as mentioned in the introduction  the visually controlled drilling machine is intended to replace a manually operated machine. 
     the human operator's task of drilling the board is approximately described by the flow charts of fig.1a. he first undergoes an 
'initialisation' phase during which he establishes his 'world model'. he checks such things as the accuracy of the correspondence between tho position of the d r i l l and the crosswire  and the relationship between moving the board on the table and the resulting movement of the image of the board in his viewer. once the initialisation is complete he systematically moves the board under the viewer  scanning the image for drilling points. as soon as he spots something that might be a d r i l l i n g point  he stops moving the board and examines the candidate point more carefully. if he confirms i t i s a drilling point  he moves i t to coincide with the crosswire  and d r i l l s a hole. at this point he can check whether the drilled hole is exactly in the centre of the d r i l l i n g point. if he notes a consistent error in the position of the hole  he may decide to adjust his 'world model' accordingly. the above sequence of operations is repeated until a l l holes have been drilled. 
     the computer program in the h1 follows a sequence analogous to the human operator's  as illustrated in fig.1b. it f i r s t enters the initialisation phase during which the scale 
between table and image movement  the position of 
the projected graticule  and the relationship 
between the graticule and a drilled hole arc determined. the main drilling phase is then entered during which the board is systematically searched for d r i l l i n g points by scanning a sequence of adjacent sub-areas  each 1 x 1 pixels  of the board  fig.1 . the tv interface samples the tv video and converts it into a digital signal of 1 bits per pixel  1 grey levels in which 1 is white and 1 is black . by this 
means  an image such as that illustrated in fig.1 
is stored in the computer. 
1 

drilled. 
that element of the state vector. calculated  see fig.1 . 
1 

     the purpose of the projected graticule is to act as a secondary datum defining the position of the d r i l l   the primary datum being the actual position of a drilled hole  fig.1 . the graticule projector is mounted  independently from the tv camera  on the main frame of the drilling 
machine. therefore  the relative positions  in the tv picture  of the graticule and the d r i l l are unaffected by an mechanical movements or electronic drifts i n the camera. although by prior adjustment the centre of the maltese cross is arranged to correspond to the drill position  mechanical d r i f t s in the projector can introduce a displacement in their relative position. this offset is calculated by drilling a test hole in the board as described below. 

1. determination of the offset between the projected graticule and the drill 
     in the next phase of the initialisation procedure the maltese cross graticule is switched on and appears in the tv picture. its position is determined by the same method as that used for the cross on the board. the projected graticule is then switched off  and the program relocates the cross on the board. it then searches for a small  1 x 1 pixel  empty area which it positions at xgrat  ygrat. the test hole  which i t is assumed will fall within the scanned area  is d r i l l e d and i t s position determined using the 
method employed to locate drilling points  section 1 . since the position of the graticule has already been found  the offset between drill and graticule can now be calculated. 
movement strategy and the registration of 

     an important feature of the control program is i t s a b i l i t y to explore the whole board without 
missing or reprocessing any regions. this is accomplished by starting in one corner of the board and by systematically processing successive sub-areas in a boustrophedal route as shown in fig.1. 
     for each sub-area being processed for d r i l l i n g an area four times the size of the subarea is scanned  the other three sub-areas being concerned with the registration between one d r i l l e d sub-area and the next. one of these three will be the next to be drilled and this sub-area is also inspected for candidate d r i l l i n g 

points whose locations are stored. when the board is shifted to process this next sub-area for drilling a new l i s t of candidates is obtained whose positions could be checked against the list obtained in the previous stop. any misregistration which may have occurred could be computed and corrected. 
picture processing operators 

a simple blob detection operator 

     during the execution of the program as described above  the computer has to recognise 'blobs' defined as dark objects surrounded by a closed ring of picture elements which are lighter than the object itself. the shape of this ring is not defined  but i t s dimension must be smaller than d  where d is the size of the operator used to recognise the blob.  d is an odd number . the operator  fig.1  is a square template composed of eight radiating limbs. 

1 

a more elaborate local operator for locating 
     this operator is designed to inspect the area surrounding the candidate location of the cross determined by the simple operator. it checks whether a cross is really present and if so determines i t s exact position. the operator is based on recognising a series of increasingly long vertical and horizontal dark bars on a light 
background  fig.1c . first  a square search path of size d is defined  and a histogram of the density of the d pixels along each side of the square is computed. a binary pattern is obtained by thresholding at the density level defined by the first minimum in the histogram. the binary pattern is 'accepted' only if it contains a black bar whose length is of the order of d/1  within say 1% of this value . if the pattern is rejected a second threshold value  given by the next minimum in the histogram  is tried  and so on. if the pattern is accepted its centre c1 is found and recorded. the procedure is repeated to find c1  c1  c1 on the other sides 
of the square. a tentative centre cd for the cross is found by the intersection of c1 c1 with c1 c1. the centre of the cluster of successive tentative centres cd obtained for increasing 
values of d is taken as the centre of the cross. performance and conclusions 
     although fairly complex at first sight  the program requires only the core size of a small mini computer  1k words of 1 bits . the addition of more sophistication would require at 
	least one level of overlay. 	the program is 
written in fortran iv with single precision integer operations and machine code device drivers. although the speed of the program has not been optimised  the machine can drill holes at approximately 1 every 1 seconds. this is slower than can be achieved by a human operator or when the machine is controlled from a punched tape. in this latter mode the speed of the machine is approximately 1 hole every 1 seconds. the comparison with numerically controlled operation leads one towards an alternative use for the 
visually controlled machine. instead of d r i l l i n g the board  it could be used to prepare a punched tape for future numerical control. one can also consider extensions of this type of machine to other problems of automatic digitisation. 
     in i t s present state  the machine can almost drill complete boards. the program still needs to be improved slightly to prevent a few d r i l l i n g points being missed. this is particularly important as the practical use of the machine in the laboratory workshop is now being considered. 
     as described  the machine treats each hole as an individual item. in practice however  the relative position of holes in a pcb is often as important as the location of an individual hole at the centre of a d r i l l i n g point. for example  the pitch of the pattern of holes for a dual-inline ic must be regular to ensure easy insertion 
of the device in the board. the drilling machine could be made intelligent enough to recognise such patterns of drilling points and to d r i l l the holes accordingly. 
1 

     other features which could be added to the program include the recognition of other shapes as drilling points and an ability to check that the holes are actually drilled in the right place with respect to the copper pattern. if the machine discovered that the holes were misplaced  procedures for updating the contents of the state vector could be invoked. 
acknowledgements 

     we would like to acknowledge the contributions of the other members of the team who have worked on this project  a.r. turner-smith and d. paterson  we would also like to thank our group leader j.a. weaver for his help and encouragement. 
