 
a system for computer assisted medical diagnosis has been developed  which incorporates an innovative model of diagnostic logic. a supporting medical data base has also been assembled  now comprising approximately fifty percent of the major diseases of internal medicine. using weighted associations between disease entitles and their manifestations  and employing a powerful attention focusing heuristic  the system has demonstrated competence in dealing with difficult clinical problems involving multiple diagnoses. 
1. introduction 
1. internal medicine as a task environment for artificial intelligence 
     at first glance  the task environment of internal medicine might appear to be eminently suitable for attack by means of the stste-space 
methods  1  of artificial intelligence. a medical problem may be characterised in terms of an initial state  disease   a goal state  health   and a collection of available operators  drugs  surgical procedures  diets  etc.  by which one state may be transformed into another. the 
main difficulty with this view of the task is that ordinarily  evidence available at the outset provides only a partial description of the initial state of a medical problem. while socalled 'presenting signs and symptoms' may be suggestive of one or more abnormal or pathological conditions  in most cases  conclusive evidence concerning the underlying disorder is not available. 
     because he can be much more selective in the choice of therapeutic measures when attempting to treat the cause rather than its manifestations  the clinician is generally obliged to formulate a model  comprising one or more hypothesized abnormal or pathological conditions  as a basis for clinical problem solving. this process of generating and testing hypotheses with respect to unobserved - perhaps unobeervable- pathological conditions is the essence of medical diagnosis. because this task is one of 'problem finding' or 'problem formulation ' not 'problem solving' as this term is generally construed  it is not clear that the solutionoriented heuristic procedures of artificial intelligence have any bearing on this essential aspect of the medical task environment. 
     in certain apeclal cases  where the diagnostic task can be taken to be that of identifying the presence of a single clinical problem  any of a host of deterministic or probabilistic 'recognizers' can be employed to deal with the problem.  see for example: ledley and lusted  1   gorry and barnett  1   blelch  1 .  such methods are of very limited scope  however  as they rest on the assumption that the clinical cases to be analyzed are 'pure' - i.e.  there are no erroneous data  sometimes called redherrings  to be dealt with  and only one cllnicopathological diagnosis to be discerned in esch case. 
     in the real world of internal medicine  these assumptions are rarely satisfied. nonetheless  the skilled clinician manages to sort out the facts of s case  disregarding some  while on the basis of others formulating a clinical picture that may comprise a number of interrelated or distinct disease entities. 
     in what follows  we describe and illustrate a model of the diagnostic process  called dialog  for diagnostic logic  that was designed to mimic the data structures and reasoning processes of the skilled clinician. the process employs a novel heuristic procedure for ranking and partitioning of diagnostic inferences  which enables construction of clinically relevant diagnostic models even in the presence of erroneous and misleading data. using an extensive medical data base which encompasses approximately fifty percent of the major diseases of internal medicine  the dialog procedure has accurately analyzed many complex  real-world clinical problems  involving aa many aa five distinct disease entities. 
1      in the following sections  we describe first the logic of the diagnostic process and the structure of medical knowledge that underlies the dialog data base. there follows s description of the dialog procedure  and an illustration of the system's behavior. 
1. the logic of diagnosis 

　　　given a set of observations  which are taken to be consequences of some unknown cause  the task of diagnosis is to devise reasonably cogent hypotheses which would be sufficient to enable derivation  via deductive inference  of the observed consequences. this method of inference  sometimes referred to as abduction  or the method of hypothesis  1  1   requires the design of procedures and data structures to deal with the following issues: 
     1. observations must be able to 'trigger' or evoke hypotheses of disease entities with which they are associated. since certain findings may suggest one disease more strongly than another  it is necessary to provide for some measure of strength of association between observations and the hypotheses they evoke. 
     1. hypotheses must be able to generate expectations concerning likely consequences  which may be posed as questions regarding additional observations  or laboratory 'studies perhaps  in order to 'test' the hypotheses. this suggests the need for a second set of associations - those relating disease entitles to the possible consequences thereof; here  a useful measure of the degree of association is the frequency of occurrence of a given finding in a given disease. 
     1. since the business of hypothesis formation is an inexact process  some would call i t an art   it is necessary to provide some means for deciding among contending hypotheses. this suggests that the candidates be ranked on some basis  and that criteria be established for deciding when the weight of evidence is sufficient to permit reasonably confident judgments to be rendered. 
     1. the final and perhaps most important consideration is that some means must be developed to group hypotheses into mutually exclusive subsets corresponding to coherent problem areas. this is essential in order to be able to deal with cases where more than one disease may be present  and hence more than one hypothesis correct. the discriminating procedure sketched above must not be forced to choose between two complementary hypotheses; somehow. it must focus on those evoked hypotheses that constitute alternatives to one another  not complements. 
     in section 1  we show how each of these issues is addressed in the dialog model. before pursuing these matters further  however  we turn our attention next to a consideration of the characteristics of the knowledge base underlying internal medicine. 
1. structure of medical knowledge 

     there are three significant relations that we have discerned requiring representation in the knowledge base for internal medicine. there are the two relations described above  which may be expressed as: 
     1  evokes  m  d  denoting the evocative 
association which manifestation m has for disease d  also 
     1  manifest  d  m  which is the reverse association between disease d and its manifestation m. 
     in addition  a number of investigators  1  including ourselves  have independently arrived at the conclusion that a hierarchy of disease categories constitutes a significant organizing principle that should be represented in the information structure of internal medicine. thus we define the relation: 
     1  form-of  dl  dl.l  which asserts that disease  or category  dl.l is a form of disease category dl. for example  dl.l might stand for hepatocellular disease and dl for liver disease. then further elaboration of this region of the hierarchy would eventually lead to hepatitis a  infectuous mononucleosis  and so forth. 
     the reason that form-of appears to be a significant relation in internal medicine is the economy of representation  and processing  made possible by the following sort of quantification: 
vd form-of dl d = manifest  d  ml   
expressing the common situation wherein all diseases of a certain class can give rise to the same manifestation. 
     because of the enormity of the data base  and because of the need to qualify the evokes and manifest relations with respect to strength of associations  it is impractical to express the axioms of internal medicine by means of verbal expressions  as above. instead  we use an explicit network to encode the hierarchy of disease categories and the related sets of associations  as illustrated in fig. 1. here  the solid lines denote the form-of relation; dashed lines  with upward pointers  express evokes; and dotted lines  with downward pointers  stand for manifest. the quantified concept 
that 'all diseases of a certain type share a common manifestation* is denoted in this network by manifest and lwnvfr hnv   t-rnrhi d to nonterminal nodes. 

1 

     note that the manifest and evokes relations can exlat between nodes of the network as well as between nodes and manifestations; this reflects the fact that one disease may be caused by  and hence be a manifestation of another. 
     in the following section  we give a somewhat more detailed account of the construction and 
interpretation of the dialog information structure. 
1. the dialog system 
1. development of the data base 
     in constructing the disease hierarchy  successive general areas of internal medicine such as liver disease and heart disease are selected. subcategories of each general area are chosen on the basis of similarity of pathogenetic mechanism; thus  members of a subcategory share in good part a common mode of clinical presentation. further subdivision of subcategories is done until finally the level of individual diagnoses is reached. 
     once the superstructure is completed  the appropriate manifestations are entered under each diagnostic level  terminal  node of the hierarchy. the following data are obtained:  1  a l i s t of a l l manifestations of each terminal node;  1  an 
estimate of l di/ma : the likelihood that if 
manifestation ma is observed in a patient  diagnosis dl is its cause  relative to a l l other causes of ma . estimates of this  evoking strength  are given on a 1 scale  with 1 indicating that the manifestation is too nonspecific to draw any diagnostic conclusions  and 1 indicating that ms is pathognomonic for dl;  1  an estimate of f mb/dj   the frequency with which patients with proven diagnosis dj w i l l display mb as a manifestation of that dlaease. a 1 to 1 scale is used  
with 1 indicating mb occurs rarely in dj and 1 indicating mb la a sine qua non for dj. 
     in addition to listing historical findings  symptoms  signs  and laboratory data as manifestations of a given disease  diagnoses or syndromes themselves can be listed. for example  portal hypertension would be listed under laennec's cirrhosis; secondary neoplasm of the liver under adenocarcinoma of the colon; and congestive heart failure under aortic insufficiency. these are examples of the unidirectional  causal link : d1 is a manifestation of d1 if &1 lfl a known cause of d . 
     once a l l manifestations are entered for each of the diagnosis-level nodes  a program is invoked to carry out the 'generalization' process. for each node of the disease hierarchy  the intersection of the manifestation lists of its subnodes is determined. the result is a l i s t of the manifestations common to a l l the subnodes of a given node; i t is thus the manifestation list for that higher node. by this method  jaundice becomes a manifestation of hepatocellular injury  and of cholestasis and others   and the presence of a markedly increased alkaline phosphatase indicates that a certain category of cholestatic diseases is to be considered. further discriminating information can be obtained only by examining the manifestation lists of subnodes in the class. this process allows the diagnostic program to construct the patient's differential diagnosis on as general a level as is possible; thus  the program can attempt to rule out general classes of disease before working on individual diagnoses. 
     the final process in constructing the data baae is to enter data about each manifestation. h at important in this area are the type of the manifestation  history  symptom  sign  laboratory data  diagnosis  and the import  an integer from one to five . the type allows the diagnostic program to work on the least expensive  least dangerous differential points first  history  symptoms  signs  before going on to the more costly items  there are 1 levels of laboratory data based on complexity  cost and danger to the patient . the import is an index of how readily an observed manifestation can be ignored  i.e.  to what degree it could be considered a  red herring.  a history of shellfish ingestion has an import of 1 and ia easily ignored; a liver biopsy showing caseating granulomas has an import of 1 and must be explained by one of the final diagnoses. various other properties 
are encoded for each manifestation. 
1. the logic of dialog 

     the dialog program has been designed to mimic the problem-solving procedures of the clinician. the program begins by accepting any given sequence of presenting manifestations of illness. it then inquires about relevant historical items  symptoms  signs  and laboratory data  proceeding via the types  exhauatlng the useful questions in each type before going on to a more coetly type . 
1.1. case analysis: entry of presenting 
manifestations  phase i  
     as each observed manifestation is entered  nodes of the disease hierarchy 'evoked by' that manifestation are processed  as follows: 
      a  if the indicated node has not previously been considered - i.e.  if no manifestation has previously caused this node to be evoked - a new hypothetical model is created that reflects the explanatory power of the newly considered dlsesse. each disease model consists of four parts: 
 1  a list of all manifestations that have been observed but which cannot be explained by this particular disease. this l i s t is referred to as the 'shelf of that model. 
 1  a list of a l l observed manifestations  along with associated evoking strengths  that are consistent with this disease. 
 1  a list of all manifeatations that would ordinarily be expected to occur  with reasonable frequency  in the presence of this disease  but which have been found absent. 

1 

 1  a l i s t of a l l other manifestations that are consistent with the newly evoked node  but about which nothing is yet known. 
      b  if the node had previously been evoked  then a l l associated sublists of the model are simply updeted to reflect the new observation. 
1.1. case analysis: the interrogative phase of dialog  phase i i   
     having recorded a l l of the i n i t i a l input data  the system proceeds to weigh.the evidence for and against each hypothesis on the evoked list. the weight assigned to each of these is determined by the following factors: 
      a  counting in favor of each model is a factor proportional to the combined evoking strengths of a l l observed manifestations that it explains. 
      b  counting against a model are two factors: data not explained are weighed in proportion to their import; data expected but found absent in the patient are weighed in proportion to their frequence of occurrence in the considered disease. 
      c  a * bonus' is awarded to those models causally linked with disease nodes that have already been confirmed. 
     the set of evoked hypotheses  ordered on the basis of weights computed as above  is next processed to determine which of several modes of analysis is to be pursued. a partitioning process is utilised that employs the following concept of dominance: hypothetical model a dominates model b i f the net shelf of a  i.e.  the shelf minus those items explained by previously confirmed diagnoses  is a subset of the net shelf of b. each member m  of the evoked models list is compared with the top-ranked model t. if mi either dominates or is dominated by t  it is placed on the 'considered' l i s t ; otherwise it is pieced on the deferred l i s t which is temporarily bet aside. 
     this partitioning heuristic has the effect of grouping with the top ranked model those diegnosee that may reasonably be considered mutually exclusive alternatives to i t . since the combination of any of these models with the top-ranked 
model would add nothing to the explanatory power of the individual models taken separately  the diagnostic process reduces  for the moment  to a discrimination among these alternatives. 
     once a 'considered' list is selected  only those diagnoses within a fixed range of the top-ranked model are used to determine which mode of questioning is to be used. when this reduced list contains five or more models  'ruleout' mode is used. 'ruleout* asks about manifestations with very high frequency of occurrence in the diseases being processed. such questions stand a good chance of eliminating one or more of the considered models. the level of questions asked is incremented via the type  so that inexpensive items are asked first. because of the high cost associated with the acquisition of laboratory data  'ruleout' mode is not used when the type of questioning has reached the level of laboratory procedures. instead  the key word 'harrow' is printed out  and the field of considered diagnoses is artificially narrowed so that 'discriminate' mode can be used  which normally applies only when the reduced considered list contains from two to four models. in this mode  the top two diagnoses are selected for discrimination; items that count heavily for one model while counting heavily against the other are the desiderata for questioning. finally  if the reduced considered list contains only one model  'pursuing' mode is used. questions are selected that are thought to have a good chance of being 'clinchers.' manifestations which have a strong evoking strength with respect to the considered model are asked. the system continues in 'pursuing' mode until either the initial spread between the two top models has reached criterion  or until the spread has been reduced to the point that the top node no longer stands alone on the major liat. in the former case  the system 'conclude's that the considered disease is present; in the letter  processing reverts to the 'discriminate' mode. 
　　in each mode  a small number of questions are selected and asked. the responses to the set of queries are proceesed in a manner essentially the same as described for phase i: new nodes are evoked  old nodes updated  etc. a new ranking of a l l evoked models is determined; the processes of partitioning  mode selection  end interrogation are then repeated as often as necessary. whenever the presence of a particular disease is concluded  the list of manifestations explained by that disease is deleted from further consideration; diseases causally related to the confirmed diagnosis are given appropriate bonus scores  dependent on evoking strength and frequency of causal relationship . phase ii processing is then repeated in an effort to discover and confirm additional problems. 
1. dialog case analysis: an example 

　　due to space conetrainte  it la not possible to include a complete protocol of the dialog that took place in analyzing the case discussed below. rather than include a l l questions and answers that were exchenged between the physician and machine  we have chosen to highlight the key decision making points of the process. anyone desiring further information may contact the authors for complete protocols of this and other cases analyzed by dialog. 
　　before turning to the substantive aspects of the transcript  some explanation of the format of the protocol is in order. 
　　as many data aa desired can be entered initially  and the order of entry does not matter. the program prints an asterisk  *  when requesting input  and will continue to do so until the 
respondent types finis to signal that he has 
finished. 
after processing the initial data  the program 
1 

prints out its current list of 'considered nodes ' prefaced by one of the keywords  ruleout  narrow  discriminate  pursuing  conclude  discussed in the preceding section. if any date are not explained by the top-ranked modal  they are displayed with the notation 'disregarding.' 
     the program then solicits additional information by one of two question types. if it displays the name of a manifestation followed by a question 
mark  it expects a response of yes  no  or na 
 meaning 'not available' . when i t asks 'please enter findings of... ' information is being requested concerning a group of manifestations. in response  either a l l information about the inquired group of manifestations can be entered  or else 'no' can be typed in order to learn by the next printout what specific question in the group the program had been considering. if the user types in a manifestation name in response to the question  the program will continue to request input  by displaying a '*'  until the user types finis. 
     this case demonstrates how the program manages the problem of multiple diagnoses in the same patient. the diagnostic problem ia easier when more than one diagnosis are oausally related  but the machine oan diagnose several completely unrelated conditions. in this aaee  four of the abnormal states-pulmonary emphysema  congestive heart failuret congested liver  and the transudative pleural effusion are interrelated. 
1 




1 

1. pople  h.e.  jr.  artificial-intelligence 
approaches to computer-based medical consultation  ieee intercon conference  1. 
1. mlnsky  m.  a framework for representing knowledge   in the psychology of computer 

vision  p.h. winston  ed.  mcgravhlll: mew york  1. 
1 

　　　　elementary hypotheses can sometimes themselves be considered symptoms  so that evidence and expectation pointers may connect them. in diagram 1  uti and pyelonephritis  both elementary hypotheses  are so related; the symptoms of uti are a eubset of those of pyelonephritis. there are also clearcut cause relations betueen elementary hypotheses where the symptoms of the two diseases concerned are not in a 
　　　　subset/superset relation. in this case  the cause relation is stated explicitly  as in strep-infection causes agn. similar to cause links are complication links  as in pyelonephritis is a complication of stone. in addition  elementary hypotheses may or may not be ultimate-etiologies. an elementary hypothesis which is an ultimateetiology is one which could stand alone as a diagnosis  for which a more basic cause does not have to be sought or is not known. 
　　　　the system knows about several di fferent types of f indings: lab-data  physical-exam. symptom  fact and familyhistory. the process of deciding whether or not a particular patient finding is relevant to the symptom description in the knowledge network and thus relevant to the disease hypothesis is called fittina;  see 

 winograd  and  minsky  for earlier uses of this term in frame theory  it requires trying to fit a particular finding-
description into a sometimes more general specification. the result of this fitting process is that the finding-specification is either confirmed or disconf irmed. if the 

finding contains enough detail; if more information is needed to see if the finding fits the specification  the doctor often asks more questions. 
the time of occurrence of the symptoms and the time relationships indicated in the 
knowledge net are also taken into account in fitting  as described in  rubin . 
　　　　during the course of a diagnostic session  nodes of the data network change state with the addition of new information about the patient. while findingspecifications may be either conf irmed or 

di sconf irmed. elementary hypotheses  

because they are not directly confirmable  have a more complicated set of alternative states. when a diagnostic session starts  all elementary hypotheses are inact ive: 

that is  no particular disease has been suggested by the patient's symptoms. as more data is presented  certain hypotheses 
become active by virtue of their 

correlation with and ability to account for the findings present. once a hypo thesis it 
active  it is evaluated after the addition 

of every finding to see how well it fits the data so far and some score is produced which represents the likelihood of that disease's being present. on the basis of 
1 
this process  a hypothesis may be accepted 

or re iectedi in most cases  however  no 

definite decision will be made  but its score will be modified to reflect the effect of the new data. an accepted elementary hypothesis is one for which the evidence is sufficiently specific to rule out any other cause for the symptoms present. for example  the presence of reoblood-cell-casts confirms the diagnosis of glomeruli tis  making it an accepted hypothesis  but the very same finding makes 
sickle-cell-trait a rejected hypothesis finally  consideration of an elementary hypothesis may be deferred until more 

supporting symptoms are known. this process helps reduce the number of concurrently-active hypotheses. 
　　　　how does the magic transformation from a bunch of symptoms to a final 
diagnosis take place  the process seems to be divided into four steps: di sbosina. triggering  local evaluation and glojtfl assembl ino. this series of four steps is performed after the addition of each finding. a brief description of the four stages follows; the third and fourth will be discussed in more detail below. 
　　　　1.sometimes the cause of a finding i  clear when the finding is encountered; this is most often the case whan the explanation is a fact. in such a circumstance  the doctor di sboees of the 

finding as a result of some alreadyaccepted ettojogy rather than trying to find a new explanation. for example  suppose a patient is brought into the emergency room of a city hospital after an automobile accident; if his urine contains blood  the doctor should surely attribute it to abdominal trauma  rather than 
considering glomerulitis. 1.triaaer ino is a process by which 

an elementary hypothesis makes the 
transition from the inactive to the active state. a subset of the symptoms which are relevant to a disease are marked as triggers. uhen a symptom is asserted to be 
present in the current case  it act ivates all those elementary hypotheses for which it has been designated a trigger. for 
example  dysuria  painful urination  tr iggers urinary-tract-infection; nausea 
by itself triggers nothing  as it is a common finding in many disorders. 
　　　　1.each elementary hypothesis has an associated local evaluation function which 

produces a value representative of how likely the disease is to be present given the data. each of the hypotheses currently active is evaluated  taking the new finding into account. the evaluation done at this stage is local in that the functions do not ask questions about the status of other 

elementary hypotheses  or consider symptoms other than thoee relevant to the diseaee hypothesis being evaluated. 
1.the purpose of global assemblu. 

the fourth stage  is to arrange the various 
local elementary hypotheses into a larger structure which is both coherent and 

adequate. 	the rules of coherence have to 

do with the wage to connect various elementary hypotheses through links like cause. complication and evidence. an adequate hypothesis is one which accounts 
for a l l the abnormal findings in a case and is the end goal of a diagnostic process. 
local evaluation 
         any hypothesis-based theory needs a method for evaluating an elementary hypothesis - in this case  a single disease or syndrome - in isolation. correlations 
between symptoms and diseases are the major determinants of such evaluation. one such correlation is the conditional probability of a symptom given a disease. i have called such numbers expectations. in bayesian terms they are p 1/d   read  the 
probabiiity of s given 1     where s is the symptom and 1 the particular disaase in question. these correlations  however  are a l l disease-centered: that is  they spring 

d i r e c t l y from the description of a disease.  lore useful diagnostic information is sumotom-centered. since a diagnosis 

proceeds from symptoms to diseases. 
         this other more sophisticatea type of information is what i have termed evidence; in bayesian terms  it ie the conditional probability of a disease given a symptom  or p 1/s . the complexity of the transformation of information from expectations to evioence  see  feller   makes plausible the idea that part of a doctor's expertise lies in the translation of knowledge from the disease-centered mode to the symptom-centered mode. 
         a local scoring algorithm must take into consideration both positive and 
negative contributions to the current hypothesis. in general the presence of relevant symptoms  evidence  will add to the v a l i d i t y score of an elementary 
hypothesis  uhi ie their absence  violated expectations  ui i i subtract from i t . the presence of fever will add to the validity of strep-infection  while its absence will subtract. the scoring algorithm we developed takes into account both positive and negative evidence for a hypothesis and scores are normalized by being divided by their highest possible total score. 
         the scoring algorithm also takes into account differing strengths of 
properties  the inclusion of isa links and symptoms associated uith a hierarchy of diseases  and age and sex of the patient  and operates with only four levels of evidence  sufficient.stronc. moderate ueak  and four of expectation  necessary  strong  moderate ueak . oetails of the algorithm can be found in  rubin   but more important 
to the present discussion are the aspects 
1 
of local evaluation which serve to reduce the number of hypotheses actively being considered at any given time. 
a hypothesis may be activated by 

one of i t s triaoers. a hypothesis which is 

not active is not being currently considered or evaluated. this selective 
activation of hypotheses is one way to 
control the number of diseases being actively considered at any time. notice that thie use of triggers is certainty a heuristic device  since the diagnosis for 

the particular case on hand may not be one 
of those triggered. 
         a second way of minimizing hypotheses is to reject unlikely ones. one 

method of rejection is to include in a disease's si ice rejecting aumotoms whose presence precludes that disease's existence. for example  the presence of red-blooo-cell-casts rules out the 

diagnosis of sickle-cell-trait. 
         in addition  we can assign a priori probabilities to diseases. the age and sex of a patient affect this probability profoundly. combining age  sex and disease leads to a useful number representing the probability of the disease occurring in a patient of particular age and sex. if this number is especially low  we may consider it 1 for heuristic purposes and put the 
hypothesis on the deferred-list. 
         the theory presented so far has been a i inear one. such a theory assumes 

that subparts of a problem can be treated independently and the solutions to those subproblems combined without alteration. of course  there are interactions among symptoms which contradict the linearity hypothesis. the three examples of nonlinearity described below illustrate some 
ways of dealing with interactions. 
both hematuria and proteinuria are 
evidence for glomerulitis and g-u-tractbleeding. houever  their relative severities differ in these two hypotheses. in g-u-tract-bleeoing  we expect the ratio of hematuria to proteinuria to be near that in uhole blood; for hematuira gross we 
expect proteinuria light. in glomerulitis  on the other hand  there should be relatively more proteinuria than in g-utract-bleeding ; for proteinuria m1erate  we would expect hematuria microscopic or light. the approach i have taken to this interaction is to specify for each disease 
or state which combinations would rule j j . 

qui. thus  and  hematuria gross  
 proteinuria light   precludes 
glomerulitis  while  and  hematuria light  
 proteinuria heavy   precludes g-u-tractbleeding. 
         the aslo  anti-streptolysin-1  titer often rises several weeks after a 
person has had a strep-infect i on  indicating that the body is fighting the infection with antibodies. taking penicillin to combat the infection  however  often squelches the antibody response. if a doctor were actively considering strep-infection. aslo-titer 
 result normal  would represent a violated expectation. an excuse is sometimes 

available for the absence of an expected finding; in this case penicillin  status taken  would excuse a normal aslo-titer. the strep-infection hypothesis is evaluated as if aslo-titer uere not a relevant symptom uhen penicillin has been taken. 
　　　　two or more diseases may resemble each other in many of their crucial aspects; it is particularly important to be able to tell them apart. besides being a possible pitfall in causing misdiagnoses  findings which are shared among diseases 
can also be used heuristically to avoid activating an undue number of hypotheses. suppose diseases a and b share findings x  y and z  but are differentiated by q's occurrence in a but not b. if x and y are present  we can consider b but not a  
provided there is also a piece of heuristic information  called a differentialdiagnosis  which activates a and rejects b if q is discovered. 
global assembly 
　　　　host of the diagnoses at which doctors finally arrive are not represented by a single elementary hypothesis. 
patients often have more than one related or even totally unrelated diseases. a final diagnosis may be glomerulitis coriplicated-by nephr1tic-syn1rot1e or fgn and hypertension essential. clearly we need some way to discover and specify these more complex hypotheses as well as to combine pathological states which are 
themselves elementary hypotheses into a larger hypothesis which postulates a single 
cause for alt of them. these concerns are handled by the aiobai assemblu stage of processing  which puts together coherent and adequate hypotheses. the processes in 

this stage are described in terms of 
matching a pattern  a template  and performing some action on the basis of that match. 
　　　　a coherent hypothesis consists of two or more elementary hypotheses joined by  coherence links  which include isa  cause  coflplication-of. 1evel1ps-1nt1 and evidence links. coherent hypotheses are constructed 
out of already-active hypotheses and  perhaps  some inactive ones as well  which are activated in the course of constructing the larger hypothesis. each type of 
coherent hypothesis can be represented as a  template  uhich is placed on the patient's data structure; present findings  active hypotheses and necessary links are the structures which must match. the action taken when a template matches consists of joining the matched components together  
along with newly-activated hypotheses. two coherent hypothesis types are described below. 
　　　　symptoms are often not connected direct iy to their di seases  but to intermediately-general pathological states. it is thus important to be able to reconnect the symptoms to the actual disease; this is done via evidence-chained hypotheses. they are formed uhen two or 
1 
more active elementary hypotheses have evidence chains which intersect at a single 
etiology. for example  if so1ium-retenti1n and acute-renal-failure were both active  we would want to unify them into a hypothesis which postulated agn. see diagram 1 for an illustration of a template for this type of hypothesis. 
　　　　forming a coherent hypothesis with cause. cotlplication-of or develops-into links may not involve activating any new 
 elementary hypotheses at all. if two active hypotheses are connected by a cause  cotlplication-of or devel1ps-int1 link  they may be joined into one composite hypothesis. more interesting is the case uhere a new elementary hypothesis must ba activated. a template for this situation is contained in diagram 1. clottingdisorder is activated in order to provide the link between hematuria and pregnancy. in words  we can activate an intermediate hypothesis which has one  non-trigger  finding present and is also connected by a cause  c1hplicati1n-1f or develops-into link to an active hypothesis. the neuly-
activated hypothesis provides a link between the two nodes. 
　　　　ultimately  the global assembly stage must come up with an adequate 

hypothesis. the primary characteristic of an adequate hypothesis is that is accounts for all the abnormalities noted  uhile 
maintaining as much simplicity as possible. an adequate hypothesis consists of several independent parts  each of which is a 
coherent hypothesis. each component must also be an ultimate-etiology or  in the case of more complex coherent hypotheses  
it must contain some ultimate-etiology. in 
addition  all accepted elementary hypotheses must be subsumed in the final diagnosis  either by themselves  or as part of a larger coherent hypothesis. for 
example  the following is an adequate hypothesi s: 
lgn 
 duration  years 1   
hypertension essential 
　　　　 duration  years 1   family-history nephritis 
notice that the second component of this hypothesis is hypertension essential  not hypertension chronic; this is because only 
hypertension essential is marked as an ultimate -etiology. hypertension chronic is a symptom  not an explanation  while hypertension essential is an explanation  actually the admission that no other explanation has been found'  essentially  a process which builds adequate hypotheses must par t i t i on the symptoms into possibly 

non-disjoint subsets and account for each subset with some coherent hypothesis. strategies for this partitioning  sea  rubin   contribute further to the process of minimizing the number of active hypotheses. 
summaru 

　　　　the area of medical diagnosis has been investigated as an a.i. problem and a 



structure for medical knowledge proposed. the process postulated to act on that structure has as one of its goals the minimization of the number of hypotheses actively considered at any one time. local vs. global evaluation and linearity vs. interaction have also been studied within the context of the theory. 
refproncob 
1. fahlman  scott   a hypothesis-frame 
system for recognition problems   wp-1  
a r t i f i c i a l 	intelligence lab  m.i.t.  cambr idge  december  1. 
1. f e l l e r   wilfiam  an introduction to probability thopru and lts applications. 
vol. 1  john uiley and sons  inc.: new york  1. 
1. gorry  g. a.   ft sufllfifi for cpwutfttaided diagnosis. tr-1  project mac  

m. i. t.  cambridge  september 1. 
1. gorry  g. a. et. al.. computer laboratory for clinical decision-flaking  research proposal to nih. flarch 1. 
1.  a framework for representing knowledge.  in the. psucholoau of computer viflion. p.h. winston  ed.  mcgraw-hill: new 

york 1s. 
1* rubin  andee   hypothesis formation and evaluation in medical diagnosis   
ai-tr-1  artificial intelligence lab  n.i.t.  cambridge  january 1. 
1  winograd  terry   frame representations and the procedural/ declarative controversy   in bobrow and collins  eds.   forthcoming. 
1 
