 
a systematic approach to the alloy designing problem  which is one of the typical ill-structured problems considered to be solvable only by inspirations of a genius metallurgist  is discussed with respect to the heuristic approach. the procedure to design an alloy of required properties consists of two parts;searching of a starting point a root  and constructing a tree in order to improve the properties of the material corresponding to the root by applying tactics. 
a cad system having a data base for metallurgy is used in order to establish a method to perform this procedure. 
introduction 

     as it has been already pointed out in our earlier paper l   the alloy designing problem comprises four sub-problems; i data processing of metal data    ii rearrangement of alloy developing strategies   iii synthetic decision based on the subproblems i  and   i i      vi verification of subproblems   i i i   by experiments. these sub-problems must be connected closely with one another by essential methods  that is  by the science-oriented method and/or by the engineering-oriented method. 
     the science-oriented method is so fundamental that it has united all tactics ever deduced and/or induced from theoretical or experienced rules into some strategies based on the science. from the point of view of the alloy designing  the scienceoriented method may only be successful in designing required alloys if the tactics of improvements have been already formulated quantitatively. however  the quantitative formulations have rarely been established except for ideal cases as a single crystal  pure metals etc  under restricted conditions and for a few properties. therefore the science-oriented method must often rely on theoretical simulations which require a great deal of cpu time  and/or quantitative estimations by the theoretical speculations for sophisticated requirements especially when the requirements are potentially directed towards the use of newer metal of little information. furthermore the number of combinations of parameters which describe alloys and conditions is enormous so that it is impossible to carry out exhaustive combinatorial or logical manipulations for all materials in designing required alloys. 
     therefore it is necessary to reduce the number of materials and to restrict them t o better materials with respect to the requirements imposed  so as to avoid combinatorial explosions. this procedure of selecting better materials can be classified into two parts: 
 i selection of a starting material by placing thresholds of requirements  
 ii improvements of the starting material by making use of tactics. 
in order to perform this procedure  we musu at first prepare a data base for materials and manmachine interfaces with the data base. these preparations are described in the later sections. 
     the further research by experiments or by simulations follows this procedure  and it will be reported in another paper. in this paper the method of selecting better materials is discussed as an applications of ai in metallurgy. 
procedure of selections 

     the procedure of selecting better materials can be described as: 
 i select a starting material  
si.inputs of requirements by designating the ranges of required properties  
s1.retrieval of information of materials which satisfy the requirements  
s1.evaluation of selected materials  
s1.selection of a starting material by the evaluated results  
 ii improve the starting materials  
s1.application of the tactics created in the data base so as to improve the starting material with respect to the required properties  
　　　　s1.evaluation of the improved materials. this procedure is illustrated in fig.l  and the steps s1-s1 are described in more detail in the later section. 


1 

information storage and retrieval 

　　　it is worth while to describe the data base for metals briefly in order to make the problem of selecting better materials clear. 
metal data 

the metal datu are classified into two types  
i.e.  structure-sensitive and structureinsensitive. the data of the latter type can be easily described with fixed number of parameters  so that the optimum alloy for the requirements with respect to the properties of this type can be easily decided by seeking a peak in a multidimensional metric space. on the contrary the data of structure-sensitive properties are unable to be described by a fixed representation because of the limitations to observations of the related parameters. the limitations also restrict the applications of established theories concerning this type data. this situation  however  is the main reason for the heuristic approach to the alloy designing problem. 
     the insufficiency of alloy data  particularly in structure-sensitive properties  must be taken for granted owing to the limitations of physical and chemical observations  so that we are obliged to refer another kind of information in order to estimate the regions of insufficient data. such information become tactics  which can be classified into 'alloying' and' heat-treatment and working'  and phase diagrams by which elementary patterns as shown in fig.1 can be recognized. both of these information are represented by networks except for the effects of 'heat-treatment and working*. these effects are caused by the fact that the effects are the function of both the tactics and reciprocal reactions of them. therefore the tactics with respect to heattreatment and working are dealt with qualitatively by man after the procedure described in the following section has been finished. 
data structure 

     in our system named caad-i computer-aidedalloy-designing-i   the information of materials are classified into five types; i fundamental properties as atomic weight  atomic radius etc    i i   phase diagrams  iii alloy data   iv strategies for developing alloys and tactics and  v photographs. 
      i fundamental properties are represented by arrays  the element of which corresponds to the value of a property of an element having the atomic number equivalent to the index of the array. 
      ii binary phase diagrams are represented by line figures in squares. then in order to represent them effectively with respect to memory size  a figure is divided into line elements and intersecting points. f.ach line element is approximated by selected points. the number of the selected points is restricted from 1 for straight lines  to 1. the terminal points are always selected. then for each line element are stored such information as the number of selected points and the temperatures and compositions of selected points. each intersecting point is represented by such data as the degree of node point   the 
names of incident branches line elements   and its temperature and its composition. according to the criterions described below  the pattern of each intersecting point is recognized and the information of the pattern is added to each node. 
the line element is encoded as lu lh ld vd rd rh  ru and vu  according to the directions as shown in fig.1. 
     the criterions for elementary patterns are as follows: 
l.eutectic and eutectoid systems 
*lh & rh & lu ru 
1.peritectic and peritectoid systems 
= lh & rh & ld & rd or lh & rh & vd 
1.monotectic and monotectoid systems 
=lh & rh & lu & ru & rd  $ rd or 
=lh & rh & ru &  lu & ld  & ld 
1.intermetallie compounds 
-ld & ld & rd & rd or ld & vd & rd 
1.solubility 
　　　　=lu & ld & rh or lh & ru & rd. the complete solid solution can be recognized by the criterion as follows. this pattern is represented by the double-valued functions of compositions except for the boundaries where the temperatures are single values. 

fig.1. codes of directions. r-.to right  l:to left h :horizontal  u:up  d:down v:vertical. 
      iii the alloy data can be defined by making use of categories which are structured into a tree 
logically as illustrated in fig.1. the correspondance between an alloy and the value of a property is defined by a direct product of element names  their compositions  the parameters and the nodes from the root to the related leaf. 


1 

      iv the strategy to select better materials can be represented by a directed graph if we assume the required properties as nodes and tactics to improve the required properties as 
branches. 
      v photographs of microstructures of metals can be represented by two dimentional arrays of the gradations. 
information retrieval 

     the information retrieval is performed by selecting menues displayed on the crt and by setting the ranges of requirements  or by referring the strategies already created in the file. by the selection of menues the values of a property are retrieved and by setting the ranges a set of materials which satisfy the requirements is created in a temporary file. two operations are prepared so as to manipulate the created sets; the union of the sets and the intersection of the sets. 
data creation 


     according to the procedure of selections as described before  the problem to be solved is formulated in the following way for the steps sls1. 
step si 

　　　the requirements should be defined quantitatively as the sets of upper and lower limits for required properties  pu and pl  under a certain condition c as: 






　　　in order to bridge between the insuff i c i e n c y of data and the development of  1 . the f i r s t and second terms of t are replaced by the name o f an alloy and/or by t h e name o f a metallic compound. 	this replacement is generally performed with respect to the f i r s t term  and almost a l l alloys can be described by the development of 	 1  with respect to the alloying procedure. 	although t h i s replacement is convenient to describe the already o b t a i n ed a l l o y s   it is ambiguous enough to obtain newer a l l o y s . 	in other words t h i s replacement contribute a heavy t r a f f i c of ideas into i t s termini  but it is 
dangerous to depend on t h i s replacement in designing a l l o y s . therefore we must obtain a complete r e s o l u t i o n of h m    . the i n t e r a c t i o n between t must be considered with the  heat-treatment and work ing . 
step s1 
　　　the evaluation of alloys which are estimated in step ss is performed by the method as described in step s1. the p o s s i b i l i t y of heat-treatment and working is now not considered in caad-i. 
　　　as the summary o f this section  t h e learning procedure and the alloy designing 
procedure are i l l u s t r a t e d in fig.1 and fig.1. 
conelusion 
　　　the s i t u a t i o n of caad-i is at the p o i n t o f c r e a t i n g t a c t i c s . the t a c t i c s are c r e a t e d b y s e t t i n g the l a s t t h r e e 
1 

terms of t which is questioned one by one according to the resolution of the formula  1 . when a new alloy data are created in the data base  the tactics are reviewed and modified with respect to the t h i r d and the fourth terms of t so as to include the new case. by the combination of these tactics are described the process of developments with respect to a part of commercial alloys. therefore we can decide the starting material if the ranges of required properties and weighting factors are defined. the selection of the optimum material are impossible  but the selection of better materials can be performed by taking advantage of the tactics already created. the further research to deside the optimum material is left to human. 
　　　the main reason of our i n v e s t i g a t i o n to apply the methods of h e u r i s t i c programming is that they are convenient to divide the a l l o y designing problem i n t o two parts  i . e .   mechanically i n f e r r e d part and mechanically not i n f e r r e d part. 
acknowledgement 
     the aethers wish to express their gratitude to prof. dr. m. i r i   mathematical engineering and instrumentation physics  and assoc. prof. dr. t. yamamoto  computer center  for their technical comments. 
appendix 
     the information of phase diagrams are processed in the following way. 
 i set the name of a phase diagram. 
 ii retrieve the phase diagram. 
 iii set the values of temperature and composition. 
 iv select branches which include the above composition within their ranges. 
 v select nodes incident to the selected branches. 
 vi recognize patterns of the nodes according to the algorithm described in the 
preceding section. 
 vii select the pattern of the node as the pattern of the point if the codes of directions are equivalent at both points by connecting the points. 
 viii decide the suffix  i.e.  -tic  or  -toid  by counting the number of branches over the designated point. 
