 
society needs humor  not just for entertainment. in the web age  presentations become more and more flexible and personalized and they will require humor contributions for electronic commerce developments  e.g. product promotion  getting selective attention  help in memorizing names  etc...  more or less as it happened in the world of broadcasted advertisement. even if deep modeling of humor in all of its facets is not something for the near future  there is something concrete that has been achieved and that can help in providing attention to the field. the paper refers to the results of hahacronym  a project devoted to humorous acronym production  a circumscribed task that nonetheless requires various generic components. the project opens the way to developments for creative language  with applications in the world of advertisement. 
1 introduction 
future human-machine interaction  according to a widespread view  will emphasize naturalness and effectiveness and hence the incorporation of models of possibly all human cognitive capabilities  including the handling of humor. there are many practical settings where computational humor will add value. among them: business world applications  e-commerce to name one   general computermediated communication and human-computer interaction  morkes et al  1   educational and edutainment systems. there are important prospects for humor also in automatic information presentation. in the web age presentations become more and more flexible and personalized and they will require humor contributions for electronic commerce developments  e.g. product promotion  getting selective attention  help in memorizing names  etc...  more or less as it happened in the world of broadcasted advertisement. 
　yet deep modeling of humor in all of its facets is not something for the near future; the phenomena are too complex  humor is one of the most sophisticated forms of human intelligence. it is al-complete: the problem of modeling it is as difficult to solve as the most difficult artificial intelligence problems. but some steps can be followed to achieve results. in the general case  in order to be successfully humorous  a computational system should be able to: recognize situations appropriate for humor; choose a suitable kind of humor for the situation; generate an appropriately humorous output; and  if there is some form of interaction or control  evaluate the feedback. 
　we are concerned with systems that automatically produce humorous output  rather than systems that appreciate humor . some of the fundamental competencies are within the range of the state of the art of natural language processing. in one form or in another humor is most often based on some form of incongruity. for verbal humor this means that different interpretations of utterances must be possible  and must not be detected before the culmination of the humorous process  or must cause perception of specific forms of opposition. natural language processing research has often dealt with ambiguity in language. a common view is that ambiguity is an obstacle for deep comprehension. most current text processing systems attempt to reduce the number of possible interpretations of the sentences  and a failure to do so is seen as a weakness of the system. from a different point of view  the potential for ambiguity can be seen as a positive feature of natural language. metaphors  idioms  poetic language and humor use all the multiple senses of texts to suggest connections between concepts that cannot  or should not  be stated explicitly. 
　the work presented here is based on various resources for natural language processing  adapted for humor. it is a small step  but aiming at an appreciable concrete result. it has been developed within hahacronym1  a project devoted to computational humor. a visible and evaluable result was at the basis of the deal. we proposed a situation that is of practical interest  where there is no domain restriction and many components are present  but simpler than in more extended scenarios. the goal is a system that makes fun of existing acronyms  or  starting from concepts provided by the user  produces a new acronym  constrained to be a word of the given language. and  of course  it has to be funny. 
　the project was meant to convince about the potential of computational humor  through the demonstration of a working prototype and an assessment of the state of the art and 
　　1 european project ist-1. hahacronym has been the first eu project devoted to computational humor. the consortium included itc-irst  as coordinator  and the university of twente. 
see http://haha.itc.it. 

art and creativity 	1 

of scenarios where humor can add something to existing information technologies. the results of the project put us in a better position to move forwards in introducing computational humor in more complex scenarios. 
1 ai and computational humor 
so far only very limited effort has been put on building computational humor prototypes. indeed very few working prototypes that process humorous text and/or simulate humor mechanisms exist  and mostly they worked in very restricted domains. 
　there has been a considerable amount of research on linguistics of humor and on theories of semantics and pragmatics of humor  attardo  1; attardo and raskin  1; giora and fein  1; attardo  1 ; however  most of the work has not been formal enough to be used directly for computational humor modeling. an effort toward formalization of forced reinterpretation jokes has been presented by ritchie . 
　within the artificial intelligence community  most writing on humor has been speculative  minsky  1; hofstadter el al.  1 . minsky made some preliminary remarks about how humor could be viewed from the artificial intelligence/cognitive science perspective  refining freud's notion that humor is a way of bypassing our mental  censors  which control inappropriate thoughts and feelings. utsumi  outlines a logical analysis of irony  but this work has not been implemented. among other works: de palma and weiner   1  have worked on knowledge representation of riddles  ephratt  has constructed a program that parses a limited range of ambiguous sentences and detects alternative humorous readings. a formalization  based on a cognitive approach  the belief-desire-intention model   distinguishing between real and fictional humor has been provided by mele . 
　probably the most important attempt to create a computational humor prototype is the work of binsted and ritchie . they have devised a formal model of the semantic and syntactic regularities underlying some of the simplest types of punning riddles. a punning riddle is a questionanswer riddle that uses phonological ambiguity. the three main strategies used to create phonological ambiguity are syllable substitution  word substitution and metathesis. 
　almost all the computational approaches try to deal with the incongruity theory at various level of refinement  raskin  1; attardo  1 . the incongruity theory focuses on the element of surprise. it states that humor is created out of a conflict between what is expected and what actually occurs in the joke. this accounts for the most obvious features of a large part of humor phenomena: ambiguity or double meaning. 
　specific workshops concerned with computational humor have taken place in recent years and have drawn together most of the community active in the field. the proceedings of the most comprehensive events are  hulstijn and nijholt  1  and istock et al  1 . ritchie  has published a survey of the state of the art in the field. 
1 hahacronym 
1 	resources 
in order to realize the hahacronym prototype  we have refined existing resources and we have developed general tools useful for humorous systems. as we will see  a fundamental tool is an incongruity detector/generator  that makes the system able to detect semantic mismatches between word meaning and sentence meaning  i.e. in our case the acronym and its context . for all tools  particular attention was put on reusability. 
the starting point for us consisted in making use of some 
 off-the-shelf resources  such as wordnet domains  magnini et al.  1   an extension of the well-known english wordnet  and standard parsing techniques. the tools resulting from the adaptation will be reusable for other applications  and are portable straightforwardly to other languages  e.g. wordnet domains is multilingual . 
wordnet and wordnet domains 
wordnet is a thesaurus for the english language inspired by psycholinguistics principles and developed at the princeton university by george miller  fellbaum  1 . it has been conceived as a computational resource  therefore improving some of the drawbacks of traditional dictionaries  such as circularity of definitions and ambiguity of sense references. lemmata  about 1 for version 1  are organized in synonym classes  about 1 synsets . wordnet can be described as a  lexical matrix  with two dimensions: a dimension for lexical relations  that is relations holding among words  and therefore language specific  and a dimension for conceptual relations  which hold among senses  the synsets  and that  at least in part  we consider independent from a particular language. a synset contains all the words by means of which it is possible to express the synset meaning: for example the synset {horse  equus-caballus} describes the sense of  horse  as an animal  while the synset {knight  horse} describes the sense of  horse  as a chessman. the main relations present in wordnet are synonymy  antonymy  hyperonymyhypony my  meronymy-holonymy  entailment  troponymy. 
augmenting wordnet with domain information 
domains have been used both in linguistics  i.e. semantic 
fields  and in lexicography  i.e. subject field codes  to mark technical usages of words. although this is useful information for sense discrimination  in dictionaries it is typically used for a small portion of the lexicon. wordnet domains is an attempt to extend the coverage of domain labels within an already existing lexical database  wordnet  version 1 . the synsets have been annotated with at least one domain label  selected from a set of about two hundred labels hierarchically organized.  figure 1 shows a portion of the domain hierarchy.  
　we have organized about 1 domain labels in a hierarchy  exploiting dewey decimal classification   where each level is made up of codes of the same degree of specificity: for example  the second level includes domain labels such as botany  linguistics  history  sport and religion  while at the third level we can find specialization such as 

1 	art and creativity 


figure 1: a portion of the domain hierarchy 
american history  grammar  phonetics and ten-
nis. 
　information brought by domains is complementary to what is already present in wordnet. first of all a domain may include synsets of different syntactic categories: for instance medicine groups together senses from nouns  such as d o c t o r # l and h o s p i t a l # l   and from verbs such as operate#1. second  a domain may include senses from different wordnet sub-hierarchies for example  sport contains senses such as a t h l e t e # l   deriving from l i f e   f o r m # l   game equipment # l  from p h y s i c a l   o b j e c t # l   s p o r t # l from act#1  and playing f i e l d # l   from l o c a t i o n # l . 
opposition of semantic fields 
on the basis of well recognized properties of humor accounted for in many theories  e.g. incongruity  semantic field opposition  apparent contradiction  absurdity  we have modelled an independent structure of domain opposition  such as religion vs. technology  sex vs. religion  etc... we exploit these kind of opposition as a basic resource for the 
incongruity generator. 
adjectives and antonymy relations 
adjectives play an important role in modifying and generating funny acronyms. wordnet divides adjectives into two categories. descriptive adjectives  e.g. b i g   b e a u t i f u l   i n t e r e s t i n g   p o s s i b l e   married  
constitute by far the largest category. the second category is called simply relational adjectives because they are related by derivation to nouns  i.e. e l e c t r i c a l in e l e c t r i c a l engineering is related to noun e l e c t r i c i t y   . to relational adjectives  strictly dependent on noun meanings  it is often possible to apply similar strategies as those exploited for nouns. their semantic organization  though  is entirely different from the one of the other major categories. in fact it is not clear what it would mean to say that one adjective  is a kind of'  isa  some other adjective. the basic semantic relation among descriptive adjectives is antonymy. wordnet proposes also that this kind of adjectives is organized in clusters of synsets associated by semantic similarity to a focal adjective. figure 1 shows clusters of adjectives around the direct antonyms fast i slow. 

figure 1: an example of adjective clusters linked by antonymy relation 
exploiting the hierarchy 
it is possible to exploit the network of lexical and semantic relations built in wordnet to make simple ontological reasoning. for example  if a noun or an adjective has a geographic location meaning  the pertaining country and continent can be inferred. 
rhymes 
the hahacronym prototype takes into account word rhymes and the rhythm of the acronym expansion. to cope with this aspect we got and reorganized the cmu pronouncing dictionary  http: //www. speech.es.cmu.edu/cgi-bin/cmudict  with a suitable indexing. the cmu pronouncing dictionary is a machine-readable pronunciation dictionary for north american english that contains over 1 words and their transcriptions. 
　its format is particularly useful for speech recognition and synthesis  as it has mappings from words to their pronunciations in the given phoneme set. the current phoneme set contains 1 phonemes; vowels may carry lexical stress. 
parser  grammar and morphological analyzer 
word sequences that are at the basis of acronyms are subject to a well-defined grammar  simpler than a complete noun phrase grammar  but complex enough to require a nontrivial analyzer. we have decided to use a well established nondeterministic parsing technique. as far as the dictionary is concerned  we use the full wordnet lexicon  integrated with an ad-hoc morphological analyzer. 
　also for the generation part we exploit the grammar as the source for syntactic constraints. 
　all the components are implemented in common lisp augmented with nondeterministic constructs. 
other resources 
an  a-semantic  dictionary is a collection of hyperbolic/epistemic/deontic adjective/adverbs. this is a last resource  that some time can be useful in the generation of new acronyms. some examples are: abnormally  ab-
strusely  adorably  exceptionally  exorbitantly  exponentially  extraordinarily  voraciously  weirdly  wonderfully. this resource is hand-made  using various dictionaries as information sources. 
　other lexical resources are: a euphemism dictionary  a proper noun dictionary  lists of typical foreign words commonly used in the language with some strong connotation. 

art and creativity 	1 

1 	architecture and implementation 
to get an ironic or  profaning  re-analysis of a given acronym  the system follows various steps and strategies. the main elements of the algorithm can be schematized as follows: 
  acronym parsing and construction of a logical form 
  choice of what to keep unchanged  typically the head of the highest ranking np  and what to modify  e.g. the adjectives  
  look up for possible substitutions 
  exploitation of semantic field oppositions 
  granting phonological analogy: while keeping the con-straint on the initial letters of the words  the overall rhyme and rhythm should be preserved  the modified acronym should sound similar to the original as much as possible  
  exploitation of wordnet antonymy clustering for ad-jectives 
  use of the a-semantic dictionary as a last resource 
figures 1 and 1 show a sketch of the system architecture. 

　in our system  making fun of existing acronyms amounts to an ironical rewriting  desecrating them with some unexpectedly contrasting  but otherwise consistently sounding expansion. 
　as far as acronym generation is concerned  the problem is more complex. to make the task more attractive - and difficult - we constrain resulting acronyms to be words of the dictionary  apple would be good  ibm would not . the system takes in input concepts  actually synsets  possibly the result of some other process  for instance sentence interpretation  and some minimal structural indication  such as the semantic head. the primary strategy of the system is to consider as potential acronyms words that are in ironic relation with the input concepts. by definition acronyms have to satisfy constraints - to include the initial letters of some lexical realization of the inputs words synsets  granting that the sequence of initials satisfy the overall acronym syntax. in this primary strategy  the ironic reasoning comes mainly at the level of acronym choice in the lexicon and in the selection of the fillers of the open slots in the acronym. 
　for example  giving as input  fast  and  cpu   we get static  torpid  dormant.  note that the complete synset for  cpu  is {processor#1  cpu#1  central..processing.unit#l  mainframe#1}. so 

we can use in the acronym expansion a synonym of  cpu . the same happens for  fast  . once we have an acronym proposal  a syntactic skeleton has to be filled to get a correct noun phrase. for example given in input  fast  and  cpu   the system selects torpid with the possible syntactic skeleton: 

where  rapid  and  processor  are synonyms re-
spectively of  fast  and  cpu  and the notation  part of  speech le tr means a word of that particular part of.speech with letter as initial. then the system fills this syntactic skeleton with strategies similar to those described for re-analysis. 
　the system is fully implemented in common lisp  exploiting clos and the meta-object protocol to import wordnet domains and to implement the navigation/reasoning algorithms. 
1 	examples 
here below some examples of acronym re-analysis are reported. as far as semantic field opposition is concerned we have slightly tuned the system towards the domains food  religion and sex. we report the original acronym  the reanalysis and some comments about the strategies followed by the system. 
acm - association for computing machinery 
-- association for confusing machinery 
fbi - federal bureau of investigation 
-  fantastic bureau of intimidation 
the system keeps all the main heads and works on the adjectives and the pp head  preserving the rhyme and/or using the a-semantic dictionary. 
crt - cathodic ray tube 
-  c a t h o l i c ray tube esa - european space agency 
-  epicurean space agency 
pda - personal digital assistant 
- penitential demoniacal assistant 
-  prenuptial devotional assistant 
mit - massachusetts institute of technology 
-  mythical i n s t i t u t e of theology 
some re-analyses are religion oriented. note the rhymes. 

1 	art and creativity 

　as far as generation from scratch is concerned  a main concept and some attributes  in terms of synsets  are given as input to the system. here below we report some examples of acronym generation. 
main concept: processor  in the sense of cpu ; attribute: fast 
open - on-line processor for effervescent net 
pique - processor for immobile quick uncertain experimentation 
torpid - traitorously outstandingly rusty processor for inadvertent data proeessing 
utmost - unsettled transcendental mainframe for off-line secured tcp/ip 
　we note that the system tries to keep all the expansions of the acronym coherent in the same semantic field of the main concept  computer  sciench . at the same time  whenever possible  it exploits some incongruity in the lexical choices. 
1 	evaluation 
testing the humorous quality of texts is not an easy task. 
there have been relevant studies though  such as  ruch  1. for hahac ronym  a simpler case  an evaluation was conducted under the supervision of salvatore attardo at youngstown university  ohio. both reanalysis and generation have been tested according to criteria of success stated in advance and in agreement with the european commission  at the beginning of the project. 
the participants in the evaluation were forty students. 
they were all native speakers of english. the students were not told that the acronyms had been computer generated. no record was kept of which student had given which set of answers  the answers were strictly anonymous . no demographic data were collected. however  generally speaking  the group was homogeneous for age  traditional students  between the ages of 1 and 1  and mixed for gender and race. 
　the students were divided in two groups. the first group of twenty was presented the reanalysis and generation data. we tested about 1 reanalyzed and 1 generated acronyms  over twice as many as required by the agreement with the european commission . both the reanalysis module and the generation module were found to be successful according to the criteria spelled out in the assessment protocol. the acronyms reanalysis module showed roughly 1% of acronyms having a score of 1 or higher  out of a possible 1 points   while the acronym generation module showed roughly 1% of acronyms having a score of 1 or higher. the thresholds for success established in the protocol were 1% and 1%  respectively. 
　a set of randomly generated acronyms were presented to a different group of twenty students. a special run of the system was performed in which the semantic filters and heuristics had been disabled  while only the syntactical constraints were operational.  if the syntactical rules had been disabled as well the output would have been gibberish and it would be difficult to compare with the regular system production . in 

table 1: evaluation results 
	a curiosity that may be worth mentioning: 	ha-
hacronym participated to a contest about  human  production of best acronyms  organized in december 1 by rai  the italian national broadcasting service. the system won a 
jury's special prize. 
1 prospects for advertisement 
humor is the healthy way of creating 'distance* between one's self and the problem  a way of standing back and looking at the problem with perspective. humor reveals new aspects  disarms and relaxes. it is also infectious and it is an important way to communicate ideas. on the cognitive side humor has two very important properties: 
- it helps getting and keeping people's attention. type and rhythm of humor may vary and the time involved in building the effect may be different in different cases: some times there is a context - like joke telling - that from the beginning let you expect for the humorous climax  which may occur after a long while: other times the effect is obtained in almost no time  with one perceptive act - for instance in static visual humor  funny posters or in cases when some well established convention is reversed with an utterance; 
- it helps remembering. for instance it is a common ex-perience to connect in our memory some knowledge we have acquired to a humorous remark or event. in a foreign language acquisition it may happen that an involuntary funny situation is created because of so called  false friends  - words that sound similar in two languages and may have the same origin but have a very different meaning. the humorous experience is conducive to remembering the correct use of the word. 
　no wonder that humor has become one of the favorite strategies used by creative people involved in the advertising business. in fact among the various fields in which creative language is used  advertising is probably the area of activity in which creativity  and hence humor  is practiced with most precise objectives. 
　from an applied ai point of view  we believe that an environment for proposing solutions to advertising professionals can be a realistic practical development of computational humor and one of the first attempts in dealing creative language. 
art and creativity 	1 　some examples of the huge array of opportunities that language offers and that existent nlp techniques can cope with: rhymes  wordplays  popular sayings or proverbs  quotations  alliterations  triplets  chiasmus  neologism  non sequitur  adaptation of existing expressions  adaptation of proverbs  personification  synaesthesia  two or more senses combined . 
　an intelligent system devoted to advertisement  based on an apparatus that extends the one we have described  can play with these expressions  alter them  change the context  use them as a platform for completely new ideas  e.g. create the slogan: thirst come  thirst served for a soft drink . 
　in the longer run the aim is to go for individual-oriented advertisement. let us leave aside issues of privacy for the moment  though we know this is a critical theme. the availability of individual profiles  automatic inferencing of interest and behavior models  information about the location of the individual  combined with reasoning on the offer side  what is advisable to promote in a given context of business  will all provide the basic input for advertising things worth getting the interest of a specific individual in a given context. commercial advertisement will be just one case along this line - one can think of influencing the individual behaviour on the basis of the availability of any possible resources such as  for instance  cultural goods. a prediction is that when such situation-oriented advertisements will become widespread  the same features that prevail now with broadcasted material will be sought after for the new case. so  forms of humorous advertisement for the individual  even playing on personal aspects  will become a plus. 
　an important aspect to be taken into account is how humor is appreciated by different individuals. personality studies regarding this specific theme give important indications  ruch  1. one option will also be to develop humor for conversational systems  based on embodied agents. the work of ni-
jholt  andre and rist  and cassell  could provide the starting point for introducing dynamic humor. 
　for obtaining good results  there are not many things that are worse than bad humor!  for these longer term objectives  much work will be needed  especially further integration with ontologies  common sense reasoning and pragmatics. 
