 
finding desired information on the internet is becoming increasingly difficult. internet directories such as yahoo!  which organize web pages into hierarchical categories  provide one solution to this problem; however  such directories are of limited use because some bias is applied both in the collection and categorization of pages. we propose a method for integrating multiple internet directories by instance-based learning. our method provides the mapping of categories in order to transfer documents from one directory to another  instead of simply merging two directories into one. we present herein an effective algorithm for determining similar categories between two directories via a statistical method called the k-statistic. in order to evaluate the proposed method  we conducted experiments using two actual internet directories  yahoo! and google. the results show that the proposed method achieves extensive improvements relative to both the naive bayes and enhanced naive bayes approaches  without any text analysis on documents. 
1 introduction 
the world-wide web  www  is now used not only by computer specialists  but by all sorts of people  from children to businessmen and businesswomen  which has resulted in an enormous quantity of web pages available on the internet. this makes finding pages containing the desired information rather difficult. search engines are requisite for finding the desired information. in general  current search engines perform their functions via one of two methods: a keyword search and a directory search. a keyword search engine performs searches by means of user-specified keywords. keyword-based search engines like google can reliably find pages containing the specified keywords. however  if the user does not have a thorough knowledge of his/her search domain and cannot choose the appropriate keywords  the search engine is useless. in such a situation  directory-based search engines do a good job. in a directory-based search engine  pages are evaluated and organized by humans before being registered in the search engine's archive. directorybased search engines provide knowledge of www navigation. users reach the desired information by going up and down the directories. 
　although pages are carefully selected and well-organized  a single internet directory is not sufficient because the internet directory tends to have some bias in both collecting and categorizing pages. in order to solve these problems  we herein propose a method that coordinates multiple internet directories by estimating directory similarities. the proposed method does not simply merge multiple directories into a larger directory  but instead determines the relationship between directories. many public internet directories exist. some are designed to cover wide domains  while others focus on special domains. such internet directories are difficult to merge. moreover  these directories should not be integrated  because the existing differences in concept hierarchies among the directories is important when selecting and using directory-based search engines. in this paper  we propose a method to solve this problem by determining the rules for mapping categories in a directory to those in another directory. our solution can be applicable not only to the internet directory problem  but also to the integration of web marketplace catalogs  agrawal and srikant  1 and ontology integration in general. 
　the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in section 1  we define the problem of coordinating multiple internet directories. in section 1  we discuss related studies. in section 1  we propose a new machine learning method for the above-mentioned problem. next  in section 1  we compare the performance of the proposed method to that of the enhanced naive bayes approach  agrawal and srikant  1  for an integration problem using real internet directories. finally  in section 1  we present our conclusions. 
1 integration of multiple internet directories 
in order to state the problem  we introduce a model for the 
internet directories we intend to integrate. we assume there are two internet directories: a source directory and a target directory. the documents in the source internet directory are 
   'for example  the integration of a distributor's catalog and a web marketplace. 

1 	al and data integration 

expected to be assigned to categories in the target internet directory. this produces a virtually integrated internet directory in which the documents in the source directory are expected to be members of both the source and target directories. this integrated directory inherits the categorization hierarchy from the target internet directory. 
　the internet directory model for the source and target is as follows: 
  the source internet directory  sp contains a set of categories  cs1  cs1         csn  that are organized into an  isa  hierarchy. each category can also contain documents. 
  the target internet directory tp contains a set of categories  c1  c1          ctm that are organized into an  isa  hierarchy. each category can also contain documents. 
　the proposed model permits documents to be assigned to intermediate categories. this model is similar to the catalog model in lagrawal and srikant  1   except that the categories are organized into a conceptual hierarchy. since the catalog model ignores hierarchy structure and therefore cannot assign documents to an intermediate category  our internet directory model is more general than the catalog model. 
　the problem addressed in this paper is finding an appropriate category ct in the target directory tp for each document ds1 in the source directory sp. an example is shown as the mapping of a black box dx in figure 1  where the black circles indicate categories and the hollow boxes indicate documents. what we need to do is determine an appropriate category in tp for a document which appears in sp but not in td  because mapping is not necessary if the document is included in both the source and the target directories. documents d1 and d1 in figure 1 are examples of such documents. this mapping can have several possibilities  e.g.  dx can be mapped to an upper left category or to a lower left category  etc. 

1 related work 
one popular approach to this kind of problem is to apply standard machine learning methods  langley  1 . this requires a flattened class space having one class for every leaf node. the problem can then be considered to be a normal classification problem for documents. naive bayes nb   mitchell  1  is an established method used for this type of document classification framework. a classifier 
a! and data integration 
is constructed using the words in the documents. however  this classification scheme ignores the hierarchical structure of classes and  moreover  cannot use the categorization information in the source directory. enhanced naive bayes  agrawal and srikant  1   hereafter referred to as e-nb  is a method which does use this information. e-nb will be discussed in the next section. glue  doan ct al.  1  is another type of system employing nb. to improve accuracy  glue combines nb and a constraint optimization technique called relaxation labeling. however  the general performance of the system depends on that of nb. unlike nb  the systems in  koller and sahami  1    wang et al.  1  classify documents into hierarchical categories  and these systems use the words in the documents for classification rules. however  these systems cannot use the categorization information in the source directory. 
　another type of approach is ontology merging/alignment systems. these systems combine two ontologies  which are represented in a hierarchal categorization. chimaera  mcguinness et al.  1  and prompt  noy and musen  1  are examples of such systems and assist in the combination of different ontologies. however  such systems require human interaction for merging or alignment. in addition to this requirement  these systems are based on the similarity between words  which introduces instability. the dictionaries used for such systems often have word similarity bias. fca-merge  stumme and madche  1  is another type of ontology merging method. it uses the attributes of concepts to merge different ontologies. as a result  it creates a new concept without regarding the original concepts in both ontologies. calvanese et al.  calvanese et al  1  also discussed an ontology integration framework with respect to global ontology and local ontology. 
　as mentioned before  we also tackled the similar problem of catalog integration. an approach  besides e-nb  is to construct the abstract-level structure of two hierarchies  omelayenko and fensel  1 . this approach does not direct the transformation of source and target information  but transforms via the abstract-level structure. it is relatively easy to transfer information through many hierarchical structures  but it is hard to create a common structure for those hierarchies. 
　the bookmark-sharing systems of siteseer  rucker and polanco  1  and blink  blink  1  also deal with a similar problem. these systems attempt to share url information which appears in the source bookmark but not in the target bookmark. these systems flatten the categorization of bookmarks in the same manner as nb and determine the mapping of categories in each bookmark  based on the shared url information. such systems are problematic when a given url does not fit into an exact category. kmedia  takeda et al  1  is another bookmark-sharing system that uses hierarchical structures explicitly  but is dependent on the similarity of the words within pages. 
　in the context of information retrieval  stuckenschmidt  stuckenschmidt  1  has coordinated the formal model of hierarchies with multiple classification hierarchies. in our paper  since the upper and lower boundaries of concept mapping can be determined by subsumption relationships  we can infer the boundary of valid mapping and also check 
1 

whether or not the given mapping is consistent. in our problem  since we have only partial evidence of classes and do not know the definitions of classes  we can not apply this method directly. 
1 learning the relationship between categories of two internet directories 
in this section  we explain our method to determine the relationship between categories in two internet directories. one characteristic of the proposed method is to use the hierarchical structure  as is.  we use all categories including intermediate categories and leaf categories  because information for categorization can also be obtained from these categories. another characteristic of the proposed method is the exclusive reliance on the categorization structure of both directories  i.e.  with no reliance on the semantic information of the documents. we can determine the relationship between categories of the two directories by statistically comparing the membership of the documents to the categories. 
1 	basic concept 
although e-nb was developed for a very similar problem  it is missing an important feature: categorization hierarchy. according to  agrawal and srikant  1   the initial definition of the problem is identical to that of this paper. however  the previous paper assumes that  any documents assigned to an interior node really belong to a conceptual leaf node that is a child of that node   and concludes from this assumption that  we can flatten the hierarchy to a single level and treat it as a set of categories.  however  the conclusion overlooks the categorization hierarchies. the categorizations are not independent of each other. the categorization hierarchies are usually structured using an  is-a  or another relationship. if a document is categorized in a lower category in the categorization hierarchy  then the document should also be categorized in the upper categories 1. if we flatten the categories  such information regarding the relationships between categories will be lost. 
　another problem associated with nb is its sensitivity to the words in documents. for example  if a document contains the word bank  the category for the document could be a financial category; however  the category could also be a 
　construction category. the quality of categorization with nb is thus not stable according to the contents of documents  due to the natural language techniques of processing words. it is critical to integrate internet directories because mixing reliable internet directories maintained by human editors with less reliable and less stable machine-generated classifiers will confuse users and decrease their confidence. in addition to the problem of sensitivity  analysis of a document to extract words is expensive. 
　our method focuses on the similarity of the way of categorization  not the similarity of documents. then  how do we measure the similarity of categorization  we utilize shared documents in both the source and target internet directories 
　　1 note that the reverse is not always true  because documents can be categorized into intermediate categories. 
as our measurement standard. if many documents in category csi also appear in category ctj at the same time  we consider these two categories to be similar  because the ways of categorization in csi and ctj are supposed to be similar  i.e.  if another document d comes in csi  it is likely that d will be also included in ctj. this method avoids both the keyword extraction process and the handling of word meaning. the example shown in figure 1 illustrates that documents in the bottom category in the source internet directory can be transferred to a similar category in the target internet directory. 

figure 1: document transfer from source internet directory to target internet directory. 
1 k-statistic 
the remaining problem is how to determine the pairs of similar categories. we adopt a statistical method to determine the degree of similarity between two categorization criteria. the k-statistic method  fleiss  1  is an established method for evaluating the similarity between two criteria. suppose there are two categorization criteria  csi in sd and ctj in td. we can determine whether or not a particular document belongs to a particular category1. consequently  documents are divided into four classes  as shown in table 1. the symbols n1  n1  -n1 and n1 denote the numbers of documents for these classes. for example  n1 denotes the number of documents which belong to both csi and ctj. we may logically assume that if categories csi and ctj have the same criterion of categorization  then n1 and n1 are nearly zero  and if the two categories have a different criterion of categorization  then n1 and n1 are nearly zero. the k-statistic method uses this principle to determine the similarity of categorization criteria. 

in the k-statistic method  we calculate the probability p  
　　1  remember that categorization in a directory is determined using the nodal structure of the categorization hierarchy. 

1 	al and data integration 

determination of pairs of similar categories 
the relationship between the two categorization criteria is examined from top to bottom. this algorithm is shown in figure 1. first  the most general categories in the two categorization hierarchies are compared using the k-statistic. if the comparison confirms that the two categories are similar  then the algorithm outputs this pair of categories. at the same time  the algorithm generates all possible pairs of their children categories. it generates two lists of categories each of which is a list of the confirmed category and its children categories. then  the algorithm picks one category from each list and makes a pair  except for the original pair. this new pair is then evaluated recursively using the k-statistic method. when a similar pair is not generated  the algorithm outputs the pairs of similar concepts between the two categorization hierarchies. they are used as mapping rules from the source directory to the target directory1. 
　this top-down comparison approach attempts to reduce the exploration space  using the structure of both directories as a guide. assuming that similar categories include similar subcategories  we can skip the combination of categories which 
　　1 the rules do not guarantee the consistency of the mappings  because category hierarchies have the possibility of inconsistency with regard to similar relationships. 
figure 1: algorithm to determine similar category pair. 
is likely unnecessary1. this is another benefit of using the ''as is  hierarchy  in contrast to the flattening approach. 
1 	application policy of rules 
since the proposed method uses categorization similarity  if a category in the source internet directory does not have a similar category in the target directory  then those documents cannot be categorized in the target internet directory. in order to avoid this problem  we once again use the categorization hierarchy. if the system cannot find a similar category pair for the category containing the document  it applies the rule generated for the parent category instead. 
　　1 this assumption may sometimes be too strong  e.g.  a child category of a category is not so relevant  whereas its child category  a grandchild category of the original category  is relevant. in such cases  we should relax this constraint when exploring future candidates. 

al and data integration 	1 

1 	computational complexity 
1 experiments using internet directories 
1 	experimental settings 
in order to evaluate the proposed algorithm  we conducted experiments using data collected from the yahoo!  yahoo!  1  and google  google  1 internet directories. the data was collected in the fall of 1. in order to compare the proposed method to that in  agrawal and srikant  1   we selected the same locations in yahoo! and google for the experimental data. the locations are as follows: 
  yahoo! : recreation / automotive google : recreation / autos 
  yahoo! : entertainment / movies and film google : arts / movies 
  yahoo! : recreation / outdoors google : recreation / outdoors 
　　1 since the data in google is constructed by the data in dmoz  dmoz  1   we collected data through dmoz. 
1 
  yahoo! : arts / visual-arts / photography google : arts /photography 
  yahoo! : computers and internet / software google : computers / software 
　table 1 shows the numbers of categories  the links in each internet directory and the links included in both internet directories. links are considered to be the same when the urls in both directories are identical. 
　we conducted ten-fold cross validations for the shared links. the shared links were divided into ten data sets; nine of these sets were used to construct rules  and the remaining set was used for testing. ten experiments were conducted for each data set  and the average accuracy is shown in the results. in order to compare our proposed method to the e-nb approach  the classifiers are assumed to correctly assign documents when the document is categorized cither in the same category as the test data or in the parent categories of the test data. e-nb constructs classifiers for only the first-level categories in the experimental domain  whereas the proposed method uses all of the categories from top to bottom. the significance level for the k-statistic was set at 1%. 
1 	experimental results 
the experimental results are shown in tables 1 and 1. table 1 shows the results obtained using yahoo! as the source internet directory and google as the target internet directory  and table 1 shows the results obtained using google as the source internet directory and yahoo! as the target internet directory. for comparison  these tables also include the results of  agrawal and srikant  1 . e-nb denotes the method of  agrawal and srikant  1  and sbi denotes the similarity-based integration method that is proposed in this paper. the data obtained for the proposed method and that presented in  agrawal and srikant  1  are not truly comparable because the collection date is different1. 
　the proposed algorithm did well compared to e-nb  performing more than 1% better in accuracy on the averages. in the movies domain  the proposed algorithm performs much better in accuracy than e-nb. one reason for this is that the pages related to movies contain various words that indicate numerous movie settings  making classification using wordbased systems difficult. on the other hand  in the outdoors domain  performance is similar for both methods because the 
　　1 in addition  differences may have occurred due to data selection. for example  yahoo! has links that use   the at mark . the treatment of such links was not discussed in  agrawal and srikant  1 . in the present study  we did not use such links. 
al and data integration 


table 1: results of yahoo! as the source internet directory and google as the target internet directory. 

table 1: results of google as the source internet directory and yahoo! as the target internet directory. 
outdoors domain treats pages using special outdoors-related words  and no classification method for the outdoors domain has been established for human readers. 
　as mentioned earlier  in the experiments described in  agrawal and srikant  1   the classifiers induced by the system have the ability to classify the documents into only the first-level categories of the test domain in the target internet directory. the proposed classifiers can classify the documents into sub-categories as well. for example  we used 1 categories for document assignment in the movies domain of yahoo! as the source internet directory and google as the target internet directory  whereas their system used only 1 categories. therefore  the classifiers obtained by the proposed method are more reliable and useful than those obtained by other methods. 
next  we compare our method with glue  doan et al  
1 . the basic steps of glue are as follows. first  the user trains learners for each concept for target taxonomies. learners can be a combination of different strategies like name- or contents-based learning. then  they determine that the source concept and target concept are similar  if the application of learners for the source concept yields good enough. finally  the system applies the relaxation labeling method for similar concept pairs. the method does not use the hierarchical structures in learning very well  and relies mainly on the performance of the learning method  namely nb. on the other hand  our method does use hierarchical structures in learning very well. so  we do not need a semantical analysis in learning. they report an accuracy of 1% which is equivalent to our results  but they use only a few categories  i.e.  1  while we use 1 categories. we can say from both theoretical and practical viewpoints that our method is more appropriate in learning for large hierarchical structures. 
1 	conclusions 
in this paper  a statistical-based technique was proposed for integrating multiple internet directories by determining the relationship between these directories. the proposed method uses the k-statistics to find similar category pairs  and transfers the document categorization from a category in the source internet directory to a similar category in the target internet directory. the proposed method has an advantage in document treatment in that it relies on the category structure only  and not on words or word similarity in a document. the performance of the proposed method was tested using actual internet directories  and the results of these tests show that the performance of the proposed method was more than 1% better in accuracy than that of previous methods  although the number of categories were by far larger for our proposed method. in addition  our problem modeling is more general than the other models in terms of assignment documents on intermediate categories. from this  we can conclude our approach shows great promise in comparison to systems employing nb  such as e-nb  agrawal and srikant  1   glue  doan et ai.   1   and so on. 
　although the present results are encouraging  much has yet to be done. the limitation of the proposed method is that this method is based on the existence of shared links. in other words  the proposed method is less reliable if there are fewer shared links. to improve our proposed method  various methods might be used to obtain semantic information in order to increase the number of shared links  e.g.  to regard similar pages as the same links. another option for this problem might be to combine semantic information or other information about the documents. if we could a establish good combination of our proposed method and such information  it is possible that we could greatly improve our method. moreover  the present method can find only one-toone mapping rules. if the system is able to find one-to-many or many-to-many mappings  it would work more correctly in categorization. for the development of these mappings  we might invent probabilistic mapping representations and also introduce a subsumption technique  stuckenschmidt  1 . finally  the proposed method should be expanded so that it can apply to more than three concept hierarchies. in such a case  despite the conflict between several concept hierarchies  we would expect more information to be obtained. the aforementioned tasks for improvement will be investigated in future studies. 
