 
we introduce a logical formalism of irreflexivc causal production relations that possesses both a standard monotonic semantics  and a natural nonmonotonic semantics. the formalism is shown to provide a complete characterization for the causal reasoning behind causal theories from  mccain and turner  1 . it is shown also that any causal relation is reducible to its horn sub-relation with respect to the nonmonotonic semantics. we describe also a general correspondence between causal relations and abductive systems  which shows  in effect  that causal relations allow to express abductive reasoning. the results of the study seem to suggest causal production relations as a viable general framework for nonmonotonic reasoning. 
1 introduction 
causal theories have been introduced in  mccain and turner  
1  as a nonmonotonic formalism that provides a natural solution for both the frame and ramification problem in reasoning about actions  see  giunchiglia el al  1  for a detailed exposition . a causal theory is a set of causal rules a- b that express a kind of a causal relation among propositions. the nonmonotonic semantics of such theories is determined by causally explained interpretations  namely the interpretations that arc both closed with respect to the causal rules and such that every fact holding in them is caused. 
　the above fonnalism has been defined semantically  and the main aim of our study consists in laying down its logical foundations. as we will show  such foundations can be built in the framework of an inference system for causal rules that we will call causal production relations. the logical origins of the latter are in input/output logics  makinson and der torre  1   but we will supply them with a natural nonmonotonic semantics allowing to represent significant parts of nonmonotonic reasoning. thus  the main result of the present study is that causal production relations completely characterize the inference rules for causal conditionals that preserve the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories. it will be shown also that any causal theory is reducible with respect to this semantics to a determinate causal theory that contain only horn causal rules with literals in heads. 
the importance of determinate theories lies in the fact that  modulo some mild finiteness restrictions  the explained interpretations of such a theory are precisely the interpretations of its classical completion  see  mccain and turner  1  . consequently  the nonmonotonic consequences of such theories are obtainable by the use of classical inference tools  such as the causal calculator  described in  giunchiglia et al. 1  . 
　finally  we will describe a relationship between causal relations and abductive reasoning. as we will see  the latter will be representable via a special kind of causal relations called abductive causal relations. this will serve as yet another justification for our general claim that causal production relations could be used as a general-purpose formalism for nonmonotonic reasoning  a viable alternative to other nonmonotonic formalisms  such as default logic . 
1 causal production relations 
we will assume that our language is an ordinary propositional language with the classical connectives and constants {a  v  -   -   t  f}. in addition  t= and th will denote  respectively  the classical entailment and the associated logical closure operator. 
a causal rule is a rule of the form a =  b  where a and 
b arc classical propositions. informally  such a rule says that  whenever a holds  b is caused. the following definition describes an inference system for causal rules that will be shown to be adequate  and complete  for causal theories. actually  many of the postulates below  e.g.  and and or  have already been suggested in the literature  see  lifschitz  1; schwind  1  . 
definition 1. a causal production relation  or simply a causal relation  is a relation =  on the set of propositions satisfying the following conditions: 
 strengthening  if a i= b and b =  c  then a =  c; 
 weakening  if a =  b and b i=  1  then a =  c;  and  if a =  b and a =  c  then a= b/ c  
 or  	if a =  c and b =  c  then avb= c; 
 cut  if a =  b and a a b =  c  then a =  c; 
 truth  	t =  t; 
 falsity  	f= f. 
　though causal relations satisfy most of the rules for classical entailment  their distinctive feature is that they are irreflexive  that is  they do not satisfy the postulate a= a. actually  such relations correspond to a strongest kind of inputoutput logics from  makinson and der torre  1   basic input-output logics with reusable output  with the only distinction that causal relations satisfy also falsity. the latter restricts the universe of discourse to consistent theories1. 
　as a consequence of cut  any causal relation will already be transitive  that is  it will satisfy 

　however  transitivity is a weaker property than cut  since it does not imply the latter  see  makinson and der torre  1  . in addition  the material implications corresponding to the causal rules can be used as auxiliary assumptions in making derivations. this is a consequence of the following property that holds for causal relations: 
 as  if a=  d and c/  a-+b  =  d  then c =  d. 
 remark. the notion of a causal production sanctioned by the above postulates is atemporal. for example  the rule cannot be understood as saying that p and q jointly 
cause -q  afterwards  in a temporal sense; instead  by cut and falsity it implies   which means  in effect  that 
p aq cannot hold. speaking generally  'causally consistent' propositions cannot cause an effect incompatible with them. a representation of temporal and action domains in this formalism can be achieved  however  by adding explicit temporal arguments to propositions  just as in the classical logic  see  giunchiglia et ai  1  . 
　a constraint is a causal rule of the form  such constraints correspond to state constraints in action theories. now  any causal rule implies the corresponding constraint: 
 reduction  
　note  however  that the reverse entailment does not hold. actually  given the rest of the postulates  reduction can replace the cut postulate: 
lemma 1. cut is equivalent to reduction. 
　another important fact about causal relations is the following 'decomposition' of causal rules: 

but they play an important explanatory role in non-reflexive causal reasoning. namely  they say that  in any causally explained interpretation in which a holds  we can freely accept b  since it is self-explanatory in this context. accordingly  such rules could be called conditional abducibles. we will discuss the role of abducibles later as part of the general correspondence between causal and abductive reasoning1. 
   1  in fact  it has been shown in  bochman  1  that other  weaker input-output logics can also be given a semantics of the kind described in what follows. 
   1 note also that  under the general correspondence between causal inference and default logic  see  turner  1    such rules correspond to normal defaults in default logic. 
　now the above lemma says that any causal rule can be decomposed into a  non-causal  constraint and a conditional abducible. this decomposition neatly delineates two kinds of information conveyed by causal rules. one is a logical information that constraints the set of admissible models  while the other is an explanatory information describing what propositions are caused  explainable  in such models . 
　for a finite set u of propositions  will denote their conjunction. we will extend causal rules to rules having arbitrary 
sets of propositions as premises using the following 'compactness' recipe: for any set u  

　for a given causal relation =   we will denote by c u  the set of propositions caused by u  that is 

　the operator c will play much the same role as the usual derivability operator for consequence relations. it satisfies the following familiar properties: 

1 	monotonic semantics of causal inference 
we will describe now a monotonic semantics for causal relations. actually  it will be just a slight modification of the semantics given in  turner  1 . 
　a fully formal semantic interpretation of causal relations could be given in terms of possible worlds frames of the form  i w   where i is a propositional interpretation  while w is a set of propositional interpretations that contains i  see  turner  1  . in order to make our descriptions more transparent  however  we will identify such frames with pairs of theories of the form   where a is a world  maximal deductively closed set   while u is a deductively closed set included in a. such pairs will be called bitheories. clearly  any possible worlds frame  i  w  determines a certain bitheory  and vice versa  so all our definitions will admit a purely semantic reformulation. 
by a causal semantics we will mean a set of bitheories. 
the corresponding notion of validity for causal rules is given in the next definition. 

  a =  b is valid with respect to a causal semantics b if it holds in all bitheories from b. 
　we will denote by =b the set of all causal rules that are valid in a causal semantics b. it can be easily verified that this set is closed with respect to the postulates for causal relations  and hence we have 
   1 cf. a similar decomposition of causal rules in  thielschcr  1 . 
causality 



is a monotonic  logical  notion  and hence  unlike the nonmonotonic equivalence  it is preserved under addition of new causal rules. for example  though any causal theory is equivalent to a determinate one  they may give different results if we add some causal rules to them. 
　strongly equivalent theories are 'equivalent forever'  that is  they are interchangeable in any larger causal theory without changing the nonmonotonic semantics. consequently  strong equivalence can be seen as an equivalence with respect to the monotonic logic of causal theories. and the next result shows that this logic is precisely the logic of causal relations. 
theorem 1. two causal theories are strongly equivalent if and only if they are causally equivalent. 
　the above result  and its proof  has the same pattern as the corresponding results about strong equivalence of logic programs and default theories  see  lifsehitz et al.  1; turner  1  . 
　the above result implies  in effect  that causal relations are maximal inference relations that are adequate for reasoning with causal theories: any postulate that is not valid for causal relations can be 'falsified' by finding a suitable extension of two causal theories that would determine different causally explained interpretations  and hence would produce different nonmonotonic conclusions. 
1 	causation versus abduction 
causal inference has numerous connections with other nonmonotonic formalisms. thus   turner  1  describes the relations with circumscription  autoepistemic and default logic. in this section we will describe a correspondence between causal inference and abductive reasoning. in addition to specific results  this will give us a broader perspective on the representation capabilities of causal relations. 
　a general correspondence between abductive frameworks and input-output logics has been established in  bochman  1   based on the identification between the above notion 
causality 

of explainability and input-output derivability. by this correspondence  abducibles are representable by 'reflexive' propositions satisfying input-output rules a=  a  while abductive frameworks themselves correspond exactly to input-output logics satisfying an additional postulate of abduction  see below . by these results  input-output logics allow to give a syntax-independent representation of abductive reasoning. 
1 	the abductive subrelation 
we will begin with the following definitions: 
　causal inference in abductive causal relations is always mediated by abducibles. consequently  propositions caused by worlds are caused  in effect  by the abducibles that hold in these worlds: 
　the abductive subrelation of a causal relation preserves many properties of the latter. for example  both have the same constraints and abducibles. 
　recall that in causally explained interpretations any proposition is caused by other propositions  the latter are also caused by accepted propositions  and so on. clearly  if our 'causal resources' are limited  such a causal chain should stop somewhere. more exactly  it should reach abducible  selfexplanatory  propositions. this indicates that in many cases the nonmonotonic semantics associated with a causal theory should be determined by the corresponding abductive subrelation. below we will make this claim precise. 
definition 1. a causal relation will be called weakly abductive if it is nonmonotonically equivalent to its abductive subrelation. 
　the next definition will give us an important sufficient condition for weak abductivity. 
　the above definition describes a variant of a standard notion of well-foundedness with respect to the  transitive  causal order. it should be clear that any causal relation in a finite language should be well-founded. moreover  let us say that a causal relation is finitary if it is generated by some finite set of causal rules. then we have 
lemma 1. any finitary causal relation is well-founded. 
　finally  the next result shows that all such causal relations will be weakly abductive. 
theorem 1. any well-founded causal relation is weakly abductive. 
　it turns out that well-foundedness is not the only condition that is sufficient for weak abductivity. thus  adequately acyclic causal theories  see  mccain and turner  1  for a definition  are not in general well-founded  but they also satisfy this property. 
theorem 1. any adequately acyclic causal relation is weakly abductive. 
　the above results show that in many cases of interest  the nonmonotonic semantics of causal theories can also be computed using abduction. still  as a general conclusion  we can say that causal inference constitutes a proper generalization of abductive reasoning beyond the situations where facts are explainable by reference to a fixed set of self-explanatory abducibles. 
1 	conclusions and perspectives 
summing up the main results  we can argue that causal relations constitute a powerful formalism for nonmonotonic reasoning  especially suitable for representing action domains. it has been shown  in particular  that it gives an exact description of the logic underlying causal theories. we have seen also that it allows to give a syntax-independent representation of abductive reasoning. if we add to this also the natural correspondences with other nonmonotonic formalisms  such as default logic and circumscription  see  turner  1    we can safely conclude that causal inference covers a significant part of nonmonotonic reasoning. 
　viewed from this perspective  there is still much to be done in order to realize the opportunities created by the formalism. there are two kinds of problems that need to resolved in this respect. 
　the nonmonotonic semantics for causal theories is based on the principle of universal causation which is obviously very strong. the principle implies  for example  that if we have no causal rules for a certain proposition  it should be false in all explainable interpretations. as a result  adding a new propositional atom to the language makes any causal theory inconsistent  since we have no causal rules for it. this makes causal theories extremely sensitive to the underlying language in which they are formulated. one way out has been suggested in  lifschitz  1 ; it amounts to restricting the principle of universal causation to a particular subset of explainable propositions. this approach  however  is purely syntactical and hence retains language dependence. 
　more subtle  yet perceptible difficulties arise also in representing indeterminate situations in causal theories. thus  since any causal theory is reducible to a determinate theory  causal rules with disjunctive heads are ignored in the nonmonotonic semantics; more exactly  they are informative only 
to the extent that they imply corresponding non-causal constraints or horn rules. this does not mean  however  that we cannot represent indeterminate information in causal theories. actually  one of the main contributions of  mccain and turner  1  consisted in showing how we can do this quite naturally in common cases  see also  lin  1  . still  there is yet no systematic understanding whether and how an indeterminate information can be represented by horn causal rules. 
　a more general problem concerns the role and place of causal inference in general nonmonotonic reasoning. though the former covers many areas of nonmonotonic reasoning  it does not cover them all. thus  it does not seem suitable for solving the qualification problem in representing actions. speaking generally  causal reasoning appears to be independent of the kind of nonmonotonicity described by preferential inference from  kraus et ai  1 . this naturally suggests that the two kinds of nonmonotonic reasoning with conditionals could be combined into a single formalism  a grand uniform theory of nonmonotonic reasoning. actually  this idea is not new; it has been explored more than ten years ago in  geftner  1 . it remains to be seen whether current studies of causal reasoning can contribute to viability of such a general theory. 
acknowledgments. the author is grateful to vladimir lifschitz  hudson turner  david makinson and leendert van der torre  as well as to the anonymous referees  for their instructive comments and suggestions. 
