 
this paper reconsiders the notions of actual cause and explanation in functional causal models. we demonstrate that isomorphic causal models can generate intuitively different causal pronouncements. this occurs because psychological factors not represented in the model determine what criteria we use to determine causation. this partially explains the difficulty encountered in previous attempts to define actual cause. freed from trying fit all examples to match intuition directly  which is not possible using only the information in causal models   we provide definitions for causation matching the different causal criteria we intuitively apply. this formulation avoids difficulties associated with previous definitions  and allows a more refined discussion of what constitutes a cause in a given situation. the definitions of actual cause also allow for more refined formulations of explanation. 
1 introduction 
identifying an actual cause in a specific situation is a normal part of every day human reasoning. from the specifics of the situation  we sift through the events  identifying those that actually caused the event in question. this is different than general claims about causal tendencies. in fact  the causal nature of events can actually run counter to the general causal tendency of the variables. for example  buying a lottery ticket has the general tendency to decrease wealth. however  in certain circumstances  the numbers on the ticket correspond to the winning numbers   it can cause a significant increase wealth. people are able to make these situation dependent pronouncements fairly easily. 
모automating causal determinations has a number of applications  including natural language processing  diagnosis  and planning. unfortunately  formulating a successful notion of actual cause has proved elusive. previous attempts were often hindered by trying to embed them in formalisms that are not appropriate for modeling causality  see  pearl  1  chapter 1  for a discussion of these . recently  functional causal models  pearl  1  have proven to be an effective formalism for modeling causal relationships. there have been previous attempts to use functional causal models as a basis for defining actual cause  but they have been shown to suffer from serious defects of their own  hopkins & pearl  1 . in this paper  we identify  at least partially  why previous methods have failed  and provide new definitions that avoid many of their problems. these definitions allow for a more refined determination of actual causation. additionally  they provide a useful basis for producing explanations. 
1 review of causal models 
in this section we review the basic definitions from  pearl  1  that we will use. first we need some notation. upper case letters  e.g. x  y  z  represent variables. lower case letters  e.g. x  y  z  represent a particular value of the corresponding variable. bold face upper case letters  e.g. x  y  z  represent sets of variables  and bold face lower case letters  e.g. x  y  z  an instantiation of the corresponding variables. 
모a causal model is a triple  u  v  f  where u is the set of background  or exogenous  variables  i.e. their values are determined outside the model   and v is the set of endogenous variables  i.e. those whose value is determined by model v a r i a b l e s   . i s a set of functions where fx maps from   together  for any set-
ting of the background variables  t determines the values of all variables in v. the parents of a variable x are the variables that directly influence the value of x  i.e. the set of variables that is non-trivial in fx . the causal diagram of a model is a directed graph with vertices u u v where there is an edge from vertex x to vertex y iff x is a parent of y in the model. we will restrict our attention to models with acyclic causal diagrams. a submodel of causal model m under intervention x = x is a causal model 
where 	. this allows us to talk about what would have happened if x had been x. we will write y x  u  to mean the value that y takes on in the submodel mx in context u = u. for a propositional formula 뷍  defined over primitives of the form represents the value of the formula when the primitives are evaluated in model mx in context u. 
1 previous work 
formulating the notion of cause has been a topic of philosophic debate for many years. unfortunately  all of the philo-

sophical works of which we are aware either suffer from serious problems  or are not precise enough to be falsifiable  see  halpem & pearl  1a  for a review of some of these problems . 
모there have been at least two previous attempts to formulate actual cause in functional causal models. the first was the causal beam approach  pearl  1 . this notion of actual cause seemed to be too restrictive  classifying certain events as noncauses that intuitively clearly should have been causes  see for example the critique in  halpern & pearl  1a  . the other  halpem & pearl  1a   which we will call asc for alternate situation strong cause  tried to remedy those problems  but introduced several others.  hopkins & pearl  1  provides a thorough analysis of its problems. 
1 why so hard  
the many formulations encountered  and the problems they exhibit beg the question: why is ascribing cause so difficult to formalize  consider the following example from  halpem & pearl  1a : two arsonists light matches at opposite ends of the forrest. both start fires  and the forrest burns down. either arsonist alone was sufficient to burn down the forrest. 
now  we ask whether arsonist 1 lighting his match caused the forrest to burn down. clearly it did. the reason being that it was sufficient to burn it down  and participated in the actual causal process that brought it about. 
모consider another example: a prisoner is scheduled for execution. the execution proceeds as follows: the executioner selects a gun from among several  which may or may not have a bullet in the chamber. the prisoner is given the option of death by lethal injection  which is always fatal   or face execution by gunshot. if the prisoner selects gunshot  the executioner fires the weapon. if the weapon he selected had a bullet  it kills the prisoner. if not  the execution fails and the prisoner goes free. in the situation we consider  the prisoner chooses execution by lethal injection. as it turns out  the selected gun was loaded so the prisoner would have died even if he had he chosen gunshot. 
모now  we ask if the prisoner's choice of execution method caused his death. obviously it did not. the reason being that in this circumstance  regardless of his choice  he would still die. that is  his choice had no impact on the outcome. 
모surprisingly  the obvious causal models in these two examples are in fact isomorphic as are the specific situations considered. the effect  forrest burns down  -  death  occurs in all but one possible instantiation of its direct causes  neither arsonist lights their match  -  execution by gunshot is selected and the gun is not loaded  and both sufficient conditions occurred in the situation under consideration. in other words  the information that rendered one a cause and the other a noncause is not contained in the causal model  or the specific situation. we achieved intuitively different results because we tested different notions of cause. in the forest fire example  we tested the ability to produce the fire  i.e. whether it was capable of bringing about the result. in the second example  we tested the consequentiality of the choice of execution methods  i.e. whether an alternate decision would produce a different result. the choice of what test to apply seems to be based on psychological factors outside of the causal model. 
모we believe that the difficulties associated with previous definitions are at least in part due to the fact that they failed to distinguish between different notions of cause.1 in fact  we would argue that like many problems in philosophy  one reason cause eludes satisfactory definition is because the intuitive concept is fundamentally imprecise. what criteria to apply is often a subjective decision  witnessed by the ease with which one can often convince others that an alternate criteria is the appropriate one. for example  one may argue that it is inappropriate to say that arsonist 1 caused the fire since regardless of his action  the fire would still have occurred. 
모while the choice of criteria for determining cause is imprecise and subject to factors not representable in a functional causal model  the same is not true once a criteria has been chosen. each criteria is precise and completely decidable based on the causal model and the state of its variables. formulating and illustrating appropriate definitions of these criteria is the focus of the next section. 
1 a new proposal 
in this section  we introduce basic definitions which we then compose to form criteria for evaluating causal relationships. as there are several ways in which an event may be considered a cause  we provide definitions for the different aspects. we believe that all causal tests are based on two basic ideas  which are related to   though distinct from  necessity and sufficiency. by combining these two criteria we can produce the different criteria used for making causal judgments. 
모first  we need some background and auxiliary definitions. foremost among them is what we allow to be causes and effects. 
definition 1 an instantiation x  of endogenous variables x is an event in context u if x u  = x. a propositional formula 뷍 defined over the endogenous variables of the model is an effect in context u if 뷍 u . 
any potential cause of an effect must be an event. note that we force events and effects to be true in the situation being considered. this is merely a convenience meant to simplify subsequent definitions. 
모since we are concerned with determining cause in a particular context  the causal diagram of a model is not very informative. a variable x that in general is necessary to determine the value of another variable y  and hence has an edge from x to y in the diagram   may become irrelevant in a particular context. that is  a particular value of the background variables u may make the value of y unresponsive to the value of a . this observation motivates the following definition: 
definition 1 the context diagram of causal world m u  is the directed graph whose vertices are the endogenous variables of m  and includes each edge  x  y  where the function fy is nontrivial in x when the background variables are 
fixed to u. 
the context diagram simplifies reasoning about causal relationships in a specific context. 
모모1   hall  1  makes a similar argument  although the details differ from ours. 

causality 	1 

another preliminary notion we will need is sufficiency.1 
definition 1 an event x is sufficient to cause effect 뷍 in context u if for all instantiations w of the nondescendants w of x in the context diagram of 
note that it must hold only when the nondescendants are manipulated. descendants are excluded from manipulation since we believe that the values they take on  including interplay between them  are an integral component of determining causation. allowing them to be manipulated would upset and skew that process. 
모sufficiency is not really strong enough for our purposes. for example  consider this example from  hall  1 : 
suzy and billy both pick up rocks and throw them at a bottle. suzy's rock gets there first  shattering the bottle. since both throws are perfectly accurate  billy's would have shattered the bottle had it not been preempted by suzy's throw 

figure 1: rock throwing example 
figure 1 shows the causal diagram of a model of the story  the background variables  as well as the functional relationship between variables should be obvious in this story  as well as the others  so will not be explicated . bt  st  represents billy  suzy  throwing bh  sh  represents billy's  suzy's  rock hitting the bottle  and bs stands for the bottle shattering. billy throwing is sufficient to cause the bottle to shatter  but it doesn't actually participate in the causal process that made the bottle shatter. suzy's action preempted billy's. we expect not only sufficiency of the cause  but that in some sense  the event actually participates in the causal process. defining this notion has been one of the primary difficulties in talking about actual cause. the following two definitions formalize these notions in a way that avoids the problems associated with previous approaches. 
definition 1 let z be the children of x in the context diagram of u  and let y be some non-empty subset of z. let w be the intersection of the descendants of x  including x  and the ancestors of y  excluding y . then event xy is a child of event x in context 
a child event can be thought of as a next step in an unfolding causal process. the criteria that is merely to enforce the intuition that before a variable takes on a value  its direct 
모모1 note that this definition differs from the definition for sufficiency presented in  pearl  1 . that definition was used for a different purpose  and is not appropriate in this context. it is more closely related to  although distinct from the notion of sustenance  pearl  1 . 
causes must be fixed. that is  a new value can not be added  if the relevant parents have not already been included. 
definition 1 an event x is a strongly sufficient cause of effect 뷍 in context u if either of the following conditions hold: 
  for all instantiations 
  x is a sufficient cause of 뷍 and there exists some child event yof x which is a strongly sufficient cause of 뷍 in context u 
effectively  what we require is that the event be sufficient for the effect  and that as the causal process progresses from the event  the sufficiency is maintained. this prevents events that arc preempted from being strongly sufficient. for example  w h i l e i s sufficient for the only child event  is not  so the event is not strongly sufficient. suzy throwing  on the other hand  is strongly sufficient  witnessed by the sequence 
모strong sufficiency is the first of the two primary notions used to evaluate causality in specific situations. in fact  strong sufficiency by itself corresponds to one of the primary notions of causation. strong sufficiency corresponds to our intuitions about physical causality. the cause sets in motion a chain of events capable of bringing about the effect. intuitively  we expect causation to be transitive. if x causes y and y causes z  we expect x to cause z.1 it is not hard to see that strong sufficiency meets that expectation. in fact  strong sufficiency turns out to be the only transitive relation among our definitions of cause. 
모the other primary consideration when testing actual causality is the notion of consequentiality. in addition to participating in the causal process  we often require that an event be in some sense consequential in order to be considered a cause. that consideration motivates the following definition. 
definition 1 let z be the nondescendants of x in the context diagram of u. then  an event x is potentially consequential with respect to effect 뷍 in context u if for some instantiations  . event x is actually consequential with respect to effect 뷍 if for some instantiation 
like strong sufficiency  actual conscquentiality alone is a common criteria for causation. for example  in the execution example from section 1 the choice of lethal injection was not considered a cause of his death precisely because it was not consequential. if instead the gun had not been loaded  which would make the decision consequential  we would consider it a cause. note that a consequential event necessarily participates in the actual causal process. that is  for every actually consequential event  there is a minimal strongly sufficient event that contains some member of the consequential event. 
모potential consequentiality on the other hand is not of itself enough for an event to be considered a cause. however  combining it with strong sufficiency produces a very common causal criteria. 
모모1  in fact  this intuition is so strong that some theories of causation start with the transitivity of cause as a starting point  lewis  1 . 

test strong sufficiency test consequentiality 
	actual 	| potential | 	no yes strong sustaining strongly sufficient no consequential --table 1: different types of actual cause can be tested by combining tests for strong sufficiency and consequentiality. 
definition 1 an event x sustains effect 뷍 in context u if 'x is strongly sufficient and potentially consequential for 뷍. 
the notion of sustenance defined here is a modified version of the one that appeared in  pearl  1 . it differs in two ways. first  it requires strong sufficiency as opposed to merely sufficiency. second  it fixes the variables w  against which x must be tested  while the previous definition has w as one of the parameters. 
모sustenance is a very commonly applied criteria for causation. most of the examples in  halpern & pearl  1a  which were deemed causes correspond to our notion of sustaining cause. in the forrest fire example in section 1  arsonist 1 was considered a cause of the fire because it sustained the forrest fire. 
a more restrictive causal criteria is also sometimes useful. 
definition 1 an event x is a strong cause of 뷍 in context u if x is a strongly sufficient and actually consequential cause of 
a strong cause can be thought of as a complete explication of why the effect occurred. 
모often we talk about an event helping to cause an event even though it is neither consequential nor sufficient. it is instead part of some cause. that consideration motivates the following definition. 
definition 1 an event xy  y may be empty  is a contributory cause of effect 뷍 in context u if x is potentially consequential  and for some event z  xz is a minimal sustaining cause of 뷍. 
contributory causation is the closest in spirit to the asc definition. if we insist on minimality  it reduces to singletons just as that definition does. additionally  in all but one example included in  halpern & pearl  1a   contributory causation matches the pronouncements of the asc definition. we consider that example among others in the next section. 
1 	examples 
the single example presented in  halpern & pearl  1a  where the asc definition differs from our definition of contributory causation comes from the following story  along with some commentary   quoted from  hall  1 : 
you are standing at a switch in the railroad tracks. 
here comes the train: if you flip the switch  you'll send the train down the left-hand track; if you leave where it is  the train will follow the righthand track. either way  the train will arrive at the same point  since the tracks reconverge up ahead. your action is not among the causes of this arrival; it merely helps to determine how the arrival is brought about  namely  via the left-hand track  or via the right-hand track . 
two models which produced different causal pronouncements were given  demonstrating the impact that model choice has on the determination of causation. the model that classified it as a cause is the one we arc interested in. figure 1 shows the model. f represents the state of the switch  lt  rt  whether the train goes down the left  right  track  and a represents whether the train arrives. the justification given was 

figure 1: a possible model for the train story 
that under normal circumstances  we may not call it a cause  but if something abnormal were to happen  for example  one of the tracks malfunctions  or is destroyed  then the action would be a cause. our new definitions say that flipping the switch is a strongly sufficient cause   in the words of hall it ''helps to determine how the arrival is brought about    but it is not even potentially consequential  so is not a contributory cause. this seems a more satisfactory result. 
모unlike the asc definition  these definitions do not always reduce to singleton causes even if minimality is enforced. additionally  the different criteria produce causes that correspond to different ways that people think about cause. 
모for example  consider a situation where 1 people vote regarding a ballot measure. the votes are tallied  and the measure passes if 1 or more vote for it. the associated diagram appears in figure 1. suppose that 1 vote for the measure  and 1 votes against. according to the asc definition  each in-

figure 1: a voting example. the v1 correspond to the votes cast  t the vote tally  and p whether the measure passed. 
dividual who votes for the measure is an actual cause of the measure passing. in the causal beam approach  nothing qualifies as a cause of the measure passing. in this approach  it depends what type of cause we arc considering. 
모three votes for the measure constitute a strong cause of the measure passing  while two do not. this corresponds to our notion that a majority of the votes is required to cause it to pass. 
모two votes for the measure constitute a consequential cause. changing those votes to vote against the measure would make 

causality 	1 

the measure fail. this corresponds to the way we often talk about causes in elections. often election outcomes are attributed to the voting behavior of some minority of the electorate  in u.s. politics these include  reagan democrats    soccer moms    angry white men     african americans   etc . while they are far from sufficient to win an election  we say that they caused the election result because if they had voted significantly differently the outcome of the election would have been different. on the other hand  most people understand that in the vast majority of elections their single vote did not cause the outcome. this is reflected in our definitions by the fact that none of the criteria yield a single voter as a cause in this situation. a single vote for the measure is a contributory cause however  as one would expect. 
    halpern & pearl  1a  provides a number of examples that have proved problematic for other methods. as most of the examples correspond either to issues of sustenance or consequentially1  and with the exception of the train example considered above  all of the positive examples are contributory causes  and the negative examples are not   we will not review them all here. we would like to revisit one example that was considered troublesome. the first version of the story is as follows: a machine severed fred's finger while he was at work. he was rushed to the hospital and it was reattached. a month later his finger worked just as before. we would of course not consider getting his finger cut off a cause of it being fully function later  because it is not consequential . now  suppose we add another component to the story: it is possible that larry the loanshark may be waiting outside for fred  so that he can cut off his finger to make an example of him for not paying his loan promptly. if larry cuts off the finger  he will destroy it so that it can not be reattached. if fred severs his finger at the factory  he will be rushed to the hospital  so larry will not have an opportunity to do it himself. the causal diagram appears in figure 1. now  consider the 

figure 1: finger severing example. fs represents severing his finger. ll represents whether larry is lurking. lc represents whether larry cuts off his finger and ff represents whether his finger is fully functional 
situation in which larry turns out not to be waiting outside  and fred does sever his finger. was fred cutting his finger off a cause of his finger being fully functional the next month  according to the asc definition it is. this was considered disturbing because adding a provision for a contingency that did not occur changed the the event from noncause to cause. 
1 ln fact  most of the difficult examples play off of the conflict-
ing interpretation of cause between sustenance and consequential ity. that is  the event in question is typically either consequential or sustaining  but not both. 
in light of our new definitions  we do not see that particular consideration as a problem. according to our definition  it again depends on what you are looking for. it is sustaining  but it is not consequential. typically  when we are testing if an event caused something to remain unchanged  we are looking for a consequential cause. that is clearly the case in this example. however  it is still reasonable to say that cutting off his finger at the factory was a sustaining cause  because that event makes certain the effect  regardless of what larry does or does not do. 
모our definitions also handle correctly the examples in  hopkins & pearl  1  avoiding the problems of asc  but because of space limitations we will not review them all here. we will consider a single example of the problem to demonstrate how these definitions avoid it. consider the following story: before an execution  the captain loads one of the guns of the two members of his firing squad  putting a blank in the other gun. both gunmen then fire simultaneously and the prisoner dies. in the current situation  the captain put the bullet in the gun of gunman 1  and both men shoot. the model consists of the loader  and the two gunmen as direct causes of the the variable representing whether the prisoner is alive. now  we ask if gunman 1 shooting caused the prisoner's death. according to the asc definition  it did. gunman 1 did not cause the prisoner's death according to any of our definitions of cause. it is clearly not consequential  nor sufficient  so it can not be a cause. it is not a contributory cause either because it is not a member of any minimal sufficient cause. according to these definitions  gunman 1 shooting is a consequential cause  gunman 1 shooting and the captain loading his gun is a strong cause  and gunman 1 shooting and the captain loading his gun are both contributory causes. 
1 	explanations 
if we have a probability distribution quantifying our uncertainty about what context will actually occur  we can use that distribution  combined with our model to produce explanations for an observed effect. 
causation forms an integral part of evaluating explanations 
 see  chajewska & halpern  1; pearl  1; halpern & pearl  1b  for critiques of methods that ignore causal considerations when producing causes . in spirit  we agree with the intuitive notion of explanation put forth in  halpern & pearl  1b . that is  an explanation is fundamentally just a hypothesized event which if true would be a possible cause of the observed phenomenon. our new view of actual causation  however  makes the particulars somewhat different. our definitions of actual cause form the basis for evaluating possible explanations. we allow any instantiation of endogenous variables to be an explanation and compare them based on how well they explain the effect. according to our view  there are different types of explanation  just as there are different types of causes. which type of explanation to choose depends on its intended purpose. this is in contrast to the approach using asc as the basis for causal explanation. we believe that this approach provides more flexibility and is more general than asc based explanations. 
by way of example  consider the following situation: we 


table 1: posteriors and explanatory power for possible explanations in the circuit example according to asc definition. 
have a circuit consisting of a single 1 input parity gate  with inputs x1  x1 and x1  and output y  i.e. y - 1 when an odd number of the inputs arc 1 . each input has an associated background variable  independent of the others  where 
so  typically 
모모모모모모now  suppose that we observe that and we want an explanation in terms of the a  vari-
ables. the first question is what constitutes an explanation  or even a partial explanation in the asc definition . according to the asc based definition  the only possible explanations  or partial explanations  are singletons.1 now  how can we compare between them  the asc approach provides three measures of the quality of an instantiation x as an explanation of effect 뷍 in light of evidence e  which must entail 뷍 . the first  named goodness is pr x causes 뷍|xe .'' the second  the posterior probability is the third  explanatory power is   the goodness of all explanations in this example are 1. also  the explanatory 
power   since every instantiation is a weak cause according to the asc definition. table 1 shows the explanatory power and posterior probability of the different possible explanations. it is not clear how to choose between them in this case. one thing to notice about this example is that every variable is consequential in every context  so notions of consequential causation  or by extension  contributory causation  become less interesting. we would argue that in this case  what we are really interested in is sustenance. our definitions allow that to be considered easily. for a particular instantiation we can calculate the probabilities pr x sustains   pr x strongly causes 뷍|e   
pr x is a consequential cause of i from the model and the probability distribution over the background variables. for a particular causal criteria  the probability that x is a cause of 뷍 given e using criteria c is just 

the probability of causation can then be used as the measure of explanation quality. in our circuit example  for example  
.1  which is the maximal probability for sustenance. this explanation  which is not allowed in the asc version  seems more satisfying than any of the single variable explanations. 
   1 notc that this is not always the case. this example was specifically crafted to exhibit such behavior. 
   1  in the asc definition of explanation  it  causes  would mean is a weak cause. we write it in a general form  because these measures are applicable to the new method as well 
모this is not to say that the measures used in  halpern & pearl  1 b  are not useful. in fact they can be very useful. 
we simply note that our definitions allow a further analysis that is useful in other situations. they prove especially useful when we are looking for a sufficient or sustaining explanations. because our definitions can handle different notions of cause  the explanations they produce can be more informative than the explanations formed when using the methods in  halpern & pearl  1b   where they are restricted to one weak form of cause. 
1 	conclusion 
we demonstrated that the intuitive choice of causal criteria is subjective  and is influenced psychological factors not rcpresentable in a causal model. the criteria  once chosen however can be evaluated from the information contained in the causal model. we presented new criteria covering the different notions of causation. fundamental among these is the definition of strong sufficiency  which provides a simple and intuitively satisfying definition for actually participating in the active causal process that generated the effect. these definitions avoid the problems of previous attempts  and allow for a more refined discussion of actual causality. additionally  they provide a foundation for evaluating explanations  which proves to be more satisfactory than previous attempts to use functional causal models for explanation. 
acknowledgment 
this work has been partially supported by muri grant 
n1-1 
