 
the evolution of description logics  dls  and propositional dynamic logics produced a hierarchy of decidable logics with multiple maximal elements. it would be desirable to combine different maximal logics into one super-logic  but then inference may turn out to be undecidable. then it is important to characterize the decidability threshold for these logics. in this perspective  an interesting open question pointed out by sattler and vardi  sattler and vardi  1  is whether inference in a hybrid μ-calculus with restricted forms of graded modalities is decidable  and which complexity class it belongs to. in this paper we prove that this calculus and the corresponding  are undecidable. second  we prove undecidability results for logics that support both a transitive closure operator over roles and number restrictions. 
keywords: description logics  hybrid μ-calculus  regular roles  graded modalities  number restrictions. 
1 	introduction 
description logics are popular knowledge representation languages  with important applications to the semantic web  software engineering and heterogeneous databases. description logics  dls  are strictly related to propositional dynamic logics  pdls   that play an important role in software and protocol verification based on automated reasoning techniques. the analogies between the two frameworks are so tight that 
dls and pdls can be regarded as syntactic variants of the same family of logics. 
　the simplest dls and pdls can be easily embedded into a fragment of l1  that is  first-order logic with two variables. application requirements led researchers to extend these basic logics with more expressive constructs  such as fixpoints  nominals  that represent individuals in dls   transitive closure operators similar to kleene's star  and equivalents of generalized quantification called number restrictions  or counting  in dls and graded modalities in pdls. at the same time  applications require these logics to be decidable and have acceptable computational complexity. 
　the evolution of dls and pdls produced-and keeps on extending-a hierarchy of decidable logics with multiple maximal elements. currently  two of the maximal decidable dls are   featuring fixpoints and nomi-
nals  sattler and vardi  1; bonatti  1   and  featuring fixpoints and number restrictions . the corresponding pdls are the hybrid  and the 
with graded modalities  respectively  sattler and vardi  1; kupferman et al  1 . 
　of course  it would be desirable to combine the features of different maximal logics into one super-logic. a combination o f a n d w o u l d help-for example-in 
describing the functional behavior of e-services  cf.  bonatti  1  and related comments on svc x  in section 1 . however  in the super-logic inference may turn out to be too complex  and in particular undecidable. 
　a related  interesting open question pointed out by sattler and vardi  sattler and vardi  1  is whether inference in the union of the hybrid and the with graded modalities is decidable  and which complexity class it belongs to. more precisely  sattler and vardi mention a slightly simpler logic: a hybrid  with determin-
istic programs. deterministic programs are a special case of graded modality  whose counterpart in dls arc features  i.e.  functional roles. the dl corresponding to the hybrid  with deterministic programs is called 
   the main contribution of this paper is a negative answer to the above open question. we prove that the hybrid calculus with deterministic programs and the correponding  are undecidable. for this purpose  we use a 
   novel approach based on nested fixpoints. 
　the second contribution is an undecidability result for logics that support number restrictions together with regular role expressions. these results show that transitive role closure can be more expressive than fixpoints in some contexts. 
　in the next section we recall the basic notions about dls and t h e s e c t i o n 1 is devoted to the undecidability proof for and the hybrid with deterministic programs. section 1 briefly illustrates the undecidability result for the combination of transitive closure and number restrictions. finally  section 1 concludes the paper with a brief discussion of the results and some directions for further research. some proofs will be omitted because of space limitations. 

description logics 	1 

1 	preliminaries 
the vocabulary of the description logics we deal with in this paper is specified by the following disjoint sets of symbols: a set of atomic concepts at  a set of nominals nom  a set of concept variables var  and a set of atomic roles ar. 
　the set of roles is the smallest superset of ar such that if  are roles then and r* are roles. 
   let r be a role  a  n. the set of concepts is the smallest superset of at u nom u var such that if c  c   d 
arc concepts  then are concepts  provided that all the free occurrences of a  in c  lie within the scope of an even number of operators -  and 
semantics is based on interpretations of the form x = 
     1  where is a set of individuals and i is an interpretation function mapping each a at u nom onto some a1   and each r ar onto some 
furthermore  nominals must be mapped onto singletons. a valuation o n i i s a f u n c t i o n . a s usual  denotes the valuation such that and for all y the meaning of inverse roles is 

while  denotes the reflexive transitive closure of r1. 
　the meaning of compound concepts is determined by pairs we denote the cardinality of a set s. 
subscript p will be sometimes omitted when it applies to a closed concept  i.e.  such that all variables are bound by p . 
   other standard constructs can be derived from the above concepts. we use the symbol to define abbreviations. 
all free occurrences of x with -x . 
　the syntactic restrictions on concept variables make every concept c monotonic with respect to its free variables. 
then j denote exactly the least and the greatest fixpoints of c   x     that can be characterized with the standard iterative constructions. 
　an assertion has the form  where c and d are closed concepts. it is satisfied by x  equivalently  x is a model of the assertion  iff . a tbox is a finite set of assertions. a tbox is satisfiable iff it has a model  that is  an x that satisfies all the assertions in the tbox. symmetric pairs of assertions such as will be abbreviated by c if every model of t satisfies 
　the description logic acc is a fragment of the logic described so far  supporting only atomic roles   plus all the constructs definable from these . 	in alc  
　by convention  the name of a description logic contains acc if the logic extends acc. moreover  the name contains an x if inverse roles are supported  an o if nom a q if number restrictions are supported  and a v if fixpoints are supported. for example  accio denotes the extension of acc with inverse roles and nominals. a subscript / indicates that roles may be declared to be functions. note that such assertions are a special case of number restriction  as they can be expressed with axioms of the form 
 if the logic supports role operators besides inversion  we list those operators as superscripts. for example  denotes the extension of accx with role union and reflexive transitive closure. 
   description logics can be regarded as variants of the propositional  individuals correspond to possible worlds and roles correspond to accessibility relations. atomic concepts play the role of propositional symbols. in particular   can be embedded into the hybrid  with deterministic programs and graded modalities   n  p f and  via the following satisfiability-preserving transla-
tion. for all propositions p  and for all n   1  

moreover  functional roles are mapped onto deterministic programs  whose accessibility relation is the graph of a function   and nominals are mapped onto their equivalents  called nominals  too   that in pdl terms arc propositional symbols that are true in exactly one world. program o denotes the universal program whose accessibility relation consists of all pairs of possible worlds. the reader is referred to  sattler and vardi  1; kupferman et a/.  1; de giacomo  1  for further details. 
1 	undecidability of 
this section is devoted to the proof of the following theorem. 
theorem 1 in   concept satisfiability  tbox satisfiability and entailment are all undecidable. 
　we find it convenient to prove this theorem by first reducing domino problems to tbox satisfiability  and then extending this result to the other decision problems. 
   recall that domino problems consist in placing tiles on an infinite grid  satisfying a given set of constraints on ad-
jacent tiles. formally  a domino problem is a structure v -  t  h  v   where t is a set of tile types and  specify which tiles can be adjacent horizontally and vertically  respectively. a solution to v is a tiling  that is  a function 

the existence of a solution for a given domino problem is known to be undecidable  cf.  gradel et al  1  . 

　domino problems are reduced to reasoning problems by characterizing  i  the grid and  ii  correct tilings. formally  the grid is a structure 
roles  h and v. if the two roles characterize the grid correctly  see figure 1 a    then characterizing the solutions of a domino problem is easy  even within simple  and decidable  description logics such as acc  by means of the following assertion: 

here for each tile type t  a distinct concept name cf is introduced. assertion  1  basically states that each individual is a tile  first term   that distinct tile types contain different tiles  rest of the first line   and that the tiling preserves the constraints specified by h and v  second line . 
　the real problem is characterizing the grid  because there is no direct way to force h and v to commute. here we shall provide a projective characterization of g  that is  we shall capture exactly the class of interpretations isomorphic to the expansion is a unary 
relation and 
　we proceed in three steps. first  h and v must be forced to be injective functions. for this purpose  we declare all roles and their converse to be functional  which is equivalent to adopting the following assertion  for all roles r. 
		 1  
　second  all nodes are classified with respect to their incoming and outcoming edges. note that the domain and the range of a role b can be defined as follows. 

now we can define the vertical and the horizontal borders of the grid  bv and bh  respectively   and the internal nodes  c . o is a nominal that represents the origin of the grid. 

 the following assertions state the properties of o and force the above concepts to cover all the domain. 
 1  
 1  
 third  we characterize the global structure of the grid. the next assertions ensure that the vertical border bv and the horizontal border bh have the desired structure  i.e.  they should be isomorphic to n . 
 1  
 1  
note that bv and bh contain no cycles  because of  1  and  1   so the two fixpoints induce infinite linear sequences of nodes. 
　finally  we introduce an assertion that forces h  and v to commute everywhere. 
 1  
informally speaking  the constructive characterization of the fixpoint in  1  corresponds to a visit of the grid along diagonals directed north-west  figure 1 b  . at each iteration  a new node x1 is considered. subformula  ensures that xo is connected to the last visited element x  in such a way that h and v commute. actually  h and v are not explicitly required to commute. they actually do  equation  1   because each visited node x but the last one  i.e.  x   must be connected by vo h and h~ o v to another visited node  proposition 1.e   therefore  by  1   there exist no further links voh~ and // o v connecting x to  the not yet visited node  x1. it follows that only x1 can be connected to x1 as specified by i. this makes h and v commute and ensures that x1 is 
unique. every time the vertical border bv is reached  subformula  adds the first element of the next diagonal. for this purpose  subformula  looks for diagonals entirely contained in x  the set of nodes visited so far  so that a new diagonal is not entered before the previous one has been completely visited. figure 1 c  illustrates this phase. let a'  be the current set of visited nodes. the black circles are the elements of . in this example   equals x1  because the latter contains precisely the first 1 diagonals. in the following we formalize all the above intuitions. 
　let t consist of the assertions  1   the local constraints  1  and  1   and the fixpoint assertions  1    1  and  1 . in the rest of this section  let i be a model of t. 
　first we introduce some notation related to the domain elements of x. 
note that edj is not necessarily defined  because h~i is partial. informally speaking  d counts diagonals and j is the displacement within a diagonal  cf. figure 1 b  . indexes are ordered lexicographically. define 

　next we need a constructive characterization of the fixpoint in assertion  1 . to improve readability  in the following we 

description logics 	1 





description logics 	1 


figure 1: modeling an even grid g 
outcoming vj edges  and that c1  c1 c1 have no outcoming h1  edges. 
　then the following assertions  where  imply that for each node in ni j h1 and vj commute. 
		 1  
in fact-with reference to figure 1 b -for all c1 in ni j  assertion  1  forces nodes c1-c1 to belong to different  mutually disjoint  concepts nx y  with the exception of c1 and c1  both of which belong to n1   i 1  j. now if then  1  would be violated  there would be 1 nodes reachable with  so h1 and vjcommute  i.e.  h1  h1 v o  v 1 char-
acterize the unbounded grid . 
　we are only left to model correct tilings. it suffices to adapt assertion  1  by replacing h and v with 
v1  respectively. from the above discussion we derive the following theorem. 

then theorem 1 suggests that transitive closure is more powerful than fixpoints in this context  the extension of  with fixpoints is decidable  while the extension 
with * is not . 
1 	discussion and conclusions 
description logics evolved into a hierarchy of decidable logics with multiple maximal elements. some support fixpoints  inverse roles  and either nominals or number restrictions  but not both  isattler and vardi  1; kupferman et al  1 . others support rich sets of role operators  including union and transitive closure. 
　the results of this paper show that the above features cannot be easily combined into one decidable logic. in particular  no decidable extension of alci can simultaneously support fixpoints  nominals and number restrictions  even in the very special case where number restrictions are confined into the functionality assertions  1 .1 as a corollary  the hybrid calculus with deterministic programs is proved to be undecidable. moreover  theorem 1 shows that role union and transitive closure cannot occur together within number restrictions  it provides also evidence that * is more expressive than fixpoints . 
　these results have immediate implications on vcr  calvanese et al  1   a rich dl with n-ary relations. recall that μ alctq can be embedded into   calvanese et al  1 . similarly  alciq can be embedded into vcr  the fragment of  without fixpoints . then theorem 1 and theorem 1 imply that decidability is preserved neither by extending  with nominals 1 nor by extending dlr with role operators u and *. 
   an interesting question arising from these results concerns the family of service description logics svc x   bonatti  1 . these logics are analogous to  in the sense that they model mappings  that can be regarded as n-ary relations . svc x  differs from  because the former features set abstraction and composition  while dlrμ sup-
ports number restrictions. service descriptions in svc x  are supposed to extend an underlying ontology written in a standard description logic x  modelling concepts and roles only . the main reasoning tasks for sdl x  are proved to be decidable by embedding svc x  into decidable extensions of both and x. by the undecidability of 
　　　　　　  it follows that this technique cannot be applied when x supports number restrictions  or simply functional roles. then the  un decidability of svc x   when .v supports number restrictions of some sort  remains an interesting open issue. 
