 
computing least common subsumers  ics  and most specific concepts  msc  are inference tasks that can support the bottom-up construction of knowledge bases in description logics. in description logics with existential restrictions  the most specific concept need not exist if one restricts the attention to concept descriptions or acyclic tboxes. in this paper  we extend the notions les and msc to cyclic tboxes. for the description logic ec  which allows for conjunctions  existential restrictions  and the top-concept   we show that the les and msc always exist and can be computed in polynomial time if we interpret cyclic definitions with greatest fixpoint semantics. 
1 	introduction 
computing the most specific concept of an individual and the least common subsumer of concepts can be used in the bottom-up construction of description logic  dl  knowledge bases. instead of defining the relevant concepts of an application domain from scratch  this methodology allows the user to give typical examples of individuals belonging to the concept to be defined. these individuals are then generalized to a concept by first computing the most specific concept of each individual  i.e.  the least concept description in the available description language that has this individual as an instance   and then computing the least common subsumer of these concepts  i.e.  the least concept description in the available description language that subsumes all these concepts . the knowledge engineer can then use the computed concept as a starting point for the concept definition. 
　the least common subsumer  les  in dls with existential restrictions was investigated in  baader et a/.  1 . in particular  it was shown there that the les in the small dl ec  which allows for conjunctions  existential restrictions  and the top-concept  always exists  and that the binary les can be computed in polynomial time. unfortunately  the most specific concept  msc  of a given abox individual need not exist in languages allowing for existential restrictions or number restrictions. as a possible solution to this problem  kiisters * partially supported by the dfg under grant ba 1-1. 
description logics 
and molitor  show how the most specific concept can be approximated in ec and some of its extensions. here  we follow an alternative approach: we extend the language by cyclic terminologies with greatest fixpoint  gfp  semantics  and show that the msc always exists in this setting. of course  then one must also be able to compute the les w.r.t. cyclic terminologies with gfp-semantics. for the dl acm  which allows for conjunctions  value restrictions  and number restrictions  it was shown in  baader and kusters  1  that the most specific concept always exists if one adds cyclic concept definitions with gfp-semantics. one reason for kusters and molitor to choose an approximation approach rather than an exact characterization of the most specific concept using cyclic definitions was that the impact of cyclic definitions in description logics with existential restrictions was largely unexplored. 
　the paper  baader  1a  is a first step toward overcoming this deficit. it considers cyclic terminologies in ec w.r.t. the three types of semantics  greatest fixpoint  least fixpoint  and descriptive semantics  introduced by nebel   and shows that the subsumption problem can be decided in polynomial time in all three cases. this is in stark contrast to the case of dls with value restrictions. even for the small dl f lo  which allows conjunctions and value restrictions only   adding cyclic terminologies increases the complexity of the subsumption problem from polynomial  for concept descriptions  to pspace. the main tool in the investigation of cyclic definitions in ec is a characterization of subsumption through the existence of so-called simulation relations on the graph associated with an el-terminology  which can be computed in polynomial time  henzinger et al  1 . 
　this characterization of subsumption can be used to characterize the les w.r.t. gfp-semantics via the product of this graph with itself  section 1 . this shows that  w.r.t. gfp semantics  the les always exists  and that the binary les can be computed in polynomial time.  the n-ary les may grow exponentially even in ec without cyclic terminologies  baader et al.   1 .  
　the characterization of subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics can be extended to the instance problem in ec. this allows us to show that the msc in ec with cyclic terminologies interpreted with gfp semantics always exists  and can be computed in polynomial time  section 1 . 
in the next section  we introduce e l with cyclic terminolo-


gics as well as the lcs and the msc. then we recall the important definitions and results from  baader  1a . section 1 formulates and proves the new results for the lcs  and section 1 does the same for the msc. 
1 	cyclic terminologies  least common subsumers  and most specific concepts 
concept descriptions arc inductively defined with the help of a set of constructors  starting with a set  of concept names and a set nr of role names. the constructors determine the expressive power of the dl. in this paper  wc restrict the attention to the  whose concept descriptions arc formed using the constructors top-concept  t   conjunction 
　　　  and existential restriction . the semantics of e l-concept descriptions is defined in terms of an interpretation . the d o m a i n i s a non-empty set of individuals and the interpretation function i maps each concept name to a subset and each role to a binary relation on . the extension of to arbitrary concept descriptions is inductively defined  as 
shown in the third column of table 1. 
　a terminology  or tbox for short  is a finite set of concept definitions of the form  where a is a concept name and d a concept description. in addition  we require that tboxcs do not contain multiple definitions  i.e.  there cannot be two distinct concept descriptions  such 
that both  belongs to the tbox. concept names occurring on the left-hand side of a definition are called defined concepts. all other concept names occurring in the tbox are called primitive concepts. note that we allow for cyclic dependencies between the defined concepts  i.e.  the definition of a may refer  directly or indirectly  to a itself. an interpretation i is a model of the tbox t iff it satisfies all its concept definitions  i.e.   for all definitions  in t. 
　an abox is a finite set of assertions of the form a a  and r a b   where a is a concept name  r is a role name  and a  b are individual names from a set . interpretations of aboxes must additionally map each individual name to an element . an interpretation i is a model of the abox a iff it satisfies all its a s s e r t i o n s   f o r all concept assertions a a  in a and x for all role assertions  in a. the interpretation i is a model of the a box a together with the  iff it is a model of both t and a. 
the semantics of  possibly cyclic  we have de-
fined above is called descriptive semantic by nebel . for some applications  it is more appropriate to interpret cyclic concept definitions with the help of a fixpoint semantics. 
example 1 to illustrate this  let us recall an example from lbaader  1a : 
　here the intended interpretations arc graphs where we have nodes  elements of the concept node  and edges  represented by the role edge   and we want to define the concept i node of all nodes lying on an infinite  possibly cyclic  path of the graph. in order to capture this intuition  the above definition must be interpreted with greatest fixpoint semantics. 
　before we can define greatest fixpoint semantics  gfpsemantics   we must introduce some notation. let t be an 
e l-tbox containing the r o l e s t h e primitive concepts  and the defined concepts . a primitive interpretations j for t is given by a domain   an interpretation of the roles r  nrole by binary relations and an interpretation of the primitive concepts by subsets  obviously  a primitive 
interpretation differs from an interpretation in that it does not interpret the defined concepts in . we say that the interpretation x is based on the primitive interpretation j iff it has the same domain as j and coincides with j on nrole and nprim. for a fixed primitive interpretation j  the interpretations x based on it are uniquely determined by the tuple of the interpretations of the defined concepts in 
is an interpretation based on 
interpretations based on j can be compared by the following ordering  which realizes a pairwise inclusion test between the respective interpretations of the defined concepts: if 
int j   then 
　　　　　　　　　induces a complete lattice on int  j   i.e.  every subset of jnt j  has a least upper bound  lub  and a greatest lower bound  gib . using tarski's fixpoint theorem ltarski  1  for complete lattices  it is not hard to show lnebel  1  that  for a given primitive interpretation j  there always is a greatest  model of t based on j. we call this models the greatest fixpoint model  gfp-model  of t. greatest fixpoint semantics considers only gfp-models as admissible models. 
definition 1 let t be an  let 
a  b be defined concepts occurring in t  and a an individual name occurring in a. then  
  a is subsumed by b w.r.t. gfp-semantics iff  holds for all gfp-models 
 a is an instance of a w.r.t. gfp-semantics 
 holds for all models x of a that are 
gfp-models of t. 
　on the level of concept descriptions  the least common subsumer of two concept descriptions c  d is the least concept 

1 	description logics 


description logics 

proposition 1 let g1  g1 be two finite el-description graphs  v1 a node of g  and v1 a node of g1- then we can decide in polynomial time whether there is a simulation 

　subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics corresponds to the existence of a simulation relation such that the subsumee simulates the subsumer: 
1 	instance and most specific concepts 
one motivation for considering cyclic terminologies in ♀l is the fact that the most specific concept of an abox individual need not exist in ♀c  without cyclic terminologies . an example is the simple cyclic abox a := {r b b }  where b has no most specific concept  i.e.  there is no least ♀l-

concept description d such that b is an instance of d w.r.t. a  kiisters and molitor  1 . however  if one allows for cyclic tboxes with gfp-semantics  then the defined concept 
1 	description logics 


description logics 

1 	conclusion 
in  baader  1a  we have shown that subsumption in remains polynomial if one allows for cyclic terminologies with greatest fixpoint  gfp  semantics. in section 1 of this paper we have complemented this result by showing that the instance problem in with cyclic terminologies interpreted with gfp-semantics is also polynomial. thus  all the standard inferences in  remain polynomial if one allows for cyclic terminologies with gfp-semantics. our main motivation for considering cyclic terminologies with gfp-semantics in was that the most specific concept of an abox-individual then always exists. in fact  we have shown in this paper that both the least common subsumer  les  and the most specific concept  msc  can be computed in polynomial time in  with cyclic terminologies interpreted with gfp-semantics. thus  also two of the most important non-standard inferences in dls  kusters  1  remain polynomial in this context. 
　it should be noted that there are indeed applications where the expressive power of the small dl  appears to be sufficient. in fact  snomed  the systematized nomenclature of medicine  cote et al  1  uses   spackman  1; 1 . 
　subsumption  baader  1a  and the instance problem  baader  1b  are also polynomial w.r.t. descriptive semantics. for the les  descriptive semantics is not that wellbehaved: in  baader  1  we have shown that w.r.t. descriptive semantics the les need not exist in  with cyclic terminologies. in addition  we could only give a sufficient condition for the existence of the les. if this condition applies  then the les can be computed in polynomial time. in  baader  1b  similar results are shown for the msc w.r.t. descriptive semantics. 
　one problem left for future research is the question of how to obtain a decidable characterization of the cases in which the les  msc  exists w.r.t. descriptive semantics  and to determine whether in these cases it can always be computed in polynomial time. 
