 
we propose a generalization of expected utility that we call generalized eu  geu   where a decision maker's beliefs are represented by plausibility measures and the decision maker's tastes are represented by general  i.e.  not necessarily realvalued  utility functions. we show that every agent   rational  or not  can be modeled as a geu maximizes we then show that we can customize geu by selectively imposing just the constraints we want. in particular  by show how of savage's postulates corresponds to constraints on geu. 
1 	introduction 
many decision rules have been proposed in the literature. perhaps the best-known approach is based on maximizing expected utility  eu . this approach comes in a number of variants; the two most famous are due to von neumann and morgenstern  and savage . they all follow the same pattern: they formalize the set of alternatives among which the decision maker  dm  must choose  typically as acts1 or lotteries1 . they then give a set of assumptions  often called postulates or axioms  such that the dm's preferences on the alternatives satisfy these assumptions iff the preferences have an eu representation  where an eu representation of a preference relation is basically a utility function  and a probability measure when acts are involved  such that the relation among the alternatives based on expected utility agrees with the preference relation. moreover  they show that the representation is essentially unique. in other words  if the preferences of a dm satisfy the assumptions  then she is behaving as if she has quantified her tastes via a real-valued utility function  and her beliefs via a probability measure  
   *work supported in part by nsf under grants iis-1 and ctc-1 and by the dod multidisciplinary university research initiative  muri  program administered by onr under grant n1-1. 
   1 formally  given a set s of states of the world and another set c of consequences  an act a is a function from s to c that  intuitively  associates with each state s the consequence of performing a in  s. 
   1 formally  a lottery is a probability distribution over consequences; intuitively  the distribution quantifies how likely it is that each consequence occurs. 
and she is relating the alternatives according to their expected utility. the assumptions are typically regarded as criteria for rational behavior  so these results also suggest that if a dm's beliefs are actually described by a probability measure and her tastes are described by a utility function  then she should relate the alternatives according to their expected utility  if she wishes to appear rational . 
　despite the appeal of eu maximization  it is well known that people do not follow its tenets in general  resnik  1 . as a result  a host of extensions of eu have been proposed that accommodate some of the more systematic violations  see  for example   gul  1; gilboa and schmeidler  1; giang and shenoy  1; quiggin  1; schmeidler  1; 
yaari  1  . again  the typical approach in the decision theory literature has been to prove representation theorems  showing that  given a suggested decision rule r  there exists a collection of assumptions such that a preference relation satisfies the assumptions iff it has an r representation  where an 1v representation of a preference relation is essentially a choice of tastes  and beliefs  such that  given these as inputs  r relates the alternatives the way the preference relation does. 
　given this plethora of rules  it would be useful to have a general framework in which to study decision making. the framework should also let us understand the relationship between various decision rules. we provide such a framework in this paper. 
　the basic idea of our approach is to generalize the notion of expected utility so that it applies in as general a context as possible. to this end  we introduce expectation domains  which are structures consisting of 
　  three  component  domains: a plausibility domain  a 
　utility domain  and a valuation domain  combines plausibility values and utility values much the same way that x combines probability and  real  utility  while combines the products to form the  generalized  expected utility. 
decision theory 	1 　we have three domains because we do not want to require that dms be able to add or multiply plausibility values or utility values  since these could be qualitative  e.g.  plausibility values could be { unlikely    likely    very likely  ...} and utility values could be { bad    good    better   ...} . in general  we do not assume that  is an order  or even a preorder   since we would like to be able to represent as many preference relations and decision rules as possible. 
　once we have an expectation domain  dms can express their tastes and beliefs using components of the expectation domain. more specifically  the dms express their beliefs using a plausibility measure  friedman and halpern  1   whose range is the plausibility domain of the expectation domain  plausibility measures generalize probability measures and a host of other representations of uncertainty  such as sets of probability measures  choquet capacities  possibility measures  ranking functions  etc.  and they express their tastes using a utility function whose range is the utility domain of the expectation domain. in an expectation domain  it is possible to define a generalization of expected utility  which we call generalized eu  geu . the geu of an act is basically the sum  in the sense of  c   of products  in the sense of  1   of plausibility values and utility values that generalizes the standard definition of  probabilistic  expected utility over the reals in the obvious way. 
　we start by proving an analogue of savage's result with respect to the decision rule  maximizing  geu.1 we show that every preference relations on acts has a geu representation  even those that do not satisfy any of savage's postulates   where a geu representation of a preference relation basically consists of an expectation domain e  plausibility measure pi  and utility function u  such that the way acts are related according to their geu agrees with the preference relation  theorem 1 . in other words  no matter what the dm's preference relation on acts is  she behaves as if she has quantified her beliefs by a plausibility measure and her tastes via a utility function  and is relating the acts according to their  generalized  expected utility as defined by the  of some expectation domain. that is  we can model any dm using geu  whether or not the dm satisfies any rationality assumptions. an important difference between our result and that of savage is that he was constructing eu representations  which consists of a real-valued utility function u and '& probability measure pr  and the expectation domain is fixed  so 

　given that geu can represent all preference relations  it might be argued that geu is too general-it offers no guidelines as to how to make decisions. we view this as a feature  not a bug  since our goal is to provide a general framework in which to express and study decision rules  instead of proposing yet another decision rule. thus the absence of  guidelines  is in fact an absence of limitations: we do not want to exclude any possibilities at the outset  even preference relations that are not transitive or are incomplete. starting from 
　　1 many decision rules involve optimizing  i.e.  maximizing or minimizing  some value function on the acts. sometimes it is explicitly mentioned whether the function is to be maximized or minimized  e.g.   minimax regret  says explicitly to  minimize the maximum regret   while other times only the function name is mentioned and it is implicitly understood what is meant  e.g.   eu  means  maximize eu  . in this paper we will use  maximizing geu  and  geu  interchangeably. 
a framework in which we can represent all preference relations  we can then consider what preference relations have  special  representations  in the sense that the expectation domain  plausibility measure  and utility function in the representation satisfy some  joint  properties. this allows us to show how properties of expectation domains correspond to properties of preference relations. we can then  customize  geu by placing just the constraints we want. we illustrate this by showing how each of savage's postulates corresponds in a precise sense to an axiom on geu. 
　intuitively  a decision rule maps tastes  and beliefs  to preference relations on acts. given two decision rules r1 and r1  an r1 representation of r1 is basically a function t that maps inputs of r1 to inputs of r1 that represent the same tastes and beliefs  with the property that r 1  t z   = r1 x thus  t models  in a precise sense  a user of r1 as a user of 
r1  since t preserves tastes  and beliefs . in a companion paper  chu and halpern  1  we show that  almost  every decision rule has a geu representation. 
　although there has been a great deal of work on decision rules  there has been relatively little work on finding general frameworks for representing decision rules. in particular  there has been no attempt to find a decision rule that can represent all preference relations. there has been work in the fuzzy logic community on finding general notions of integration  which essentially amounts to finding notions of expectation  using generalized notions of see  for example   benvenuti and mesiar  1 . however  the expectation domain used in this work is  a subset of  the reals; arbitrary expectation domains are not considered. luce  1; 1  also considers general addition-like operations applied to utilities  but his goal is to model joint receipts  which are typically modeled as commodity bundles in economics  as a binary operation  rather than to represent decision rules. 
　the rest of this paper is organized as follows. we cover some basic definitions in section 1: plausibility domains  utility domains  expectation domains  decision problems  and geu. we show that every preference relation on acts has a geu representation in section 1. in section 1  we show that each of savage's postulates corresponds to an axiom on geu. we conclude in section 1. proofs of theorems stated are available at http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/halpcrn. 
1 	preliminaries 
1 plausibility  utility  and expectation domains 
1 	decision theory since one of the goals of this paper is to provide a general framework for all of decision theory  we want to represent the tastes and beliefs of the dms in as general a framework as possible. in particular  we do not want to force the dms to linearly preorder all consequences and all events  i.e.  subsets of the set of states . to this end  we use plausibility measures to represent the beliefs of the dms and  generalized  utility functions to represent their tastes. 


　clearly plausibility measures are generalizations of probability measures. as pointed out in  friedman and halpern  1   plausibility measures generalize a host of other representations of uncertainty as well. note that while the probability of any two sets must be comparable  since r is totally ordered   the plausibility of two sets may be incomparable. 
　we also want to represent the tastes of dms using something more general than r  so we allow the range of utility functions to be utility domains  where a utility domain is a set u endowed with a reflexive binary relation . intuitively  elements of u represent the strength of likes and dislikes of the dm while elements of p represent the strength of her beliefs. note that we do not require the dm's preference to be transitive  although we can certainly add this requirement . experimental evidence shows that dms' preferences occasionally do seem to violate transitivity. 
an act a is simple iff its range is finite. that is  a is simple if it has only finitely many consequences. many works in the literature focus on simple acts  e.g.   fishburn  1  . we assume in this paper that a contains only simple acts; this means that we can define  generalized  expectation using finite sums  so we do not have to introduce infinite series or integration for arbitrary expectation domains. note that all acts are guaranteed to be simple if either s or c is finite  although we do not assume that here. 
　a decision problem is essentially a decision situation together with information about the tastes and beliefs of the dm; that is  a decision problem is a decision situation together with the subjective part of the circumstance that faces the dm. formally  a  plausibilistic  decision problem is a tuple v =  a  e  u  pi   where 
  a =  a  1  c  is a decision situation  

  u : c -  u is a utility function  and 
we say that v is monotonic iff e is monotonic. 
decision situations and decision problems 
a decision situation describes the objective part of the circumstance that the dm faces  i.e.  the part that is independent of the tastes and beliefs of the dm . formally  a decision sit-  pi : 1s -  p is a plausibility measure. 

uation is a tuple a =  a  1  c   where 
  s is the set of states of the world  
  c is the set of consequences  and 
  a is a set of acts  i.e.  a set of functions from s to c . 
　　1 sometimes we use x to denote cartesian product; the context will always make it clear whether this is the case. 
decision theory 
note that the notion of additivity we defined is a joint property of several components of a decision problem  i.e.   1    &  u  and pi  instead of being a property of pi alone. additivity is exactly the requirement needed to make the analogue of  1  equivalent to  1 . while decision problems involving probability are additive  those involving representations of uncertainty such as dempster-shafer belief functions are not  in general. 
1 


1 	decision theory 

that x1 ...  xn is a partition of y iff the xis are nonempty and pairwise disjoint  and ui xi = y. 
　fix some decision situation  a  s  c . readers familiar with  savage  1  will recall that savage implicitly assumes that a consists of all possible functions from s to c  since the dm can be questioned about any pair of functions. throughout this paper  we have assumed that a could be any nonempty subset of the set of all simple acts. it is possible to maintain that assumption here  though some of the postulates would fail  not because does not relate certain members of a  but because a does not contain certain pairs of acts. we could adapt the postulates by  relativizing  them  so acts not in a are not required to be related  as we do in the full paper; however  that involves changing the statements of savage's postulates somewhat  and the presentation becomes more complicated. to simplify the exposition here  we assume in this section only that a consists of all simple acts. here are savage's first six postulates  stated under the assumption that a consists of all simple acts from s to c  so that  for example  if a and b are in a  and x cc  s  then 

　since we focus on additive decision problems in this section  we can define a notion of conditional geu  which greatly simplifies the presentation of the gru axioms. given 
decision theory 	1 s into events such that the dm's preference about a and b is unaffected if c were to happen in any element of the partition. savage also has a seventh postulate  but it is relevant only for general  nonsimple  acts; since we consider only simple acts  we omit it here. 


　al says that the expected utility values are linearly preordered; more specifically  a 1 a  says that they are totally preordered and a 1 b  says that the relation is transitive. note that al does not say that the whole valuation domain is linearly preordered: that would be a sufficient but not a necessary condition for geu d  to satisfy pi. since we want necessary and sufficient conditions for our representation results  some axioms apply only to expected utility values rather than to arbitrary elements of the valuation domain. as the following theorem shows  every subset of {al a   al  b  ...  ag} represents the corresponding subset of {pl a  pl b  ... p1}. 

　theorem 1 is a strong representation result. for example  if we are interested in capturing all of savage's postulates but the requirement that is totally ordered  and instead are willing to allow it to be partially ordered  a situation explored by lehmann    we simply need to drop axiom a 1 b . although we have focused here on savage's postulates  it is straightforward to represent many of the other standard postulates considered in the decision theory literature in much the same way. 
1 	conclusion 
we have introduced geu  a notion of generalized eu and shown that geu can  a  represent all preference relations on acts and  b  be customized to capture any subset of savage's postulates. in  chu and halpern  1   we show that geu can be viewed as a universal decision rule in an even stronger sense: almost every decision rule has a geu representation. thus  the framework of expectation structures together with geu provides a useful level of abstraction in which to study the general problem of decision making and rules for decision making. 
