 
cyclic definitions in description logics have until now been investigated only for description logics allowing for value restrictions. even for the most basic language  which allows for conjunction and value restrictions only  deciding subsumption in the presence of terminological cycles is a pspace-complete problem. this paper investigates subsumption in the presence of terminological cycles for the language .   which allows for conjunction  existential restrictions  and the topconcept. in contrast to the results for   subsumption in  remains polynomial  independent of whether we use least fixpoint semantics  greatest fixpoint semantics  or descriptive semantics. 
1 introduction 
early description logic  dl  systems allowed the use of value restrictions  but not of existential restrictions thus  one could express that all children are male using the value restriction male  but not that someone has a son using the existential restriction  the main reason was that  when clarifying the logical status of property arcs in semantic networks and slots in frames  the decision was taken that arcs/slots should be read as value restrictions  see  e.g.   nebel  1  . once one considers more expressive dls allowing for full negation  existential restrictions come in as the dual of value restrictions  schmidt-schaub and smolka  1 . thus  for historical reasons  dls that allow for existential  but not for value restrictions  are largely unexplored. in the present paper  we investigate terminological cycles in the dl  which allows for conjunction  existential restrictions  and the top-concept. in contrast to  even very inexpressive  dls with value restrictions  subsumption in  remains polynomial in the presence of terminological cycles. it should be noted that there are indeed applications where the small  appears to be sufficient. in fact  snomed  the systematized nomenclature of medicine  cote et a/.  1  employs  spackman  1; spackman et al.  1 . even though snomed does not appear to use cyclic definitions  this may be due to a lack * partially supported by the dfg under grant ba 1-1. 
description logics 
of technology rather than need. in fact  the galen medical knowledge base contains many cyclic dependencies  rector and horrocks  1 . also  even in the case of acyclic terminologies  our polynomial subsumption algorithm improves on the usual approach that first unfolds the tbox  a potentially exponential step  and then applies the polynomial subsumption algorithm for -concept descriptions  baader et al.  1 . 
¡¡the first thorough investigation of cyclic terminologies in description logics  dl  is due to nebel   who introduced three different semantics for such terminologies: least fixpoint  lfp  semantics  which considers only the models that interpret the defined concepts as small as possible; greatest fixpoint  gfp  semantics  which considers only the models that interpret the defined concepts as large as possible; and descriptive semantics  which considers all models. 
¡¡in  baader  1; 1   subsumption w.r.t. cyclic terminologies in the small dl  which allows for conjunction and value restrictions only  was characterized with the help of finite automata. this characterization provided pspace decision procedures for subsumption in  with cyclic terminologies for the three types of semantics introduced by nebel. in addition  it was shown that subsumption is pspace-hard. 
the results for cyclic -terminologies were extended by kiisters   1  to aln  which extends  by atomic negation and number restrictions. 
¡¡the fact that the dl acc  which extends fl1 by full negation  is a syntactic variant of the multi-modal logic k opens a way for treating cyclic terminologies and more general recursive definitions in more expressive languages like acc and extensions thereof by a reduction to the modal mucalculus  schild  1; de giacomo and lenzerini  1 . in this setting  one can use a mix of the three types of semantics introduced by nebel. however  the complexity of the subsumption problem is exptime-complete. 
¡¡in spite of these very general results for cyclic definitions in expressive languages  there are still good reasons to look at cyclic terminologies in less expressive  in particular subboolean  description logics. one reason is  of course  that one can hope for a lower complexity of the subsumption problem. for dls with value restrictions  this hope is not fulfilled  though. even in the inexpressive dl  subsumption becomes pspace-complete if one allows for cyclic definitions. this is still better than the exptime-completeness that one 


has in acc with cyclic definitions  but from the practical point of view it still means that the subsumption algorithm may need exponential time. 
¡¡in contrast  the subsumption problem in can be decided in polynomial time w.r.t. the three types of semantics introduced by nebel. the main tool used to show these results is a characterization of subsumption through the existence of so-called simulation relations. 
¡¡in the next section we will introduce the dl  as well as cyclic terminologies and the three types of semantics for these terminologies. then we will show in section 1 how such terminologies can be translated into description graphs. in this section  we will also define the notion of a simulation between nodes of a description graph  and mention some useful properties of simulations. the next three sections are then devoted to the characterization of subsumption in w.r.t. gfp  ifp  and descriptive semantics  respectively. 
1 	cyclic terminologies in the dl 
concept descriptions arc inductively defined with the help of a set of constructors  starting with a set nc ofconcept names and a set nr of role names. the constructors determine the expressive power of the dl. we restrict the attention to the  whose concept descriptions are formed using the constructors top-concept  t   conjunction   and existential restriction . the semantics of ¡êl-concept descriptions is defined in terms of an interpretation 
the domain is a non-empty set of individuals and the interpretation function i maps each concept name a ¡ê nc to a subset of   and each role to a binary relation the extension of to arbitrary concept 
descriptions is inductively defined  as shown in the third column of table 1. 
¡¡a terminology  or tbox for short  is a finite set of concept definitions of the form  where a is a concept name and d a concept description. in addition  we require that tboxes do not contain multiple definitions  i.e.  there cannot be two distinct concept descriptions d  and d1 such 
that both  belongs to the tbox. concept names occurring on the left-hand side of a definition are called defined concepts. all other concept names occurring in the tbox are called primitive concepts. note that we allow for cyclic dependencies between the defined concepts  i.e.  the definition of a may refer  directly or indirectly  to a itself. an interpretation x is a model of the tbox t iff it satisfies all its concept definitions  i.e.   for all definitions 
¡¡the semantics of  possibly cyclic   we have just defined is called descriptive semantic by nebel . 
for some applications  it is more appropriate to interpret cyclic concept definitions with the help of an appropriate fixpoint semantics. before defining least and greatest fixpoint semantics formally  let us illustrate their effect on an example. 
example 1 assume that our interpretations are graphs where we have nodes  elements of the concept name node  and edges  represented by the role edge   and we want to define the concept i node of all nodes lying on an infinite  possibly cyclic  path of the graph. the following is a possible definition of inode: 
¡¡now consider the following interpretation of the primitive concepts and roles: 
where 	there are four possible ways of extending this interpretation of the primitive concepts and roles to a model of the tbox consisting of the above concept definition: inode can be interpreted by m u n  m  n  or  all these models are admissible w.r.t. descriptive semantics  whereas the first is the gfp-model and the last is the lfp-model of the tbox. obviously  only the gfp-model captures the intuition underlying the definition  namely  nodes lying on an infinite path  correctly. 
¡¡it should be noted  however  that in other cases descriptive semantics appears to be more appropriate. for example  consider the definitions 

with respect to gfp-semantics  the defined concepts tiger and lion must always be interpreted as the same set whereas this is not the case for descriptive semantics.l 
¡¡before we can define lfp- and gfp-semantics formally  we must introduce some notation. let t be an containing the roles the primitive concepts nprim and the defined concepts . . a primitive interpretations j for t is given by a domain   an interpreta-
tion of the roles . by binary relations and an interpretation of the primitive concepts by subsets . obviously  a primitive interpretation 
differs from an interpretation in that it does not interpret the defined concepts in  we say that the interpretation x is based on the primitive interpretation j iff it has the same domain as j and coincides with j on nrole and nprim. for a fixed primitive interpretation j  the interpretations x based on it are uniquely determined by the t u p l e o f the interpretations of the defined concepts in   we define lnt{j  := {x i x is an interpretation based on j}. 
interpretations based on j can be compared by the following ordering  which realizes a pairwise inclusion test between the 
   'this example is similar to the  humans and horses  example used by nebel   1   to illustrate the difference between descriptive semantics and gfp-semantics in acm. 
description logics 

respective interpretations of the defined concepts: if 
int j   	then 
induces a complete lattice on jnt j   i.e.  every subset of int  j  has a least upper bound  lub  and a greatest lower bound  gib . using tarski 's fixpoint theorem  tarski  1  for complete lattices  it is not hard to show  nebel  1  that  for a given primitive interpretation j  there is always a greatest and a least  model of 
t based on j. we call these models respectively the greatest fixpoint model  gfp-model  and the least fixpoint model  lfpmodel  of t. greatest  least  fixpoint semantics considers only gfp-models  lfp-models  as admissible models. 
definition 1 let t be an ¡êl-tbox and a  b be defined concepts1 occurring in t. then  
  a is subsumed by b w.r.t. descriptive semantics b  iff. holds for all models i of t. 
  a is subsumed by b w.r.t. gfp-scmantics iff  holds for all gfp-models x of t. 
  a is subsumed by b w.r.t. lfp-semantics iff  holds for all lfp-models 1 of t. 
¡¡we will show in the following that all three subsumption problems are decidable in polynomial time. to do this  we represent el-tboxes as graphs. 
1 
¡¡since there is a polynomial translation of general tboxes into normalized ones  baader  1   one can restrict the attention to normalized tboxes. thus  we will assume that all tboxes are normalized. normalized ¡êl-tboxes can be viewed as graphs whose nodes are the defined concepts  which are labeled by sets of primitive concepts  and whose edges are given by the existential restrictions. for the rest of this section  we fix a n o r m a l i z e d w i t h primitive concepts  defined c o n c e p t s a n d roles 
definition 1 an ¡ê c-description graph is a graph g = 
{v e l  	where 
  v is a set of nodes; 
   1 obviously  we can restrict the attention to subsumption between defined concepts since subsumption between arbitrary concept descriptions can be reduced to this problem by introducing definitions for the descriptions. 
description logics 
  is a set of edges labeled by role names; 
   is a function that labels nodes with sets of primitive concepts. 
¡¡the normalized tbox t can be translated into the following ¡ê l-description graph 
  the nodes of gt are the defined concepts of t; 
  if a is a defined concept and 

its definition in t  then 
= 
¡¡the translation between ¡êl-tboxes  primitive interpretations  and ¡êl-description graphs works in both directions  i.e.  any el-description graph can also be view as an ¡êltbox  primitive interpretation . 
¡¡simulations are binary relations between nodes of two ¡êcdescription graphs that respect labels and edges in the sense defined below. 
¡¡it is easy to see that the set of all simulations from g  to g1 is closed under arbitrary unions. consequently  there always exists a greatest simulation from g1 to g1- if g1  g1 are finite  then this greatest simulation can be computed in polynomial time  henzinger et a/.  1 . the following proposition is an easy consequence of this fact  see  baader  1  . 
propositions let g1 g1 be two finite el-description graphs  v1 a node of g  and v1 a node of g1. then we can decide in polynomial time whether there is a simulation 

1 	subsumption w.r.t gfp-semantics 
in the following  let t be a normalized el-tbox with primitive concepts nprim  defined concepts ndef  and roles nrole. before characterizing subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics  we give a characterization of when an individual of a gfp-model belongs to a defined concept in this model. 

figure 1: the ¡êl-description graph gt of example 1. 

1. a c g f   r b. 
1. there is a simulation z: gt ~ gt with  b  a  e z. 
proof  1 =  1  assume that the simulation z: gt ~ gt sat  isfies . let j be a primitive interpretation and i the gfp-model of t based on j. we must show that x € a1 implies x € bi. 
¡¡by proposition 1  implies that there is a simulation such that  a  x  y. it is easy to show that the composition x :- z o y is a simulation from such that  b  x  x. by proposition 1  this implies 
	 1 =  1  assume t	h	a	t	w	e consider the graph 
¡ê1r  and view it as an description graph of a primitive interpretation. thus  let j be the primitive interpretation with gt = gj and let i be the gfp-model of t based on j. 
¡¡since the identity is a simulation id: gt gt = gj that satisfies   proposition 1 yields a a1. but then 
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡b implies a   and thus proposition 1 yields the existence of a simulation such that 
 b a  	z. 	d 
¡¡the theorem together with proposition 1 shows that subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics in  is tractable. 
corollary 1 subsumption w.r.t. gfp-semantics in  can be decided in polynomial time. 
the ¡ê l-description graph gt corresponding to this tbox can be found in figure 1. let vt - {a  a' b  c  d} denote the set of nodes of this graph. then  is a simulation from gt to gt- consequently  all the defined concepts in t subsume each other w.r.t. gfp-semantics. 
1 	subsumption w.r.t. ifp-semantics 
for the sake of completeness  we also treat lfp-semantics. it should be noted  however  that the results of this section demonstrate that lfp-semantics is not interesting in 
let t be an  and gt the corresponding 
description graph. where a b are nodes of gt  we write 
b to denote that there is a path in gt from atob  
 b to denote that there is a non-empty path in gt from a to b. we define the set there exists a node b such that 
i.e.  cyct consists of the nodes in gt that can reach a cyclic path in gt  the following proposition is an easy consequence of the definition of lfp-semantics and of   see  baader  1  . 
proposition 1 let t be an ¡êc-tbox and a a defined concept in t . t h e n a is unsatisfiable w.r.t. lfpsemantics  i. e.  holds for all ifp-models x of t. 
¡¡in example 1  all the defined concepts belong to cyct  and thus they are all unsatisfiable w.r.t. lfp-semantics. 
¡¡since all the defined concepts in cycr are unsatisfiable  their definitions can be removed from the tbox without changing the meaning of the concepts not belonging to cyct.  their definition cannot refer to an element of cycr.  this leaves us with an acyclic terminology  on which gfp- and lfpsemantics coincide  nebel  1 . thus  subsumption w.r.t. lfp-semantics in ¡êl can be reduced to subsumption w.r.t. gfpsemantics. 
corollary 1 subsumption w.r.t. lfp-semantics in ¡êc can be decided in polynomial time. 
1 	subsumption w.r.t. descriptive semantics 
let t be an ¡êl-tbox and gt the corresponding ¡êldescription graph. since every gfp-model of t is a model of t  	implies 	consequently  implies that there is a simulation z: gt ~ gt with 
         z. in the following we will show what additional properties the simulation z must satisfy for the implication in the other direction to hold. 
¡¡to get an intuition on the difference between gfp- and descriptive semantics  let us consider example 1. with respect to gfp-semantics  all the defined concepts of t are equivalent  i.e.  subsume each other . with respect to descriptive semantics  a  b  d are still equivalent  c is equivalent to a'  but a' is not equivalent to b  and c and d are also not equivalent  in both cases  the concepts are not even comparable w.r.t. subsumption . 
¡¡to see that c and a' are equivalent w.r.t. descriptive semantics  it is enough to note that the following identities hold in every model x of t: .a similar argument shows that b and d are equivalent. in addition  equivalence of c and a' also implies equivalence of a and b. the following model of t is a counterexample to the other subsumption relationships: 

description logics 


figure 1: a  b  i1 -simulation chain. 

¡¡we will see below that the reason for a! and b not being equivalent is that in the infinite path in gr starting with af  one reaches d with an odd number of edges  whereas c is reached with an even number; for the path starting with b  it is just the opposite. in contrast  the infinite paths starting respectively with a and b  synchronize  after a finite number of steps. to formalize this intuition  we must introduce some notation. 

¡¡consider the t box t and the simulation z introduced in example 1. then 

is a  b  a-simulation chain w.r.t. z  and is a  b  a'-simulation chain w.r.t. z. note that the first chain synchronizes after a finite number of steps in the sense that there is a z-link between the same defined concept. in contrast  the second chain does not synchronize in this sense. 
¡¡if  b  a   z  then  s1  of definition 1 implies that  for every infinite path p1 starting with b1 := b  there is an infinite path p1 starting with a1 := a such thatpi is z-simulated by p1. in the following we construct such a simulating path step by step. the main point is  however  that the decision which concept an to take in step n should depend only on the partial  b  1 -simulation chain already constructed  and not on the parts of the path p1 not yet considered. 
definition 1 a partial  b a -simulation chain is of the form depicted in figure 1. a selection function s for a  b and z assigns to each partial  b  a-simulation chain of this form a defined concept an such that is an edge in gr and  bn  an  z. 
	given a p a t h   	      and a 
defined concept a such that 	one can use a selec-
tion function 1 for a  b and z to construct a z-simulating path. in this case we say that the resulting  b  a-simulation chain is s-selected. 
description logics 

figure 1: a partial  b  a -simulation chain. 
definition 1 the simulation  is called  b   1 synchronized iff there exists a selection function s for a  b and z such that the following holds: for every infinite sselected  b  a -simulation chain of the form depicted in figure 1 there exists an i  1 such that 
we are now ready to state our characterization of subsumption w.r.t. descriptive semantics  see  baader  1  for the proof . 
theorem 1 let t be an  and a  b defined concepts in t. then the following are equivalent: 
1. 
1. there is a  b a -synchronizedsimulation such that  b  a   z. 
¡¡it remains to be shown that property  1  of the theorem can be decided in polynomial time. to this purpose  we construct a simulation y such that  1  of theorem 1 is equivalent to  b a  € y  see  baader  1  for the proof that this is indeed the case : we define y :=  j 
un o yn  where the relations yn are defined 
by induction on n: y1 is the identity on the nodes of gt- if 
the relation y can obviously be computed in time polynomial in the size of gt- by using the techniques employed to decided horn-sat in linear time  dowling and gallier  1   it is not hard to show that y can actually be computed in time quadratic in the size of gt 
corollary 1 subsumption w.r.t. descriptive semantics in can be decided in polynomial time. 
¡¡an alternative way for showing the polynomiality result would be to reduce the existence of a  b  a -synchronized simulation z satisfying  b  a  z to the strategy problem for a certain two-player game with a positional winning condition. the existence of a winning strategy is in this case a polynomial time problem  gradel  1 . 
1 	future and related work 
we have seen that subsumption in with cyclic terminologies is polynomial for the three types of semantics introduced 

by nebel . in some applications  it would be interesting to have a mix of all three semantics  and it remains to be seen whether the polynomiality results also hold in such a setting  which would correspond to a restriction of the modal -calculus  kozen  1  . 
 sub-boolean dls  like c  have attracted renewed attention in the context of so-called non-standard inferences  kiisters  1  like computing the least common subsumer and the most specific concept. in  baader  1  we have shown that the characterization of subsumption in c w.r.t. gfp-semantics also yields an approach for computing the least common subsumer in  w.r.t. gfp-semantics. in addition  we have extended the characterization of subsumption in ¡êl 
w.r.t. gfp-semantics to the instance problem  and have shown how this can be used to compute the most specific concept. 
   simulations and bisimulations play an important role in modal logics  and thus also in description logics . however  until now they have mostly been considered for modal logics that are closed under all the boolean operators  and they have usually not been employed for reasoning in the logic. a notable exception are  kurtonina and de rijke  1; 1   where bisimulation characterizations are given for sub-boolean modal logics and dls. however  these characterizations are used to give a formal account of the expressive power of these logics. they are not employed for reasoning purposes. 
   in  baader et al  1   subsumption between -concept descriptions was characterized through the existence of homomorphisms between the description trees  basically the syntax trees  associated with the descriptions. if one looks at the polynomial time algorithm for deciding the existence of such a homomorphism  then it is easy to see that it actually computes the greatest simulation between the trees. for trees  the existence of a homomorphism mapping the root to the root coincides with the existence of a simulation containing the tuple of the roots. for graphs  a similar connection does not hold. in fact  for graphs the existence of a homomorphism is an np-complete problem. for simple conceptual graphs  or equivalently  conjunctive queries  the implication  containment  problem can be characterized via the existence of certain homomorphisms between graphs  chein et al.  1   and is thus np-complete. 
