 
inconsistencies frequently occur in knowledge about the real-world. some of these inconsistencies may be more significant than others  and some knowledgebases  sets of formulae  may contain more inconsistencies than others. this creates problems of deciding whether to act on these inconsistencies  and if so how. to address this  we provide a general characterization of inconsistency  based on quasi-classical logic  a form of paraconsistent logic with a more expressive semantics than belnap's four-valued logic  and unlike other paraconsistent logics  allows the connectives to appear to behave as classical connectives . we analyse inconsistent knowledge by considering the conflicts arising in the minimal quasi-classical models for that knowledge. this is used for a measure of coherence for each knowledgebase  and for a measure of significance of inconsistencies in each knowledgebase. in this paper  we formalize this framework  and consider applications in managing heterogeneous sources of knowledge. 
1 introduction 
an approach to measuring inconsistency is to use propositional quasi-classical  qc  logic  hunter  1 . in this  each inconsistent set of formulae is reflected in the qc models for the set  and then the inconsistency is measured in the models. obviously  this is not possible in classical logic  or indeed many non-classical logics  because there is no model of an inconsistent set of formulae. qc logic  a form of paraconsistent logic  can model inconsistent sets of formulae. there are other paraconsistent logics that we could consider  for example belnap's four-valued logic  belnap  1   or levesque's 1-interpretations ilevesque  1   or grant's generalizations of classical satisfaction  grant  1   but these  as we will illustrate  involve the consideration of too many models. this increases the number of models that need to be analysed and it underspecifies the nature of the conflicts. 
　however  the original proposal for measuring inconsistency based on qc logic does not provide an evaluation of the significance of inconsistencies. as an illustration of the need to evaluate significance  consider two news reports on a world cup match  where the first report says that brazil beat 
germany 1  and the second report says that germany beat brazil 1. this is clearly a significant inconsistency. now consider two news reports on the same football match  where the first report says that the referee was pierluigi collina and the second report says that the referee was ubaldo aquino. this inconsistency would normally be regarded as relatively insignificant. 
　in this paper  we extend the idea of measuring inconsistency via qc models by giving a new framework for measuring the significance of inconsistencies in a knowledgebase. to do this  we review aspects of qc logic and a measurement of inconsistency based on it. we then present our framework for evaluating the significance of inconsistencies. we show this leads to a generalization of a four-valued semantics where instead of a single truth value to denote inconsistency  we have an infinite sequence of inconsistent truth values dx where . we then discuss how we can use qc logic together with significance functions for reasoning and analysing with heterogeneously sourced information such as news from different newsfeeds. 
1 review of qc logic 
we review the propositional version of quasi-classical logic  qc logic   besnard and hunter  1; hunter  1 . 
definition 1 the language of qc logic is that of classical propositional logic. we let c denote a set of formulae formed in the usual way from a set of atom symbols a  and the connectives   then atoms r  returns the set of atom symbols used in t. 
definition 1 let a be an atom  and let be a complementation operation such that the 
operator is not part of the object language  but it makes some definitions clearer. 
definition 1 let 	be a clause that includes a 
d i s j u n c t t h e focus of 
d e n o t e d     is defined as the clause obtained by removing a%from 
example 1 let be a clause where are literals. hence  
1 	knowledge representation 　focus is used to capture a form of resolution in the semantics of qc logic. a model in qc logic is a form of herbrand model. 
definition 1 let a be a set of atoms. let o be the set of objects defined as follows  where  is a positive object  and -a is a negative object. 
we call any 	a qc model. so x can contain both 
for some atom 
　for each atom 	and 	e	a	c	h	x means that in x there is a reason for the belief 	and that in x there is a reason against the belief 	similarly  means that in x there is a reason against the be-
lief a and that in x there is a reason for the belief  this effectively gives us a four-valued semantics. though for nonatomic formulae the semantics  defined next  is significantly different to  belnap  1 . 
be a satisfiability relation called strong 
satisfaction. for a model x  we define 
　strong satisfaction is used to define a notion of entailment for qc logic. there is also a natural deduction proof theory for propositional qc logic  hunter  1  and a semantic tableau version for first-order qc logic  hunter  1 . entailment for qc logic for propositional cnf formulae is conp-complete  and via a linear time transformation these formulae can be handled using classical logic theorem provers  marquis and porquet  1 . 
　the definitions for qc models and for strong satisfaction provide us with the basic concepts for measuring inconsistency. qc logic exhibits the nice feature that no attention needs to be paid to a special form that the formulae in a set of premises should have. this is in contrast with other paraconsistent logics where two formulae identical by definition of a connective in classical logic may not yield the same set of conclusions. for example  in qc logic  	is entailed by and 	and 	is entailed by 
. qc logic is much better behaved in 
this respect than other paraconsistent logics such as  da costa  1   and consistency-based logics such as  benferhat et al.  1 . furthermore  the semantics of qc logic directly models inconsistent sets of formulae. 

example 1 consider the following sets of formulae. 
　whilst four-valued logic  belnap  1  also directly models inconsistent sets of formulae  there are too many belnap models in many situations. consider for example 
     . there is one minimal qc model   but there are a number of belnap models that satisfy this set. qc logic has a reduced number of models because of the constraint in the definition of strong satisfaction for disjunction that ensures that if the complement of a disjunct holds in the model  then the resolvent should also hold in the model. this strong constraint means that various other proposals for many-valued logic will tend to have more models for any given knowledgebase than qc logic. in particular  the shortcomings of belnap's four-valued logic also apply to threevalued logics such as 1-interpretations by  levesque  1   and a similar proposal by  grant  1 . 
measuring coherence of qc models 
we now consider a measure of inconsistency called coherence  hunter  1 . the opinionbase of a qc model a  is the set of atomic beliefs  atoms  for which there are reasons for or against in x  and the conflictbase of a  is the set of atomic beliefs with reasons for and against in x. 
definition 1 let 
conflictbase x  = 
opinionbase a   - 
　in finding the minimal qc models for a set of formulae  minimization of each model forces minimization of the conflictbase of each model. as a result of this minimization  if   then 
 1  conflictbase x  = conflictbase r  and  1  either opinionbase x  = opinionbase y  or opinionbase a  is not a subset of opinionbase y . 
　increasing the size of the conflictbase  with respect to the size of the opinionbase  decreases the degree of coherence  as defined below. 

knowledge representation 	1 

into  1   i = 1. 
if coherence x  = 1  then x is a totally coherent  and if 
coherence at  = 1  then x is totally incoherent  otherwise  a  is partially coherent/incoherent. 
we now present a new framework for measuring the significance of inconsistencies arising in qc models  and thereby in sets of formulae. the approach is based on specifying the relative significance of incoherent models using the notion of a mass assignment which is defined below. 
ensures mass is only assigned to models that contain conflicts and condition 1 ensures the total mass distributed sums to 1. given some   a mass assignment can be localized on small subsets of   spread over many subsets of   or limited to large subsets of . a mass assignment can be regarded as a form of metaknowledge  and so it needs to be specified for a domain  where the domain is characterized by   and so the possible models of the domain are subsets of 

　a significance function gives an evaluation of the significance of the conflicts in a qc model. this evaluation is in the range  1  with 1 as least significant and 1 as most significant. 
　so mass-based significance is not additive. also the remaining significance need not be for the complement of x  ie  xc . some may be assigned to models not disjoint from x. we now consider some constraints on mass assignments that give useful properties for mass-based significance. 
　a focal mass assignment puts the mass onto the totally incoherent models  and a solo mass assignment puts the mass on the smallest totally incoherent models. 
proposition 1ifm is a solo mass assignment for  then m is focal mass assignment for 
　significance is additive for totally incoherent models when the mass assignment is solo. 
proposition 1 let m be a solo mass assignment for 	let 
s be a mass-based significance function for m and let x 

1 	knowledge representation a useful feature of a focal mass-based significance function is that as the number of conflicts rises in a model  then the significance of the model rises. this is formalized by the following notion of conflict cumulativity. it does not hold in 
general  see example 1 . 	since the conflictbase is common for all minimal qc mod-
els for a knowledgebase  we obtain the following. 

knowledge representation 	1 


figure 1: the knowledge lattice 
       as being isomorphic models when and the following conditions hold: 

　we can define a valuation function that extends a truth assignment to any formula by an inductive definition on the structure of a. however  for brevity  we will adopt a shortcut based on the relation. 
definition 1 let  x m  and 	be isomorphic mod-
els. a valuation function  denoted vt from to k is defined so that when a is an atom  and as follows when a is non-atomic. 

　since we could have defined the valuation function equivalently in an inductive definition on the structure of the formulae  we can obtain propositions such as the following that relate the valuation function applied to a formula and applied to its subformulae. 

　this semantics relates to qc logic strong satisfaction relation with the mass-based significance function as follows. 
proposition 1 let m be a solo mass assignment for also let   and t be a truth assignment where  x  in  and are isomorphic models. if   t 
if 
proposition 1 let   	let 	where 
coherence a'  = 1  and let m be a solo mass assignment for let be a many-valued model where and  a   in  and are isomorphic models. let s be a significance function for m. 

　the semantics therefore extends qc logic so that in case of inconsistency  the bi truth value reflects the significance of the inconsistency  where b1 is the least significant and b1 is the most significant. it is straightforward to extend this semantics to focal mass assignments. 
1 	significance of inconsistencies in news 
in this section  we consider news reports. having some understanding of the  degree of inconsistency  of a news report can help in deciding how to act on it. moreover  inconsistencies between information in a news report and domain knowledge can tell us important things about the news report. for this we use a significance function to give a value for each possible inconsistency that can arise in a news report in a given domain. we may also use significance in the following ways:  1  to reject reports that are too inconsistent;  1  to highlight unexpected news;  1  to focus on repairing significant inconsistencies; and  1  to monitor sources of information to identify sources that are unreliable. 
plication. in our simple example below  we assume a news report is a set of ground predicates. each term is used to represent a piece of information in a news report and may be equivalent to a word  or number  or a simple phrase. the predicate symbol is used to tag or categorise each piece of information. 
1 	knowledge representation how we use the significance function depends on the apdefinition 1 let Φ be a news report and let be domain knowledge. for is rebutted by 
example 1 domain knowledge for weather reports may include: 

so with the report t1 in example 1  we get that 
{temp 1c  pptn snow } is rebutted by clause i  and that {pollen high   pptn snow } is rebutted by clause 1. 
example 1 continuing example 1  we adopt the mass assignment as follows: 

so the reports t1 to t1 in example 1  together with the domain knowledge in example 1  denoted here by gives the following significance evaluations.- 1  
	= 1   - 1  	- 1  
= 1. if we set the threshold of acceptability for a news report t1 at a significance evaluation of 1  then only t1 and t1 would be acceptable  the others would be rejected. 
　this small example illustrates how we may find some inconsistencies acceptable and others unacceptable  thereby select some news reports in preference to others. for larger examples  it may be necessary to specify a mass assignment for many possible incoherent models. one solution for this is to generate a mass assignment from a partially specified mass assignment. mass is assigned to particular models and then mass for further models is obtained by interpolation. in particular  domains with some numerical data  such as sport reports or weather reports  can be addressed with this approach. for example  if we are only interested in inconsistencies about temperature  and we have a range of possibilities from rain lcm  ...  to rain 1cm   then the mass could be assigned to two models such as {+ rain lcm   - rain lcm } and {-f-rain 1cm   -rain 1cm }  and then the remaining mass assigned by interpolation. 
1 	discussion 
whilst a number of approaches to handling inconsistent information touch on the issue of measurement of inconsistency  the topic is underdeveloped. information theory can be used to measure the information content of sets of inconsistent formulae  lozinskii  1 . this increases with additions of consistent information and decreases with additions of inconsistent information. however  it does not provide a direct measure of inconsistency since for example  the value for is the same as for . another approach to handling inconsistent information is that of possibility theory  dubois et al  1. let  be a weighted formula where  is a classical formula and  a possibilistic knowledgebase b is a set of weighted formulae. an a-cut of a possibilistic knowledgebase  denoted 
the inconsistency degree of b  denoted inc b   is the maximum value of a such that the  is inconsistent. however  this approach does not discriminate between different inconsistencies. for this  there is a need for an underlying paraconsistent logic such as qc logic. 
