 
we follow searle's contention that speaking a  natural  language is to engage in a rulegoverned form of behaviour  and that those rules are conventional  institutional  rather than natural or physical. we show how this analysis can also be used to specify rules of interaction for systems of electronic agents communicating with an artificial language. we conclude that using constitutive rules to define the semantics of an agent communication language not only distinguishes agent communication from method invocation  but also offers significant computational advantages over using intentional states. 
1 	introduction 
wre maintain that there is a distinct conceptual and functional difference between communication using an acl  agent communication language  and communication using an api  application programmer interface . method invocation  via an api  is essentially perlocutionary  that is  the 1speech act'  the method call  is 
completely definable in terms of its perlocutionary effect  i.e. the further consequences or effects on the receiving  remote  object. this property makes method invocation practical for client-server distributed systems  because the execution of the remote method is transparent to the  local  caller - the data and methods of the called object may just as easily have been on the same machine as on another connected to the network. it also explains why the call semantics is so important: the fundamental difference between idempotent and at-most-once call semantics is whether or not the server is maintaining state. the communicating language itself is just a conventional device for securing a natural response. 
　however  according to searle's institutional theory of communication  searle  1   speaking a language is to engage in a rule-governed form of behaviour. the semantic structure of the language is given by a conventional characterisation of sets of constitutive rules  and 'speech acts' are acts typically performed by uttering an expression in accordance with those rules. thus the basic unit 
multiagent systems 
of communication is the illocutionary act  which comprises the type of the act  its illocutionary force: stating  ordering  promising  etc.  and its propositional content. the meaning of each unit is given by the constitutive rules: these are rules that both define the forms of behaviour and determine what that behaviour counts as. searle contended that it was not possible to reduce the analysis of illocutionary acts to perlocutionary effects. therefore there is a significant difference between agent communication and object invocation: the aim of this paper is to make that difference clear and suggest how to leverage it for computational advantage. 
　in  searle  1   the characterisation of the constitutive rules  in particular the preparatory and sincerity conditions  was expressed in terms of intentional states. while justifiable for natural language communication between humans  we believe that this is inappropriate for open systems of electronic agents and has misdirected standardisation efforts  e.g. fipa  the foundation for intelligent physical agents . however  we believe that the conventional and institutional nature of communication can still be used to specify constitutive rules of interaction for such artificial systems. 
　the argument advanced in this paper to support that belief is as follows. section 1 gives some preliminaries  introducing our methodology and notation. section 1 gives some illustrative examples to motivate the specification  in section 1  of some basic 'standard' communicative acts  and in section 1 of a richer form of communication for conversations. section g concludes with a summary  a brief review of further and related work  and draws some conclusions. in particular  the emphasis on the institutional perspective of speech act theory  rather than on agents' beliefs  desires  or intentions  indicates that a new paradigm in designing agent communication languages offers significant computational advantages. 
1 	preliminaries 
in this section  we briefly describe our methodological motivation for applying the ideas of speech act theory to agent communication. we then describe the notation used in the rest of the paper  in particular  the abstractrepresentation of agents and normative relations  in particular institutional power  permission and obligation . 
1 
1 	methodology 
we operate on the assumption that there are aspects of human intelligence and society than can inform algorithms  architectures and data structures for the design and implementation of 'better' solutions to software engineering problems. the process begins with the analysis of human intelligence and the expression of a theory  the process of theory formation in philosophy  psychology  linguistics  etc. we don't presume to undertake this step ourselves . the next step is a process we might call reification: the specification of that theory in a formal language. there are two problems with this process: firstly  information loss  as parts of the theory which are intractable are eliminated; and secondly  complexity gain  as there may be theoretical assumptions which are easy to state but much harder to formalise. as a consequence  the reified theory  or specification  is not a direct representation or literal specification of the original: instead it has been inspired by that t heory. 
　the process is marked in this paper. we have been analysing both speech act theory  scarle  1   institutional power  jones and scrgot  1   and conventional signalling systems  jones  1 . the resulting specification of - or rather  proposal for a way of specifing - an agent communication language owes something to both accounts of communication  in particular  we will refer to signals and agent's signalling actions  rather than speech acts  but also looks to the extant computer implementations described in  artikis et a/.  1 .  such implementation of the specification is step three of our methodology  while step four is to embed that implementation back in the human context in which it originated.  
1 	notation: agent description 
we assume a domain with distinguished agents a  1  etc.  facts  propositions   and actions  procedures   an agent is a triple comprising  k  g  p   respectively the agent's knowledge base  goal base  and planned actions. for an individual agent a  we write: 
 represents the program state of agent a  which encapsulates the agent's deliberative state; a's current program state  knowledge base  proves  a's current program state plans that in some future program state 
　　　 currently  a's program state plans action it  not necessarily that a plans to do 1r itself   denotes a transition of a's program state as a consequence of action  being performed. 
　intuitively  can be thought of  if it is preferred  as agent a believes is true . we write to denote an actual 'belief of a itself concerning the program state of 1  which can be true  in a  independently of whether 	is an abstraction covering a future state of a  which may be thought of as a goal to achieve  say   and is an abstraction for a plan to execute action   either to be done itself or by another agent. 
　note that  in a transition if a performed we require that and would normally expect that  i.e. we are not concerned with 
'accidents': we are concerned with planned  purposeful action . if and after  doing  is the case  we assume there is some process of belief revision which ensures that after the transition and not i.e. that is internally consistent. 
1 	notation: 'logical' description 
the characterisation of the constitutive rules for an agent communication language requires the representation of action  'counts as' and institutional power  jones and sergot  1   and dcontic relations. the notation used is as follows. 
　for an agent's actions  both signalling acts and  physical  acts on the environment  a relativised  to agents  ♀ operator is used  note that  here is the proposition that 1r happened : 
a sees to it that is true a sees to it that is performed 
　for reasons illustrated in the first example of the next section  we also introduce a second relativised action operator c  for the idea of 'capability to verify'  with intuitive reading  we consider the formal reading later : 
 means a is able to demonstrate  give evidence  that   is true   means a is able to demonstrate physical capability to perform  
　central to the  jones  1  analysis of conventional signalling systems and the  jones and sergot  1  analysis of institutional power is the idea of counts as. the idea here is that one agent seeing to it that  say  can count as  in certain contexts  as another agent - or even the institution itself - seeing to it that  this notion was formalised in  jones and sergot  1  with a relativised  to institutions  conditional connective : 

such a formula is called an institutional power  whereby a seeing to it that  counts as  just as if  1 sees to it that 
  this is used to formalise searle's constitutive rules of the form  x counts as y in context c   where searle's context c will here be denoted by some institution /. we write: 

to identify a 'named' power p denoting a specific counts as formula. 
1 	multiagent systems 　an agent a's permissions and obligations with respect to an institution / are represented by: is permitted to perform in  by  j is permitted to make   true in  by  / is obliged to  by  / to perform   is obliged to  by  / that be true 
1 	two illustrative examples 
1 	example 1: t c p slowstart 
the standard tcp specification requires implementation of an algorithm called  slow start   documented in ietf rfc1  cf.  stevens  1  . the specification of the algorithm mandates that  on the sender's side  the first transmission consists of just one packet. if this is acknowledged successfully  then the sender can transmit two packets. the sender then continues to increase the number of packets transmitted until the network capacity is reached  packets are not acknowledged successfully   and then throttles back. this ensures that no tcp sender overwhelms a network. 
　let  be a windows nt server  and let  be the statement ''i  w  implement tcp slow start algorithm as specified in ietf rfc1 . let  be the signalling system  i.e. agent communication language  in which the signal q denotes  assume a is used for communication by institution ietf  represented by /  so that is the action of transmitting the signal denoting  
　now  suppose we want to allow agents  in particular servers  tcp senders   to assert or inform other agents that they implement the ietf  institution /  standard specifications. we also want / to be able to inspect and verify that servers do indeed implement the standard specifications correctly. 
　so  we can write meaning that  subjectively  from w's perspective  is true  w believes . suppose then that makes the assertion  in a that  / . as per searle   counts as an undertaking that  represents an actual state of affairs    searle  1 : p.1   we want this to count as a commitment  in the context of the institution /  that it implements the slow start algorithm correctly. we interpret commitment here as an obligation to be able to verify that  
　now  to capture the idea of an assertion as a commitment  the institution / has the following as one of its constitutive rules  which also apply to any other server: 

thus the assertion  in 1  that the server w implements the slow start algorithm  counts as an obligation  from the server to the institution  that this is a true statement. 
　however  and more importantly  we also want to be able to make judgements of the form cither: 

to say that according to the institution   is objectively  at least according to the institution  true  or not . 
　certainly this demands that  as a required state  but also that w be capable of demonstrating that 
 as it turns   because of a widespread bug in the slow start implementation in windows nt servers   /  is not a true  objectively true  statement  stevens  1 . being unable to verify  if demanded to do so  that  /   w would be in violation of its obligation if it made the assertion.  note we have set aside the practical problem of a program verifying properties  correctness  of itself.  
1 	example 1: football  soccer  
this kind of example is common in the literature but worth examining again. consider the institution f of football  soccer . we define a  goal  is scored when the ball has crossed a painted white line between two uprights and under a crossbar. then  we can examine the situation at any given instant and determine whether or not a goal  according to f  has been scored.  in searlc's terms  the fact that a ball has crossed a line is a brute fact  the fact that by crossing the line between some sticks a goal has been scored  is an institutional fact.  
　in certain games  a referee is given the power to examine the situation and decide whether or not it fits the definition of a  goal . if the referee signals that this is the case  then it is a goal  in the sense that the score of one team is incremented  etc. . although a fairly coarse over-simplification  we could say that the referee is empowered by f to sec to it that goals are scored. however  the referee is not permitted to signal  goal   cannot exercise the institutional power  unless the world-to-word fit is such that the situation in the world matches the definition of the word. so if one of the players sees to it that the conditions for a goal are satisfied  implicitly  according to the rules of football   then this counts as  in f  as initiating the referee's permission to signal  goal . 
let us assume that the players are permitted to signal 
 goal  arbitrarily  of course this is not strictly the case   but because they are not empowered to create goals  if they do signal  goal   this does not count as a goal  in effect  all they can do is 'claim' . 
so let us have agent 1' who has the power of referee 
 i.e. agent 1* occupies the role of referee  which is granted certain powers by institution f . let  be the action of transmitting a signal in the signalling system  acl  used by f  which denotes  goal   e.g.  whistling  saying  goal   etc. . then  for the institution f  referee agent r  and player agents p  we have : 

multiagent systems 	1 　a situation arose in the 1 world cup final between england and germany  when the england players were claiming a goal had been scored. the england players were permitted to signal  goal   but not being empowered  these signals did not count as goals. the referee was so empowered  so when he signalled  goal   it did count as a goal - even though a  goal  had not been scored. the problem  according to the characterisation above  was that the referee was exercising a power that in fact he was not permitted to. at this point  the referee should have been sanctioned according to the rules of f: but this too is a subject for further work. however  as we see in section 1  this is the kind of situation we expect to encounter in future multi-agents systems  where agents have powers to see to it that institutional facts are true  but have constraints on their permissions or occasions when to exercise that power. 
1 	single signalling acts 
the two illustrative examples of the previous section indicate typical examples of the kind of meaning we seek for agent's illocutionary acts. in the first example  it was that the assertion counted as an undertaking that the propositional content was true  and that the asserter could verify that it was true ; in the second example  that the declaration counted as the insitution seeing to that the corresponding institutional fact was true. 
　motivated by this  in this section  we specify a set of constitutive rules for single  'one off' signals  i.e. signalling actions not anticipating a reply. the specific context for this argument is as follows. for  an agent communicates by message passing   i.e. a communicative action performed by an agent  we are assuming a computational model involving the point-to-point transmission  from agent a to agent b  of 'information structures' representing these messages. 'saying' and 'hearing' arc the results of  respectively  writing to and reading from some channel  e.g. a tcp/ip socket connection   or the consequences of remote method invocation  rmi  using constitutive rules rather than a conventional device. 
　for the operational context  we mean an open system as indicated in  artikis et a/.  1   whereby: no single agent has universal knowledge of the entire system  agents may have conflicting goals  internal architectures are not known  local states are individually consistent but may be globally inconsistent  and there is no centralized authority or control  of knowledge and behaviour . on the issue of decentralization  we take the position of local autonomy over goals  decisions and state  but that all communication is institutional  searle  1 . 
　assume for the application that the agents are engaged in information trading or web services. we assume that the application will include finding and requesting services  and finding and supplying information. thus there will be some individual message exchanges  assertives  directives  etc.  and some structured exchanges  e.g. contract nets and auctions . for each individual signalling act  we give the required form  of propositional content arid signalling content   the conventional interpretation of the signal  and the institutional powers  if any  associated with the signal itself. note that this is an external specification: so the conventional interpretation indicates that  in the context of this particular institution  if an agent wants to convey a certain meaning  then  by convention  it uses a particular signal; and if an agent witnesses a particular signal  then  by convention  a certain meaning is conveyed. we consider four of the five types of illocutionary point identified in  searle  1 : assertive  assert and inform   directive  command and request   commissive and declarative. 
1. assertive  assert  i propositional content 
signal c a s s e conventional interpretation institutional condition   
1 
1. assertive  inform  	i propositional content 	proposition ' signal 	inform conventional 	interrelation institutiotial condition 	| none 
1. directive  request  i propositional content signal conventional interpretation institutional condition | none 
1. directive  command  i propositional content 
signal conventional interpretation institutional condition 	  
1. commissive  promise  	i 
propositional content 
signal    conventional interpretation institutional condition 	| 
1. declarative  declare  	i 
propositional content  signal conventional interpretation institutional condition  
　note that there might be some minor objections to the characterisation of the constitutive rules for the given illocutionary act types. however  recall that this is an artificial system of communication  that is being designed. it is not intended to be a formal characterisation of a preexisting system of communication  i.e. natural language  although it draws its inspiration from that source. if in turn the inspiration is not respecting the intuition  then it is cas}' enough to substitute signalacll for assert  siyndlact-1 for inform  and so on  as the software will process the messages in just the same way and according to the same constitutive rules. 
　searle's  searle  1  formulation of rules in speech act theory included what he called preparatory conditions and sincerity conditions. preparatory conditions were extant circumstances required for a speech act to be a valid act of the associated illocutionary type; the sincerity condition was a 'psychological' expression associated with the speech act. 
　our agents do not have psychological states  but given the notation of section 1 it is not uninteresting to consider putative sincerity conditions expressed in the signals defined above. for example  if we added to inform the preparatory condition -i aa h  at  h  /     and the sincerity condition aa h  /   then these are effectively fipa inform feasibility preconditions fp1 and fp1  fipa  1   while the conventional interpretation is essentially the intended re  rational effect . thus it is straightforward  within the framework of constitutive rules  to get the current fipa acl semantics to 'drop out' as a special case. 
multiagent systems 

1 	conversations: an auction protocol 
in this section  we apply the idea of constitutive rules to a conversation  based on a variant of the english auction protocol  venkatraman and singh  1 . one observation from the analysis here is that specification of constitutive rules for an acl must be sensi-　now the way it works is that if an agent has the power and performs the action  then it will count as seeing to it that the corresponding instituional fact is true. the institutional fact in turn initiates or terminate other powers  so each agent in effect has the power to empower other agents . if  initially  /powaannounce  1 p   then: tive to time and predication  cf.  artikis et a/.  1; sergot  1 . 
　an informal description of the auction is: the auctioneer opens the auction for goods g at price p  bidders are empowered to bid for g at price p; after receiving a bid  the auctioneer is empowered to announce a new price and if there is no bid at the new price  the ... initiating 	jt*owhbid g  p  ... terminating 	/powaannounce b signals bid # p  results in ... 
	...initiating 	/powu announce   
	... terminating 	ipowb bid g p  for all b 

for all b' an auction  namely that : offering specific goods g for auction implies that the auctioneer either owns or is licensed to sell g  making a bid of p for p implies that the bidder owns p; bidding p more than once and bidding a price lower than the announced price p arc meaningless actions; and the auctioneer is not empowered to accept two bids for the same g. 
　one way to formalise this protocol is to specify: the institutional powers of the auctioneer and the bidders; the assertions implicit in making announcements and bids; and the changing permissions of each participant as the protocol progresses which determine whether or not they are allowed to exercise their powers. there are three illocutionary acts: announce  bid and accept  with propositional content goods g  lot number  and price p. we assume  that all communications are broadcast  with the intended recipient b of accept messages explicitly identified in some way. 
　in general  the assertive force implicit in the illocutionary acts is given by: a signals accept /;  g p  results in ... 
... terminating /powa accept  b  g  p  ... terminating /powj/ bid g  p'  
　note  artikis et a/.  1  formalised a specification of the contract-net protocol in terms of which powers  etc.  were initated and which were terminated by specific actions  which allowed for an event calculus specifica-
tion and direct implementation of the protocol .  sergot  1  also contains an analysis of an auction protocol. 
　what's missing from the formalisation of conversational illocutionary acts  as opposed to the signalling acts of the previous section  is the conventional interpretation  that these acts count as attempts to affect computational states in some way . it is not entirely clear what these should be  e.g. for announce  to inform b that g is for sale  to induce b to make a bid  or to indicate its intention to sell g once a buyer is found ; or indeed that such rules are adding anything useful in this context. we leave this for further investigation. auctioneer has the power to accept a bid at price p. 	... terminating /powa accept some b  
multiagent systems 1 	there are also other rules that govern the conduct of 	...initiating 	;powa accept  
　the institutional conditions element of the constitutive rules are given by the following institutional powers. note that these are unlike some of the institutional powers previously discussed in this paper  for two reasons. firstly  these are 'power schema1  in the sense that the actions of other agents will instantiate specific instances of each schema; and secondly  because they are transient rather than permanent  and each specific instance is either initiated or terminated under certain circumstances. the power of a bidder is given by: 

while the auctioneer has two powers: firstly the power to make announcements  by announcing an auction  and secondly the power to make contracts  by accepting a bid: p respectively. in this way  we could circumvent the implicit assertive force in the announce and bid signals  by requiring that agents seek permission to sell goods or 
offer bids  and are subject to sanction if they create contracts without permission  which they cannot honour. 
1 	summary and conclusions 
searle  searle  1  defined the semantics of illocutionary acts in terms of the conventional realization of series of sets of constitutive rules  and that a meaningful speech act was performed by uttering an expression in accordance with those rules. the constitutive rule sets proposed   searle  1 :p1  contained several conditions  including the propositional content  preparatory  sincerity and essential conditions. however  a number 
1　in addition  we could specify that agents are only permitted to exercise their power  as an auctioner or a bidder  if they either own the goods g or the bidding price of these rules were concerned with 'psychological states  and the attempted formalization of such rules in multi-
	announcement 	 modal bdi logics are far from computationally tractable. 
　in this paper  we have proposed to use searle's theory of constitutive rules to define a semantics of illocution-
	contract 	ary acts  signals  for an agent communication language. 

the set of conditions  for a wide series of act types  includes the propositional content and form of a signalling act  the conventional interpretation  of intended perlocutionary effect   the institutional conditions  expressed as a counts as formula  requiring institutional powers  and  in conversations  what deontic states are initiated or terminated by the performance of the signalling act. 
　there is  however  more work that is required. we have characterised the formalism used in section 1 as a 'notation'. ideally  the agent abstraction would define an operational model  which would be directly executable  and the 'logical' representation would be complete. for an executable operational model  we need an operational semantics  and for this purpose we are investigating labelled transition systems. a compiler for such rules  with an explicit link to  an implementation of  the agent abstraction  could then be considered. 
　for the logical model  we require  at least  a semantics of the c operator. we recognize this is problematic  but for the kind of applications in which we axe interested  where assertions of the forms  i have this right    i represent this agency    i can perform this service  are anticipated  we feel something of this kind is required. we have interpreted searle's meaning of an assertion   commitment to the truth of  as an obligation to be able to verify and this is not a matter of merely seeing to it that however  the work-around suggested in the previous section could eliminate the c operator. 
　moreover  there axe many open questions  some of which have already been indicated. the nature of the relationship between electronic institutions and deontic states of agents needs to be further elaborated  as this is central to definition of the communication model. many problems in section 1 stemmed from trying to analyse dynamic phenomena in an essentially static formalism  so an explicit treatment and representation of time  linking to  artikis et a/.  1; sergot  1   is required. the representation of contracts  from where this work originated  also needs to be refined. 
　defining acl semantics based on speech act theory was first proposed for both kqml  labrou and finin  1  and fipa  fipa  1   and given in terms of an axiomatic characterisation of intentional bdi agents. we would argue that the emphasis on the intentional states rather than the institutional nature of the communication has omitted the most important component of the theory.  greaves et al  1  proposed an alternative model  using the idea of conversation policies  which define fine-grained constraints on acl usage. another alternative involves proposals primarily based on the idea of commitments  e.g.  venkatraman and singh  1; colombetti  1   while jones  jones  1  proposes a conventional account of natural language speech acts based on the intentional exploitation of signalling systems. motivated in part by the latter work  we have returned to speech act theory and attempted to characterise constitutive rules for a system of communication between 'autonomous' agents governed by an electronic institution. our intuition is that the interaction between this work and that of conversation policies offers some intriguing potential for further development. 
　in conclusion  we believe that we have a basis for designing acls  and giving a formal characterization of the semantics of communicative acts which is powerful  expressive and flexible. most importantly  it demonstrates the fundamental conceptual and functional difference between language-based communication and method invocation  and justifies why agent-based systems offer a unique advantage over object-oriented ones. 
acknowledgements 
we are grateful to the partners on the alfebiite project  eu ist-1   especially marek sergot  andrew jones  alexander artikis and lloyd kamara; the members of fipa tc semantics; and several other commentators for their valuable input and insight. 
