 
this paper introduces a new distinctive class of combinatorial auction protocols called priceoriented  rationing-free  porf  protocols. the outline of a porf protocol is as follows:  i  for each bidder  the price of each bundle of goods is determined independently of his/her own declaration  while it can depend on the declarations of other bidders    ii  we allocate each bidder a bundle that maximizes his/her utility independently of the allocations of other bidders  i.e.  rationing-free . 
although a porf protocol appears quite different from traditional protocol descriptions  surprisingly  it is a sufficient and necessary condition for a protocol to be strategy-proof. furthermore  we show that a porf protocol satisfying additional conditions is false-name-proof; at the same time  any falsename-proof protocol can be described as a porf protocol that satisfies the additional conditions. a porf protocol is an innovative characterization of strategy-proof protocols and the first attempt to characterize false-name-proof protocols. such a characterization is not only theoretically significant but also useful in practice  since it can serve as a guideline for developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. we present a new false-nameproof protocol based on the concept of a porf protocol. 
1 introduction 
internet auctions have become an integral part of electronic commerce and a promising field for applying ai technologies. among various studies related to internet auctions  those on combinatorial auctions have lately attracted considerable attention  an extensive survey is presented in  de vries and vohra  1  . although conventional auctions sell a single item at a time  combinatorial auctions sell multiple items with interdependent values simultaneously and allow the bidders to bid on any combination of items. in a combinatorial auction  a bidder can express complementary/substitutable preferences over multiple bids. by taking into account complementary/substitutable preferences  we can increase the participants' utilities and the revenue of the seller. 
　one important characteristic of an auction protocol is that it is strategy-proof. a protocol is strategy-proof if  for each bidder  declaring his/her true evaluation values is a dominant strategy  i.e.  an optimal strategy regardless of the actions of other bidders. in theory  the revelation principle states that in the design of an auction protocol  we can restrict our attention to strategy-proof protocols without loss of generality  myerson  1 . in other words  if a certain property  e.g.  pareto efficiency  can be achieved using some auction protocol in a dominant-strategy equilibrium  i.e.  a combination of dominant strategies of bidders  the property can also be achieved using a strategy-proof auction protocol. 
　furthermore  a strategy-proof protocol is also practically useful for applying to internet auctions. for example  if we use the first-price sealed-bid auction  which is not strategyproof   the bidding prices must be securely concealed until the auction is closed. on the other hand  if we use a strategyproof protocol  knowing the bidding prices of other bidders is useless; thus  such security issues become less critical. 
　also  the author pointed out the possibility of a new type of fraud called false-name bids  which utilizes the anonymity available in the internet  yokoo et al  forthcoming; 1a; 1; sakurai et ai  1 . false-name bids are bids submitted under fictitious names  e.g.  multiple e-mail addresses. such a dishonest action is very difficult to detect  since identifying each participant on the internet is virtually impossible. 
　we say a protocol is false-name-proof if  for each bidder  declaring his/her true evaluation values using a single identifier  although the bidder can use multiple identifiers  is a dominant strategy. as for strategy-proof protocols  the revelation principle holds for false-name-proof protocols  yokoo et al% forthcoming; 1 . thus  we can restrict our attention to false-name-proof protocols without loss of generality. 
　given that strategy/false-name proof protocols are important both in theory and practice  obvious questions we need to answer are  how can we design such protocols and what features do these protocols have in common  i.e.  characterization of the protocols. although there have been several works on characterizing strategy-proof protocols  e.g.   roberts  1; holmstrom  1    as far as the author is aware  there is no work on characterizing false-name-proof protocols. 
　in this paper  we introduce an innovative characterization of strategy/false-name proof protocols by introducing a new 

distinctive class of combinatorial auction protocols called price-oriented  rationing-free  porf  protocols. the outline of a porf protocol is as follows. 
 for each bidder  the price of each bundle of goods is determined independently of his/her own declaration  while it can depend on the declarations of other bidders. 
 we allocate each bidder a bundle that maximizes his/her utility independently of the allocations of other bidders  i.e.  rationing-free . 
　a porf protocol looks quite different from traditional protocol descriptions. in a traditional protocol  the allocations of goods are usually determined first  and then the payments of the winners are determined. on the other hand  in a prof protocol  the prices of bundles for each bidder are determined first  and then the allocation is determined independently based on these prices. 
　however  surprisingly  a porf protocol captures all the essential features of a strategy-proof protocol  i.e.  if a protocol can be described as a porf protocol  it is strategy-proof  and vice versa. also  if a protocol can be described as a porf protocol that satisfies additional conditions  it is false-nameproof  and vice versa. 
　as far as the author is aware  a porf protocol is an innovative characterization of strategy-proof protocols and the first attempt to characterize false-name-proof protocols. such a characterization is not only theoretically significant but also useful in practice  since it can serve as a guideline for developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. we present a new false-name-proof protocol based on the idea of a porf protocol. 
1 problem settings 
assume there are a set of bidders n = ~ and a set of goods m = {1 ...  m}. each bidder i has his/her preferences over  formally  we model this by sup-
posing that bidder i privately observes a parameter  or signal  
  which determines his/her preferences. we refer to as the type of bidder i. we assume  is is drawn from a set we assume a quasi-linear  private value model with no allocative externality  defined as follows. 
definition 1  utility of a bidder  
the utility of bidder i  when i obtains a bundle  i.e.  a subset of goods and pays   is represented as - 
pbti. 
we assume evaluation value v is normalized by v 1{  = 1. also  we assume for all   
more  we assume free disposal  i.e.  	for all  
　in a traditional definition  mas-colell et al.1   an auction protocol is  dominant-strategy  incentive compatible  or strategy-proof  if declaring the true type/evaluation values is a dominant strategy for each bidder  i.e.  an optimal strategy regardless of the actions of other bidders. 
　in this paper  we extend the traditional definition of incentive compatibility so that it can address false-name bid manipulations  i.e.  we define that an auction protocol is  dominantstrategy  incentive compatible if declaring the true type by using a single identifier is a dominant strategy for each bidder. to distinguish between the traditional and extended definitions of incentive compatibility  we refer to the traditional definition as strategy-proof and to the extended definition as 
false-name-proof 
　an auction protocol is individually rational if no participant suffers any loss in a dominant-strategy equilibrium  i.e.  the payment never exceeds the evaluation value of the obtained goods. in a private value auction  individual rationality is indispensable; no bidder wants to participate in an auction where he/she might be charged more money than he/she is willing to pay. therefore  in this paper  we restrict our attention to individually rational protocols. also  we restrict our attention to deterministic protocols  which always obtain the same outcome for the same input. 
　we say an auction protocol is pareto efficient when the sum of all participants' utilities  including that of the auctioneer   i.e.  the social surplus  is maximized in a dominant-strategy equilibrium. the author has proved that there exists no falsename-proof protocol that satisfies pareto efficiency and individual rationality at the same time  yokoo et al.  forthcoming; sakurai et al.  1 . therefore  we need to sacrifice efficiency to some extent when false-name bids are possible. 
1 price-oriented  rationing-free  porf  protocol 
a porf protocol is defined as follows. 
definition 1  porf protocol  
 each bidder declares his/her type   which is not necessarily the true type  
 for each bidder i  for each bundle  the price 
pb  i is defined. this price must be determined independently of 's declared type  while it can be dependent on declared types of other bidders. 
	 we assume = 1 holds. also  if 	 
pb' i holds. 
 for bidder a bundle b is allocated  where  = arg max bidder i pays  if 
there exist multiple bundles that maximize i 's utility  one of these bundles is allocated. 
 the result of the allocation satisfies allocationfeasibility  i.e.  for two bidders and bundles allocated to these bidders and holds. 
it is straightforward to show that a porf protocol is strategyproof. the price of bidder i is determined independently of vs declared type  and he/she can obtain the bundle that maximizes his/her utility independently of the allocations of other bidders  i.e.  the protocol is rationing-free. 
　on the other hand  in a porf protocol  the prices must be determined appropriately to satisfy allocation-feasibility1. 
　　since the price for each bidder can be different and the price of a bundle is not necessarily the sum of the prices of all goods in the bundle  there is no direct relation between the prices that achieve allocation-feasibility and equilibrium prices. 

the definition of a porf protocol requires that if there exist multiple bundles that maximize z's utility  then one of these bundles must be allocated  but it does not specify exactly which bundle should be allocated. therefore  if there exist multiple choices  the auctioneer can adjust the allocation of multiple bidders in order to satisfy allocation-feasibility. 
next  we provide some examples of porf protocols. 
since a porf protocol is strategy-proof  in the rest of this paper  we assume each bidder i declares his/her true type 1i. 
example 1 let us consider the auction of a single unit of a single item. 
  the price of the only bundle b = m is defined as  = max  
this protocol is identical to the vickrey auction protocol  vickrey  1 . 
　more specifically  for the bidder with the highest evaluation value  the price of the good is equal to the second highest evaluation value. on the other hand  for other bidders  the price is equal to the highest evaluation value  so nobody except the bidder with the highest evaluation value is willing to buy the good. 
example 1 let us consider a combinatorial auction. to simplify the protocol description  we introduce the following no-
tation. for a set of goods b and a set of bidders x  where  is a set of types of bidders in x  we define 
as the sum of the evaluation values ofx when b is allocated optimally among x. 
to be precise  for an feasible allocation 
where 	and for all  
　{x  b  is defined as max where is the type of bidder j. 
the price of bundle b for bidder i is defined as follows: 

this protocol is identical to the vickrey-clarke-groves 
 vcg  mechanism lvickrey  1; clarke  1; groves  1   i.e.  if b is allocated to i in a pareto efficient allocation  then is equal to the payment in the vcg; otherwise  
pb i is larger than  
　let us describe how this protocol works. assume there are two goods 1 and 1  and three bidders  bidder 1  1  and 1  whose types are   respectively. the evaluation 
value for a bundle 
　accordingly  the prices of these bundles for each bidder is given as follows. 
{1} {1} {1} bidder 1 1 1 1 bidder 1 1 1 1 bidder 1 1 1 1 as a result  bidder 1 obtains good 1 with price 1  and bidder 1 obtains good 1 with price 1. 
1 strategy-proof  porf 
a porf protocol looks quite different from traditional protocol descriptions  in which the allocation of the goods/winners are determined  and then the payments of these winners are determined. in a prof protocol  the prices of bundles for each bidder is determined first  and then the allocation is determined based on these prices. in a traditional protocol description  the payment of bidder i must be determined independently of  ''s type to make the protocol strategy-proof this is similar to the fact that the price of bidder i in a porf protocol must be determined independently of z's declared type. the most distinctive characteristic of a porf protocol is that it is rationing-free  i.e.  each bidder can obtain the optimal bundle based on the prices  and the allocation for each bidder is done independently  except when a bidder is totally indifferent between multiple bundles . 
　surprisingly  a porf protocol is not only a sufficient condition that a protocol is strategy-proof  but it is also a necessary condition  i.e.  the following theorem holds. 
theorem 1 if a protocol is strategy-proof then the protocol can be described as a porf protocol. 
the argument presented in this section is very general and requires only the fact that a protocol is deterministic and individually rational. 
　the outline of the proof in the remainder of this section can be summarized as follows. first  we show that if a bidder is single-minded  definition 1   i.e.  he/she is interested only in a particular bundle  any strategy-proof protocol can be described as a porf protocol  lemma 1   i.e.  the price of the bundle is determined and the bidder will obtain the bundle if his/her evaluation value is larger than the price. an intuitive explanation for this result is that if such a price does not exist  a single-minded bidder can have an incentive to under/overdeclare his/her evaluation value for the bundle. the only way to make the protocol strategy-proof is to set a fixed threshold based on other bidders' evaluation values  which determines whether the single-minded bidder will obtain the bundle or not. 
　next  we show that this result can be extended to the case where a bidder is a minded  definition 1   i.e.  a bidder is interested in multiple bundles at the same time  lemma 1 . an intuitive explanation for this result is as follows. a singleminded bidder can pretend to be a a-minded bidder  and vice versa. therefore  to a a-minded bidder  the protocol must give the results that are basically equivalent to a singleminded bidder 
　any bidder can be represented as a j-minded bidder  where m is the number of goods and is the number of all possible bundles  except an empty set . thus  we can show that any strategy-proof protocol can be represented as a prof protocol. 
　in the following  we show the detailed proof of theorem 1. to derive the theorem  we introduce notions such as singleminded bidder  monotone allocation rule  and critical-value  which are used in  lehmann et ai  1; mu'alem and nisan  

1 . the proofs of lemma 1 and 1 are basically due to  lehmann et al.y 1; mu'alem and nisan  1 . 
definition 1  single-minded bidder  
we say bidder i is single-minded ifi requires only one bundle 
	 
otherwise   
if bidder z is single-minded  i.e.  the declared type of z can be considered to be single-minded  then a porf protocol can be described as follows  assuming the set of other bidders and their types are fixed. we denote this protocol as a porf protocol for a single-minded bidder. 
	  for bidder 	  which is the price of 	  is defined. if 
	  then bi  or a superset of 	is allocated 
to bidder z and i pays pi. if then no good is allocated. if then either bi  or a superset of bi  is allocated and i pays pi or no good is allocated. 
definition 1  monotone allocation rule  
 we say a protocol is monotone for a single-minded bidder i if the following condition is satisfied  assuming the set of other bidders and their types are fixed. 
if bundle bt  or a superset of bi  is allocated to bidder i when i 's evaluation value for   then bx  or a superset of b{  is also allocated when i 's evaluation value for bi is 

the following lemma holds. 
lemma 1 if a protocol is strategy-proof then the protocol is monotone for a single-minded bidder. 
proof: if a protocol is not monotone  there exists a case where   or a superset  is allocated to bidder z when z 's evaluation value for bi is    while   or a superset  is not allocated to bidder z when z's evaluation value for bi is since the protocol is individually rational  the payment when z's evaluation value is  must be less than or equal to v%. therefore  when z's true evaluation value is if z truthfully declares his/her type  z's utility is 1  since neither nor a superset is allocated. however  if z declares a false type as a single-minded bidder where the evaluation value for. 
z can obtain a positive utility. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
furthermore  the following lemma holds. 
lemma 1 if a protocol is monotone for a single-minded bidder  then there exists critical-value c that satisfies the following condition  assuming the set of other bidders and their types are fixed: if bi  or a superset  is allocated to i  while if no good is allocated. 
proof: let us assume that no critical value exists. then  for an arbitrary value   either one of the following two cases holds. 
case i: there exists where bidder ' cannot obtain b1 when z's evaluation value is  
case ii: there exists where bidder z can obtain bi when z's evaluation value is  
if we set 	case ii cannot be true so case i must hold. 
let us re-assign as and repeat this procedure until case ii occurs  if case ii never occurs  then becomes a critical value . in this case  bidder z cannot obtain when the evaluation value is     while i can obtain bi when the evaluation value is this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is monotone. 
next  we show that the following lemma holds. 
lemma 1 if a protocol is strategy-proof then  for a singleminded bidder  the protocol can be described as a porf protocol for a single-minded bidder  i.e.  if i's evaluation value 
for bi is larger than a given value pi  then bi  or a superset  is allocated and i 's payment is pi if i's evaluation value for bi is smaller than pi no good is allocated. 
proof: from lemma 1 and 1  the protocol is monotone and there exists critical-value c  i.e.  bi  or a superset  is allocated when the evaluation value is larger than c  while no good is allocated when the evaluation value is smaller than c. the only thing we need to show is that the payment is equal to c when b1  or a superset  is allocated. let us assume that the payment is and derive a contradiction. 
　first  let us consider the case ' .  when the evaluation value of i is obtains b1  or a superset  but the payment is when the evaluation value of i is  if i declares the true type  no good is allocated and the obtained utility is 1  while if z declares a false type where the evaluation value is  can obtain b1  or a superset  and the payment is c'  thus the obtained utility becomes positive. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
　next  let us consider the case when the evaluation value of z is obtains b1  or a superset  but the payment is if i declares a false type where the evaluation value is can obtain b1  or a superset  because c is a critical value. since the protocol is individually rational  the payment must be less than or equal to  which is less than   i.e.  the payment when i declares the true type. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
　from the above  the protocol can be described as a porf protocol for a single-minded bidder where  
definition 1  k-minded bidder  
we say bidder i is a k-minded bidder ifi requires exactly one 
bundle from k bundles . let us represent i 's evaluation value for ~ . for notation simplicity  let us assume and the evaluation value of i for bundle b is defined as follows. 

　from lemma 1  if bidder z is a single-minded bidder who requires only   then a strategy-proof protocol must be a porf protocol for a single-minded bidder. let us represent the price for bidder z of  in this protocol as  
first  we show that the following lemma holds. 
lemma 1 if a protocol is strategy-proof then  for k-minded 
bidder i  the payment when i obtains b is given b	y	= 
max   where   
proof: let us assume that 	= argmax 	where 
 we derive a contradiction assuming 
first  let us consider the case 	assume that z is a 

single-minded bidder who requires only  and vs evaluation value for is pi  . in this case  if i declares the true type  the obtained utility is 1. on the other hand  if i declares his/her type as a fc-minded bidder  i can obtain and the payment is   thus i can obtain a positive utility. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. 
	next  let us consider the case 	if i declares 
its type as a single-minded bidder who requires only can obtain  or a superset  and the payment is   which is less than i.e.  the payment when he/she declares the true type. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof.  
finally  we show that the following lemma holds. 
lemma 1 if a protocol is strategy-proof  then  for a kminded bidder i  the protocol can be described as a porf 
protocol for a k-minded bidder  i.e.  for each  which is the price for bidder i  is defined  and the protocol assigns 
  or a superset   where 	= argmax i. 
the payment is  
proof: we derive a contradiction assuming that a strategyproof protocol assigns for fc-minded bidder i. let us choose = arg max   where from the definition of a fc-minded bidder  holds. 
furthermore  from the fact that holds.  
from lemma 1  the payment when i obtains b is given by 

holds. this formula represents the fact that the utility when i declares the true type  is less than the 
utility when i declares a false type  where i is a single-minded 
bidder that requires only . this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is strategy-proof. d 
　any bidder can be represented as a -minded bidder  where m is the number of goods and is the number of all possible bundles  except an empty set . since lemma 1 holds for all fc  from lemma 1  we can derive theorem 1. 
1 porf with additional conditions false-name-proof 
from the definition  if a protocol is false-name-proof  it is also strategy-proof. therefore  it is obvious that false-nameproof  porf holds. on the other hand  porf  falsename-proof does not hold in general. for example  the vcg mechanism is strategy-proof  so it can be described as a porf protocol  but it is not false-name-proof  as shown in  yokoo et al.1 forthcoming; sakurai et al.  1 . 
　in this section  we limit our attention to protocols that satisfy the following condition. 
definition 1  weakly-anonymous pricing rule  wap   for bidder i  the price of bundle b is given as a function of types of other bidders  i.e.  the price can be described as 
p  where x is the set of bidders except i  andis  the set of types of bidders in x. 
the above condition requires that if two bidders are facing the same types of opponents  their prices must be identical for all bundles. the wap condition is intuitively natural and virtually all well-known protocols  including the vcg  satisfy this condition. 
　for a porf protocol that satisfies the wap condition  we define the following additional condition. 
definition 1  no super-additive price increase  nsa   
for all subset of bidders   and . and for let us denote bi as a bundle that maximizes i 's utility  
then  
an intuitive meaning of this condition is that the price of buying a combination of bundles  the right side of the inequality  must be smaller than or equal to the sum of the prices for buying these bundles separately  the left side . 
the next theorem states that for a porf protocol with the 
wap  the nsa is a sufficient condition for a protocol to be false-name-proof. 
theorem 1 if a porf protocol with the wap satisfies the nsa condition  then the protocol is false-name-proof. 
proof: the proof is rather clear. if a bidder uses a set of identifiers 1  then from the nsa condition  the bidder can obtain the same set of goods by using a single identifier  while the payment becomes smaller  or remains the same . ＆ 
　we can show that for a porf protocol with wap  the nsa is not only a sufficient condition but also a necessary condition  i.e.  the following theorem holds. 
 theorem 1 if a protocol is a porf protocol with the wap and is false-name-proof  then it satisfies the nsa condition. 
proof: let us assume that there exists a false-name-proof protocol that can be described as a porf protocol with the wap but does not satisfy the nsa condition. more precisely  for a set of identifiers and for is the bundle that maximizes i's utility  but 
　let us assume the case where bidder i' is facing opponents whose types are also  let us assume bidder i' is single-minded for bundle and the evaluation value is . if bidder declares his/her true type  the obtained utility is 1  since if can obtain the bundle  the payment is equal to his/her evaluation value . on the other hand  if i' uses a set of identifiers 1  and for each he/she declares the type as then for each identifier z  bi is obtained. 
the sum of the payment is  which is less than the evaluation value of   i.e.  
	thus  bidder 	can obtain positive utility 
by utilizing false-name bids. this contradicts the assumption that the protocol is false-name-proof.  
　for the protocols that are strategy-proof  sp   false-nameproof  fp   porf  wap  and nsa  the subset/superset relations can be illustrated as figure 1. the vcg mechanism can be described as a porf protocol with wap  but it does not satisfy the nsa condition. therefore  it is not false-nameproof. one example of a false-name-proof protocol that does not use the wap rule is a dictatorial protocol where all goods 

are allocated to one special bidder  the dictator  regardless of other bidders' evaluation values. 

figure 1: relations of protocols 
　due to space limitations  we omit detailed descriptions  but all existing false-name-proof protocols developed so far  e.g.  the lds  yokoo et al  1a   the ir  yokoo et al  1b   and the gal protocol  terada and yokoo  1   can be described as a porf protocol that satisfies the nsa condition. 
1 new false-name-proof protocol 
in this section  we develop a new false-name-proof protocol based on the concept of the porf protocol. to simplify the protocol description  we introduce a concept called a minimal bundle. 
definition 1  minimal bundle  bundle b is called minimal for bidder i if for all i holds. 
in this new protocol  the price of bundle b for bidder i is defined as follows: 
  and 
in short  the price of bundle b is equal to the highest evaluation value of a bundle  which is minimal and conflicting with bundle b. 
　compared with the lds protocol  yokoo et al.  1a   this protocol is much simpler and does not require any parameters to be set by the auctioneer  while in the lds protocol  the auctioneer must carefully determine the reservation price and the way of dividing goods into multiple bundles. if all bidders are single-minded  this protocol is one example of greedy protocols described in  lehmann et al  1 . 
　let us describe how this protocol works. let us assume there are three goods 1  and 1  and two bidders  bidder 1 and bidder 1  whose types are   respectively. the evaluation value for a bundle is determined as follows. 
these evaluation values mean that bidder 1 is 1-minded foi bundles {1} and {1}  while bidder 1 is 1-minded for bundles {1} and {1}. these bundles are minimal bundles. the prices of these bundles are given as follows. 
         {1} {1} {1} {1} {1} {1} {1 1} bidder 1 1 1 1 bidder 1 1 1 1 
as a result  bundle  is allocated to bidder 1 and bundle {1} is allocated to bidder 1. 
　it is clear that this protocol satisfies the allocationfeasibility. for each good /  let us choose bidder and bundle  that maximize where and is 
minimal for bidder j. then  only bidder is willing to obtain a bundle that contains good i. for all other bidders  the price of a bundle that contains / is higher than  or equal to  his/her evaluation value. 
　furthermore  it is clear that this protocol satisfies the nsa condition. in this pricing scheme  
max 	holds for all 	  and  
therefore  the following formula holds. 

furthermore  in this pricing scheme  prices increase monotonically by adding opponents  i.e.  for all  
1 discussions 
as far as the author is aware  a porf protocol is an innovative characterization of strategy-proof protocols and the first attempt to characterize false-name-proof protocols. here  we discuss several previous works on characterizing strategyproof protocols. 
　in  lehmann et a/.  1; mu'alem and nisan  1   it is shown that if there exist only single-minded bidders  a strategy-proof protocol is monotonic and has a critical value. since their motivation is to develop computationally efficient strategy-proof protocols that can achieve semi-optimal allocations  they do not extend their results to more general cases such as k-minded bidders. 
　in  roberts  1   a characterization of strategy-proof mechanisms is shown for general social choice problems. it is shown that any strategy-proof protocol can be described as a variation of the groves mechanisms  groves  1 . on the other hand  in the model used in this paper  we assume that the evaluation values of each bidder satisfy no allocativeexternality condition. therefore  the results described in  roberts  1  cannot be applied  i.e.  a porf protocol is not necessarily to be a variation of the groves mechanisms. 
　in  holmstrom  1   a characterization of strategy-proof mechanisms is described. it is shown that with the assumption that the preferences of each participant satisfy a condition called smoothly-connected  any strategy-proof protocol that satisfies pareto efficiency must be an instance of the groves mechanisms. this result can be applied to the model used in this paper since the smoothly-connected condition still holds. therefore  if we require that a protocol be pareto efficient  it 

is likely that the pricing scheme described in example 1 is the only way to make a porf protocol pareto efficient1. 
　as well as a porf protocol is theoretically significant  since it is an equivalent class of strategy-proof protocols  it has practical importance since it can serve as a guideline for developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. designing a strategy/false-name proof protocol has been a difficult task. as shown in section 1  we successfully developed a new false-name-proof protocol based on the idea of a porf protocol. the simplicity of this newly developed protocol compared with the lds protocol illustrates the expressive power of a porf protocol. of course  we need to prove that a porf protocol satisfies allocation-feasibility. however  this tends to be much easier than directly proving a protocol is strategy/false-name proof  since we can assume each bidder declares his/her true type by using a single identifier. 
　as for the computational cost of executing a protocol  a naive implementation of a porf protocol requires calculating prices for all bundles of all bidders. however  as in the case of the vcg  we can describe a protocol cither as a porf protocol or in a traditional manner in which an allocation of goods is determined  and then the payments are calculated based on the allocation. we can assume that the description of a porf protocol is not for actual implementation but for serving as a normative guideline in proving characteristics of a protocol. 
1 conclusions 
in this paper  we introduced a new distinctive class of combinatorial auction protocols called porf protocols. although a porf protocol looks quite different from traditional protocol descriptions  surprisingly  it is a sufficient and necessary condition for a protocol to be strategy-proof. furthermore  we showed that a porf protocol satisfying additional conditions is false-name-proof; at the same time  any false-name-proof protocol can be described as a porf protocol that satisfies the additional conditions. 
　a porf protocol is not only theoretically significant but also useful in practice  since it can serve as a guideline for developing new strategy/false-name proof protocols. we successfully developed a new false-name-proof protocol based on the idea of a porf protocol. we are currently extending the obtained results to combinatorial exchange. 
acknowledgements 
the author wishes to thank yoshikatsu tatamitani  kenji terada  yuko sakurai  atsushi iwasaki  and shigeo matsubara for their helpful discussions. 
references 
 clarke  1  e. h. clarke. multipart pricing of public goods. public choice  1-1  1. 
 devries and vohra  1  s. de vries and r. v. vohra. combinatorial auctions: a survey. informs journal on computing  1. 
　　since we require that the protocol also be individually rational  the groves mechanisms would be reduced to the vcg. 
 groves  1  t. groves. incentives in teams. econometrica  1-1  1. 
 holmstrom  1  b. holmstrom. groves' scheme on restricted domains. econometrica  1 : 1  1. 
 lehmann et al.  1  d. lehmann  l. i. o'callaghan  and y. shoham. truth revelation in approximately efficient combinatorial auctions. journal of the acm  1 :1  1. 
 mas-colell et al.  1  a. mas-colell  m. d. whinston  and j. r. green. microeconomic theory. oxford university press  1. 
 mu'alem and nisan  1  a. mu'alem and n. nisan. truthful approximation mechanisms for restricted combinatorial auctions. in proceedings of the eighteenth national conference on artificial intelligence  aaai-1   pages 1  1. 
 myerson  1  r. b. myerson. optimal auction design. mathematics of operation research  1-1  1. 
 roberts  1  k. roberts. the characterization of implementable choice rules. in j.-j. laffont  editor  aggregation and revelation of p