 
we study the problem of agents negotiating periods of time during which they can have use of resources  thus allowing for the sharing of resources. we define a multi-stage negotiation framework where agents  in order to obtain resources  step through a sequence of stages  each characterised by an increased chance of a mutually agreeable deal but at the price of disclosing more and more information. in the sequence  the agents may agree to move to the next stage if the previous stage fails to produce a deal amongst them. in this paper  we concentrate on two early negotiation stages  characterised by minimal disclosure of information. thus  the agents negotiating at these stages can be thought of as  minimally intrusive . 
1 introduction 
negotiation of resources is an important research area in multi-agent systems. in general  agents may negotiate to obtain resources that they are missing but that are necessary to carry out their plans. in this paper  we assume that negotiation for resources takes place within the framework of  sadri et al  1   where the knowledge of the agents is represented as a tuple   b  r  x  d  g   with b: beliefs about the world  the self and the other agents  as well as the negotiation policies of the agent; r: initially owned resources; x: intentions  i.e.  the plans1 that the agent intends to carry out  in order to achieve its goals  together with the resources required for that plan; v: store of past dialogues; and q: agent goals. 
　we extend  sadri et al.  1  to negotiate not just resources  but also time windows during which resources can be used by agents  thus allowing for sharing of  nonconsumable  resources over time  the extended framework allows solutions for a wider range of resource re-allocation problems. in the extended framework  agent intentions are 
   this work is partially funded by the 1st programme of the european commission under the ist-1 socs project. 
   'it is beyond the scope of this paper to provide a general and exhaustive representation of the agent knowledge. instead  we concentrate on those elements relevant to the resource sharing problem. in particular  for simplicity  we identify here intentions with plans. 
paolo torroni deis university of bologna v.le risorgimento  1 bologna  italy ptorroni deis.unibo.it 
sets of activities. drawing inspiration from  el sakkout and wallace  1   we model an activity a  a is a unique identifier  as a tuple  denoting that a re-
quires resource ra  has duration da  earliest start time tsa latest end time  note that  without loss of generality  we assume that each activity requires only one resource 1. in the extended framework  the knowledge of agents includes a 
 possibly empty  concrete schedule 	for activities  where if 
	then 	a  r  d  't 'sa  tea 	j  such that 
  and  
　we develop negotiation protocols and policies that allow agents to exchange resources and strike deals for agreed time windows. we introduce a multi-stage process of negotiation  each characterised by a protocol and a policy. a higher stage involves more information passing between agents and more sophisticated negotiation  possibly including re-planning by the agents aimed at trying to help satisfy each other's constraints and requirements. the following example illustrates the sort of problems and solutions we propose in this paper. example 1 let x and y be two agents  x's intentions contain an activity a requiring a resource 
y's intentions contain an activity b also requiring r. x owns r from time 1 to 1 and from time 1 onwards  and y owns r from time 1 to 1. x needs r for three consecutive time slots between 1 and 1  but it currently owns r for only two time slots. let us consider the three scenarios below. 
1.  the problem is solved by y agreeing to give r to x for  1 . 
1. and y has a concrete schedule for b to be carried out between 1 and 1. the problem is solved by y agreeing to postpone its schedule by 1 time slot and giving r to x for  1 . 
1. cannot give r away  because otherwise b becomes unfeasible. the problem can be solved by an exchange: y agrees to give r away to x for 
 1   in return for x giving r to y for  1 .   
1 background and preliminaries 
in this section we review and adapt some concepts from background papers  needed in the rest of the paper. 
　　indeed  it is possible to model any activity requiring multiple resources by a number of activities  one for each resource  with the same duration and times. 
definition 1 an agent system is a finite set  s  with at least two elements  where each is a ground term  representing the name of an agent. all elements of s are distinct  agent names must be uniquely identifiable . each agent   is equipped at each time with a knowledge base  
namely a tuple 	  as explained in the introduction. 
　note that  in this paper  we assume that the only parts of the knowledge base of an agent that change over time are the dialogue store  which grows in time  and the concrete schedule. we will also assume that  in   all activities that require the same resource have disjoint time windows. in the sequel  when clear from the context  we will sometimes refer to the knowledge base of an agent x simply as 
definition 1 let s be an agent system. let ties be a set of resources.1 let be the resource allocation in the system at time  this can be determined  for example  from and of all agents at time . the allocation of resources is defined for time periods  ts tc   

　the negotiation process we will define modifies the resource distribution in the agent system through time. the temporal resource reallocation problem  t-rrp  is the problem of answering to the following question: does there exist a time r during the negotiation process when the resource distribution is such that each agent has the resources it requires for time periods that would allow it to perform the activities in its intention  within their specified time windows  
　the purpose of this work is to show how it is possible to find a solution to the t-rrp  when one exists  by using agents that negotiate by means of dialogues. we will assume that all agents in a system share the same communication language  in terms of syntax  semantics  ontology  and pragmatics. we refer to  sadri et al  1 for a formal definition of a language for negotiation. in brief  a language defines the set of allowed dialogue moves. each dialogue move is coded into a tell predicate  which has 1 arguments: sender  receiver  content  dialogue identifier  and time of the move. we will use the communication language  defined below: 
  for 
　the first three moves are of intuitive meaning.  1  is used by x to propose a deal  promise : x will give r to y for 
　　1 without loss of generality  we assume that all resources in the system arc non-consumable  for resource reallocation  consumable resources differ from non-consumable ones in that the former can be allocated only for maximal intervals  and not for any sub-intervals  where is given below in the definition . 
multiagent systems 

　　　　　　　figure 1: protocol for stage 1 the interval j if y will give r to x for the interval  t.s  te .  1  is used to refuse a proposed deal and ask for a new one  there is no refuse .promise move which only terminates a protocol    1  is used to accept a deal. 
　given a language for negotiation   we define the set of final moves  .in particular  is the subset of that contains all the moves whose content is  1    1  
or  1 . 
　dialogues can be generated by means of policies  held by the knowledge base of the agents. 
definition 1 policies are expressed as dialogue constraints of the form  are moves. the conditions c are to be evaluated in the knowledge base of the agent or in extensions to it. the intended use of these policies is that if the agent receives a move pt  and the conditions c are satisfied in its knowledge base  the agent generates an operational model for policies is defined in  sadri et al.  1j. 
definition 1 given an agent system s equipped with a language for negotiation  and two agents x and y in s equipped with policy pol  a dialogue induced by pol be-

　note that this definition prevents agents from being involved in more than one dialogue at a time  e.g.  dialogues cannot be nested . 
　an important property of policies used to induce dialogues as in definition 1 is conformance to protocols  known to all agents involved in the dialogue. a dialogue protocol can be defined as a set of states  representing the current state of dialogue  a set of allowed dialogue moves  and a set of transition rules that  given a state and a move  produce a state. a protocol is therefore defined as a finite state machine  consisting of states and arcs  which has among its states an initial state 
1 

so  two final states   successful termination  and   unsuccessful termination   and possibly a number of intermediate states st. the arcs can be viewed as allowed transitions mapping one state to another given a label. these labels correspond to the content of moves. an example of protocol is in fig. 1. when we show the protocols  we use some abbreviations  such as for instance: request for request give refuse req for refuse request give 
　in order to define the concept of conformance  we define dialogues in relation with protocols. 
definition 1 given an agent system s equipped with a language for negotiation and a protocol .   a dialogue con-
forming to   between two agents x and y in 1  is a set of ground dialogue moves in     such that  for 
a given set of time lapses 
1. 1. 1. 1. as for definition 1; 
1. the content of must label an arc from if the content of is the label of an arc into a final state  then there is no in the d i a l o g u e . t h e contents of pi and   if they both exist  must be labels  respectively  of an arc going into a state  and an arc coming out of the same state. 
　a dialogue   is terminated if is the label of an arc into a final state. 
　we are now ready to define the concept of conformance of policies to protocols. 
definition 1 given a policy pol and a protocol   pol conforms to if every dialogue induced by pol is a dialogue conforming to  
　we define sequences of dialogues for a resource r and an activity a  between two agents x and y. definition 1 given an agent system s  a sequence of dialogues o between two agents x and y in s for a resource r and an activity a is a set of terminated dialogues between x and y  
for all   such that  for a given set of time lapses  
　we assume the atomicity of sequences of dialogues: agents will not react to any incoming request about a resource r if they are participating in an ongoing sequence of dialogues regarding r  and moreover they themselves will not make a request for r with respect to another activity while they are participating in an ongoing sequence of dialogues which they initiated  an agent cycle very similar to the one in  sadri et al.t 1  will achieve this atomicity . 
1 negotiation stages 
we define two different stages of negotiation  each characterized by the degree of flexibility of the agents and the amount of information disclosed and used by them: 
stage 1: request/flexible schedule 
stage 1: blind deal 
　in this section  for each stage we define the protocol  the policies adopted by the agents  and the properties of the stage. the properties that we study are  i  conformance of the policy to the protocol   ii  properties of single dialogues  termination and characterization of the class of problems that can be solved    hi  properties of sequences of dialogues happening at that stage  and  iv  subsumption of earlier stages  in terms of solvable problems . in particular  for each stage we give an example of a problem that can be solved within it  and an example of a problem that cannot. 
　in defining the policies and in stating the results  we rely upon some predicates  whose formal definition is given in appendix. we use the notation to indicate that at time  the knowledge of x entails a certain predicate p. the proofs of the results are omitted for lack of space 
1 	stage 1 - request/flexible schedule 
protocol. the protocol is given in figure 1. policy. the policy is shown in figure 1: an agent will accept a request for r if it can find a concrete schedule of its own activities that does not make use of r during the requested interval. it will refuse it otherwise  leading to an unsuccessful final state. note that it is up to the requesting agent to find good heuristics to formulate a request or a series of requests which can be accepted. 
properties. stage i is computationally demanding for the agent who is replying to a request. the problems that can be solved at this stage are all those that can be solved by means of a  possibly empty  modification in the agents' current concrete schedule. 
 i : protocol conformance. it is possible to prove that the policy of stage 1 is conforming to the protocol in fig. 1.  ii : properties of single dialogues. a request/flexible schedule interaction enjoys the property of termination. in fact  dialogues following this protocol have a fixed number of steps. theorem 1 let us consider a system composed of two agents  x and y. then  for all system resources r  all activities 


figure 1: stage j policy for an agent y 

a assigned to x  all times r  and all intervals  ts  te  s.t. 

there exists a dialogue d induced by the policy of stage 1  starting at time r  and ending at time   such that 
intuitively this theorem 
states that if there exists a time window tw such that an agent x needs r in it and another agent has r available in   then there also exists a dialogue induced by the policy of stage 1 which solves x's reallocation problem about r. this intuitive understanding of the theorem is the result of the formal predicate definitions given in appendix. 
{iii : properties of sequences. it is up to the agent who is missing a resource to find good heuristics to formulate the requests  which can lead to a successful dialogue sequence  provided it is possible to find a solution at this stage . given an agent x  a resource r  and an activity a  one possibility could be a cycle starting at a time r where x successively asks for intervals  ts  te  such that  miss{r  {ts  te   a   until all such intervals are exhausted  or the request for one of the intervals is accepted. we call this strategy!. 
theorem 1 let us consider a system composed of two agents  x and y  negotiating at stage 1. then  for all resources r in the system  and all activities a assigned to x that require r  if x follows strategy 1 in its attempt to acquire r from y  starting at t with a request for r for an interval  ts  te  such that  miss r  {ts  te   a   then either the resulting sequence of dialogues will be finite and will terminate at a time 
  and 	feas{a  	for some  or 
{iv : subsumption of earlier stages. stage 1 subsumes our previous work done in  sadri et al  1   in the sense that the resource reallocation problems it solves include those solved by  sadri et a/.  1 . 
we now give a counterexample for stage 1. 
example 1 let us consider the following modification of example 1  where there is a different initial resource assignment  and different time windows for the activity b  b must be completed by 1 : 

we do not give any concrete schedules for the agents' activities since they play no role here. there is no solution to this problem that can be found at stage 1. in fact  if y gives away r  it will not be possible for it to carry out a any more.  
multiagent systems 

figure 1: protocol for stage 1 
1 stage 1 - blind deal 
protocol. the protocol is shown in fig. 1. after the initial move by y  request{give  which makes the dialogue reach state sl the other agent x can either accept or refuse  as in stage 1  or can propose a deal  promise . after a promise  the agent y who made the request can either accept the deal  causing a successful termination  or refuse it  change prorn   which brings back to s1. 
policy. the policy is shown in fig. 1 an agent will accept a request about a resource r for the period  ts  te  if it would do it at stage 1  but it will refuse it only if it does not have any deal to propose  promise . in particular  an agent x will propose a deal  in reply to a request made by an agent y  if there exists an interval  iv  te'   disjoint from  ts  te   which has the following property: once y obtains r for  t.s' tc'   it will not need it anymore for  ts  te . in that case  if y accepts to give r away for the interval  ts'  te'   the negotiation process reaches a successful final state  otherwise x may continue proposing different deals  if they exist   until y accepts one  successful termination   or there exist no new ones to propose  in which case x will refuse the initial request  thus leading to an unsuccessful final state. 
　since there might be several alternative proposals for a deal at a given time  but we want the agent's policies to be deterministic  we use in the definition of the policies of an agent x at stage 1 a predicatepick  ts te  t   that at any given time t uniquely determines a time period  having made reference possibly to  
　example 1 can be solved by the following negotiation dialogue d 1  occurring at stage 1: 

properties. at stage 1 agents are more cooperative than at stage 1. this is achieved by both agents - and in particu-
1
   we use the notation where is a set of atoms  to mean that   enlarged with   entails p. 
1 


figure 1: stage 1 policy for an agent y 

lar the agent to whom the request is addressed - to do more reasoning in order to be helpful in response to requests.    : protocol conformance. it is possible to prove that the policy of stage 1 is conforming to the protocol in fig. 1.  ii' : properties of single dialogues. stage 1 docs not enjoy the fixed dialogue length property of stage 1  but it terminates if we have a finite scheduling horizon tmax and we do not allow the same move twice at different times  in the same dialogue  which is a reasonable requirement . stage 1 is computationally more demanding than stage 1 for both agents. theorem 1 let us consider a system composed of two agents  x and y  each having an initial resource assignment. then  for all resources r in the system  all activities a and b  all times r and all intervals  ts  tc   such that 

for some  ts'' te    there exists a dialogue d induced by the policy of stage 1  starting at time r  and ending at a time t'  such that 

 iii : properties of sequences. 
theorem 1 let us consider a system composed of two agents  x and y  negotiating at stage 1. then  for all resources r in the system  and all activities a assigned to x which require r  if starting at time r x follows strategy! to request r from y  either the sequence of dialogues will terminate at r' after a finite number of dialogues  and 

 iv : subsumption of earlier stages. more problems can be solved by stage 1 than by stage 1  namely: 
theorem 1 let us consider a system composed of two agents  x and y. for all resources r in the system  all activities a assigned to x  all times r and intervals  t.s  te  s.t. 

there exists a dialogue d induced by the policy of stage 1  starting at time r  and ending at time   such that 
　although this enlarges the set of problems that can be solved  it does not solve  for instance  the problems where more than one exchange is needed. we now give the following counterexample for stage 1. 
example 1 	let us consider the following modification of example 1  where there is a different resource and activity assignment: 

there is no solution to this problem that can be found at stage 
1. in fact  the  minimal  requests that will make to obtain for 1 consecutive time periods are:  1  and  1 . y may reply to the first one with a deal to obtain  for  1  

or for  1   neither of which makes x's activity b feasible. the same will happen for the second request  which results in an unsuccessful sequence of negotiation dialogues for a problem that has a solution.  
1 discussion 
this work benefits from a logic-based high level approach that facilitates specification and proof of formal properties and which has an operational model  that forms a bridge between the system description and implementation. this feature is difficult to find in most related work: as the negotiation process becomes more elaborated  it gets harder to find and prove formal properties as those identified here. in the following  we briefly survey similar approaches to agent negotiation or proposed solutions to the same problem. 
   our modelling of constraints draws inspiration from work on constraint satisfaction for a monolithic system  el sakkout and wallace  1 . but our work differs from it both in context and approach. our aim is to provide protocols and policies for a multi-stage process of negotiation in a collaborative multi-agent context  whereas their aim is the solution of t-rrp problems viewed as constraint satisfaction problems  while minimising changes to concrete schedules.  harrison  1j extends such work to multi-agent systems  but the focus there is again that of minimising changes to existing schedules  and not on negotiation. 
    conry et ai  1j proposes an approach to negotiation based on multiple stages  focusing on coordination degrees. progressive stages require that agents solve problems in a more coordinated way. in the first stage  the agents try to solve problems independently of other agents* constraints  while in the last one it is possible  e.g.  to discover that the overall problem is over-constrained and thus a certain goal is unfeasible. 
   there are many issues regarding negotiation that our paper does not address. for example  we do not deal with the efficiency and timeliness of negotiation. these issues are addressed in  kraus et al  1  using utility functions. 
　we are currently working on extending our negotiation process to a number of further stages  whereby the agents disclose to each other more information about their constraints in order to be able to propose more informed deals for exchanges of resources. we would like to stress that we approach a resource sharing problem from a multi-agent perspective: existing scheduling techniques are likely to outperform compared to the negotiation processes outlined in this work  but they do not generally allow for agent autonomy. in the final stage of such an approach  where all the constraints are known  the problem becomes one of distributed constraint satisfaction.  yokoo and hirayama  1  reviews a number of algorithms for such an application. 
