 
a default conditional  has most often been informally interpreted as a defeasible version of a classical conditional  usually the material conditional. that is  the intuition is that a default should behave  implicitly or explicitly  as its  say  material counterpart  by default  or unless explicitly overridden. in this paper  we develop an alternative interpretation  in which a default is regarded more like a rule  leading from premises to conclusion. to this end  a general semantic framework under a  rule-based  interpretation is developed  and a family of weak conditional logics is specified  along with associated proof theories. nonmonotonic inference is defined very easily in these logics. one obtains a rich set of nonmonotonic inferences concerning the incorporation of irrelevant properties and of property inheritance. moreover  this interpretation resolves problems that have been associated with previous approaches. 
1 introduction 
a major approach in nonmonotonic reasoning has been to represent a default as an object that one can reason about  either as a conditional as part of some object language  or as a nonmonotonic consequence operator. thus for example  an 
adult is  typically or normally  employed  might be represented represents a default conditional  dis-
tinct from the material conditional  given a suitable proof theory and semantics  one can derive other defaults from a 
given set of defaults. there has been widespread agreement concerning just what principles should constitute a minimal logic  a suggested  conservative core   of defaults. however  the resulting conditional is quite weak  at least compared with the material conditional  in that it does not  in fact  should not  fully support principles such as strengthening of the antecedent  transitivity  and modus ponens. 
   since one would want to obtain these latter properties  by default   such logics are extended nonmonotonically by a  closure  operation or step. this closure operation has  for example  been defined by selecting a  preferred  subset of the models of a theory; in the resulting subset of the models one obtains strengthening of the antecedent  transitivity  or  effectively  modus ponens  wherever feasible. essentially then  there are two components to default reasoning within such a system. first  there is a standard  monotonic logic of conditionals that expresses relations among defaults that are deemed to always hold. second  there is a nonmonotonic mechanism for obtaining defaults  and default consequences  where justified. representative  but not even remotely exhaustive  work in this area includes  geffncr and pearl  1; pearl  1; kraus et al  1 . in essence  these approaches treat the default conditional like its classical counterpart  the material conditional  where  feasible  or  by default . 
　while this work captures an important notion of default entailment - perhaps the most important notion - it is not without difficulties. as described in the next section  some principles of the  core  logic are not uncontentious; as well  there are examples of default reasoning in which one obtains undesired results. lastly  there are more recent approaches  notably addressing causality  in which one requires a weaker notion of default inference  rejecting  for example  contrapositive default inferences. in response to these points  we suggest that there is a second  distinct  interpretation of default conditionals  in which a default is regarded more like a rule  with properties more in line with a rule of inference  than a weakened classical conditional. 
　in the following sections we describe our proposed approach informally and formally. we begin by proposing an exceptionally weak logic of conditionals; from this basis a 
   family of conditional logics is defined. given a default conditional the underlying intuition that is formalised is that supplies a context in which  all other things being equal  normally holds or  more precisely  in the context of is more  normal  than  notably  all of the 
logics that we consider are weaker than the aforementioned  conservative core . it proves to be the case however that a nonmonotonic operation is very easily defined; this nonmonotonic step essentially specifics that a property is irrelevant with respect to a default unless it is known to be relevant. this nonmonotonic step easily admits inferences that in other approaches have taken significant formal machinery to obtain. as well  we show that the aforementioned difficulties that arise in interpreting a default as a weak classical conditional do not arise here. 

   this distinction between treating a default as a conditional or as a rule has been noted previously; see for example  geffner and pearl  1 . as well  work on inheritance networks  horty  1  can be viewed as investigating proof theories for the latter interpretation; and work on causality such as  mccain and turner  1  falls in the rule-based framework. however a logic  that is  with both semantics and proof theory  capturing this interpretation has not  to our knowledge  been investigated previously  nor has a fully general nonmonotonic closure operator been developed under this interpretation. last  we suggest in the conclusion that this alternative interpretation may be widely applicable  extending to areas such as counterfactual reasoning  generally treated via the stronger interpretation. 
1 background 
in recent years  much attention has been paid to conditional systems of default reasoning. such systems deal with defeasible conditionals based on notions of preference among worlds or interpretations. thus  the default that a bird normally flics can be represented propositionally as  these ap-
proaches are typically expressed using a modal logic in which the connective is a binary modal operator. the intended meaning of is approximately  in the least worlds  or most preferred worlds  in which  is true   is also true . possible worlds  or  again  interpretations  are arranged in at least a partial preorder  reflecting a metric of  normality  or  preferredness  on the worlds. given a set of defaults default entailment with respect to can be defined via: 
if  then 
there has been a remarkable convergence or agreement on what inferences ought to be common to all nonmonotonic systems; space considerations preclude a full listing of approaches and references. the resulting set of principles has been called the conservative core in  pearl  1 . it was originally considered in  adams  1   and has been studied extensively  as the system p  in  kraus et at.  1 . one expression of the logic of conditionals is as follows. the logic includes classical prepositional logic and the following rules and axioms:1 
    an alternative is to treat the conditional as a nonmonotonic inference operator  in a certain sense these approaches can be considered equivalent; here  for simplicity  we remain within the conditional logic framework. 
ca/or: 
these principles are not uncontentious; for example   poole  
1   can be viewed as arguing against a derived principle 
cc/and obtained 
via rt and asc . likewise   neufeld  1  suggests against ca in some cases. 
   nonetheless  the resulting logic  and proposed strengthenings of the logic  are weak. a central difficulty is that seemingly irrelevant properties will block a desired inference. for example  given that a bird is asserted to fly by default  one cannot thereby conclude that a green bird flies by default. the problem  essentially  is that there is nothing requiring preferred worlds in which birds fly to include among them green-bird worlds. consequently  various means of strengthening the logic to incorporate irrelevant properties in a principled fashion have been proposed. thus for  birds fly   since being green is presumably irrelevant with respect to flight  one would want to have  among the preferred worlds in which birds fly  a  preferred  subset in which there are green birds. 
　rational closure  lehmann and magidor  1   for example  assumes that a world is ranked as unexceptional as possible. in conditional entailment  geffner and pearl  1   a partial order on possible worlds is determined by ranking worlds based on the highest-ranked default that distinguishes between the worlds. in both cases  defaults are evaluated with respect to the resulting ranking. thus  since there is no reason to suppose that greenness has any bearing on flight  one assumes that greenness has no effect on flight. 
　however there are difficulties with both approaches. rational closure employs a very strong minimization criterion; see  geffner and pearl  1  for a number of problematic examples. as well  consider an elaboration of an example given by john horty: 
 1  
 normally one does not eat with the fingers but one does when eating asparagus normally one uses a napkin but not when one is out of napkins the rational closure of these conditionals gives that  if one is not out of napkins one is not eating asparagus clearly this inter-
action between unrelated defaults is undesirable. as well  in neither conditional entailment nor rational closure does one obtain inheritance of properties  however see  benferhat et ai  1  . in addition  consider the following example  geffner and pearl  1 : 
 1  
 that is  adults are normally employed  university students are normally adults but are not employed  and frank sinatra fans are normally adults.  in both conditional entailment and rational closure we obtain the default inference that frank sinatra fans are not university students. but this is a curious inference  since there is nothing in the example that would seem to relate frank sinatra fans to university students. 
　we suggest that at least some of these examples do not necessarily reflect a problem with the approaches per se. rather  our thesis is that there are  at least  two distinct interpretations that can be given to a default. first  there is the intuition 
nonmonotonic reasoning 

that a default is essentially a weak version of the material conditional  or  in more recent approaches  necessary entailment   and should behave as such a conditional  except that it is defeasible. this intuition is seen most clearly in the expression of defaults by circumscriptive abnormality theories  mccarthy  1 . in this case a default is represented as the formula the circumscription 
of a asserts that a is false  roughly  if consistently possible. obviously  if a is asserted to be false  the result is exactly the material conditional. as well  conditional entailment adopts this intuition: the default is basically the same   and so together with specificity information implicit in  geffner and pearl  1  p. 1 . this interpretation also underlies approaches that assume that defaults are founded  formally or informally  on notions of probability.1 
the second interpretation regards a default more as an 
 object-level   whose properties are closer to those of a rule of inference. thus  given a conditional if the antecedent a happens to be true  we conclude by default. given we specifically do not want to conclude this latter interpretation covers an important class of defaults that have not been addressed as a logic of conditionals per se  although this distinction has been noted in  geffner and pearl  1 ; and inheritance networks  horty  1  can be viewed as proof theoretic accounts of this interpretation . a further motivation for exploring this interpretation is that there has been recent interest in conditional accounts of causality  for example  mccain and turner  1    in which reasoning via 
a default contrapositive is explicitly rejected. thus  from causes  we don't want to conclude causes 
1 defaults as rules 
the general approach is the same as those described in the previous section: we begin by specifying a logic of defaults and subsequently provide a principled  nonmonotonic  means to extend the logic to account for irrelevant properties. our point of departure is that we informally treat defaults more like rules of inference; in particular  defaults are intended to be applied in a  forward'' direction only. our interpretation  roughly  is that the antecedent of a default establishes a context in which the consequent  normally  holds  or holds all other things being equal. thus  for default  our in-
terpretation is roughly that  in the context established by a  it is the case that is more normal  typical  etc.  than  we express this semantically by 
 1  
that is  the proposition  see the next section  is more normal  typical  etc.  than it seems reasonable that our binary relation of relative normality be asymmetric and transitive  and so we generally assume that these conditions hold. we note that the form of  1  has appeared regularly in the literature  going back at least to  lewis  1 .1 the difference is that usually the interpretation of  1  is along the lines of  the least worlds where is true are less normal than the least worlds ; our interpretation refers to the proposition expressed by these formulas. consequently  our relation  is not an accessibility relation in the normal sense  since it is a relation on sets of worlds. 
　filling in the  formal  details yields a weak logic of conditionals  significantly weaker than the so-called  conservative core . we also consider various strengthenings of the logic  but these strengthenings are still weaker than this  core  set of defaults. we subsequently define a notion of nonmonotonic inference with respect to these logics. it proves to be the case that this is very easy to do in our approach. basically  the  semantic  relation x y asserts that in the  context   set of possible worlds  x y  partitioned by x y  we have that y is more normal than x. our nonmonotonic assumption is that this obtains in all  feasible  subcontexts. that is  for proposition z  unless there is reason to conclude otherwise  we assert that  the next section develops the formal details. 
1 the approach 
1 the base logic 
let be the language of propositional logic defined  for simplicity  over a finite alphabet p of propo-
sitional letters or atomic propositions  and employing the logical symbols and the symbol is taken to be some propositional tautology  and is defined as the language is pc extended with the binary operator as a weak conditional. for convenience  arguments of are members of hence  we do not allow nested occurrences of formulas are denoted by the greek letters ... and 
sets of formulas by upper case greek letters sentences are interpreted with respect to a comparative conditional model m =  where: 
1. w is a set  of states or possible worlds ; 
1. with properties described below; 
1. p: 
we use the upper case letters x  x1  y  ...to denote sets of possible worlds. p maps atomic sentences onto sets of worlds  being those worlds at which the sentence is true. the relation  associates with each world  w a binary notion of relative normality between propositions; we write x y to assert informally that  according to world w  proposition y is more normal than x. that is  given a partition of a context x y  the relation x  y asserts that y is more normal  unexceptional  etc.  than x. we assume that is a strict partial ordering on its last two arguments  that is for w   is asymmetric and transitive. as well  we assume that the incoherent proposition is maximally abnormal: 
		 1  
truth of a formula at a world in a model is as for propositional logic  with an addition for 
 y is more normal than x  by a'  y rather than by y  x. 
1 

definition 1 
a formula is valid  written just if it is true at every world in every model. we identify the proposition expressed by a sentence with the set of worlds in which is true  denoted   that is  
thus is true just if the proposition expressed by is more normal than that expressed by is necessarily true  is defined as 
　consider the logic closed under classical propositional logic along with the following rules of inference and axioms: 
rcea/lle: from rceca: 
from 
rl/supraci: from weakcem: 
trans: 
we call the smallest logic based on the above axiomatisation c. theoremhood of a formula a is denoted  as usual  by this system is quite weak; however in the full paper we consider the even weaker logic c- consisting of propositional logic and rcea  rceca  and rl. rcea asserts that conditionals with the same consequent and equivalent  in propositional logic  antecedents are equivalent. rceca asserts the same thing with respect to consequents  but is somewhat more general  in that the consequents need be equivalent just in the  context  given by the antecedent. ri asserts that if  is logically implied by  then it is also normally implied. weakcem gives a weak version of the excluded middle for a weak conditional; in the semantics this is reflected by asymmetry of  similarly trans reflects transitivity of  in the semantics. we obtain the following basic results: theorem 1 

as well  we obtain: 
theorem 1 a is valid in the class of comparative conditional 	models 	c. 
　for those familiar with conditional logic  the formulas rcm  rt  asc  cc  and ca  and their nonmonotonic consequence operator counterparts: right weakening  cut  cautious monotonity  and  and or  are not valid in c. nonetheless  despite its  monotonic  inferential weakness  the logic already allows a rich set of nonmonotonic inferences  as covered in the next section. however  before proceeding we first consider various extensions to the logic. 
1 
1 	extensions to the logic 
in the logic c most properties of the relation  stem from its being a strict partial order  viz. asymmetric and transitive . we also look at strengthening by considering properties that seem reasonable for a notion of normality. consider the following: 
for cd  if x is less normal than y  then a stronger proposition than x  viz. x z  is also less normal than y. cd is a dual: if x is less normal than y  then a weaker proposition than y  viz. y z  is also more normal than x. ud combines these conditions  and wdju is a weak version of disjoint unions  described below. interestingly  the first two of these conditions have appeared in the belief revision literature. our relation  is what  alchourron and makinson  1  call a  transitive  hierarchy; while with cd and cu is a regular hierarchy. their interpretation of echoes ours for x y  that  x is less secure or reliable or plausible ... than y   giirdenfors and rott  1  p. 1 . 
consider next the following rules and formulas: 
space considerations preclude a full discussion of these conditions. weakrcm is a weaker version of both the rule rcm and the formula asc in conditional logic. cm   conditionalisation  in nonmonotonic consequence relations  gives a conditional version of one half of the deduction theorem. combining weakrcm and cm yields the rule rcm  allowing weakening of the consequent of a conditional. d supplies a certain  reasoning by cases  for the conditional. 
　we obtain the following correspondence between semantic conditions and the axiomatisation: 
theorem 1 c + cd  cu  ud  wdju  is complete with 
respect to the class of comparative conditional models closed under weakrcm  cm  rcm  d  
　we could go on and add other conditions in the semantics. again space considerations dictate against a lengthy discussion  but two conditions are worth noting here: 

disjoint union has appeared frequently in the literature  for example  savage  1; fine  1; dubois et al  1 . the addition of disjoint union requires that the notion of a model be altered slightly  from a relation  the resultant semantic framework would correspond to the basic definition 
nonmonotonic reasoning 
of a plausibility structure  friedman and halpern  1 . the addition of connectivity would make  a qualitative probability in the terminology of  savage  1 . 
1 nonmonotonic reasoning 
we claimed at the outset that the logic c and its strengthenings would allow a simple approach to nonmonotonic inference  having just the  right  properties for a rule-based interpretation of a conditional. for the logics  the central idea was that  given a partition  of a context the relation x  y asserts that y is more normal  unexceptional  etc.  than x. to obtain nonmonotonic inference  we simply assume that this relation holds in any subcontext  that is  wherever  reasonable . more formally  
parative conditional models; that is world in every augmented comparative conditional model. nonmonotonic inference is defined as follows: 
we say that is a nonmonotonic inference from with respect to or just is a nonmonotonic inference from if the set is clear from the context of discussion. 
　we illustrate nonmonotonic inference first by a familiar example: 
 1  
 1  
 1  
 1  
thus birds fly and have wings  and penguins are  necessarily  birds that do not fly. we obtain the following: 

nonmonotonic reasoning 
as do non-green flying penguins. as well  and so penguins inherit the property of having wings by virtue of necessarily being birds. note that if we replaced  1  by p  1  we would no longer obtain however we would obtain the weaker we justify this by noting that a normality conditional does not imply a strict specificity relation between and whereas does. 
　the next example further illustrates reasoning in the presence of exceptions. 
		 1  
so quakers are pacifists while republicans are not  and quakers are generous. we obtain 
thus in the last case  while quakers that are republican are  informally  exceptional quakers  they are nonetheless still generous by default. 
　concerning our original motivating examples  in  1  we do not obtain the undesirable inference 
last  we note that while we obtain full 
incorporation of irrelevant properties  we do not obtain full 
we have argued that there are two interpretations of a default conditional: as a weak  typically material  implication  or as something akin to a rule of inference. the former interpretation is explicit in  for example  circumscriptive abnormality theories  and implicit in an approach such as conditional entailment. it is clear that there are many  and varied  applications in which the first interpretation is appropriate. however we have also noted that there are various reasons to suppose that this is not the only such interpretation: first  work such as  poole  1  and  neufeld  1  can be viewed as arguing against principles of the  core  logic underlying this first interpretation  the former arguing against the principle cc/and and the latter against ca/or . second  there are examples of inferences in approaches such as rational closure or in conditional entailment that are either too weak or too strong. last  there are emerging areas  such as causal reasoning  in which a  weak material implication  interpretation is not appropriate. while this distinction has been recognized previously  what is new here is the development of a family of logics  with a novel semantic theory and proof theory  along with a specification of nonmonotonic inference  for the  rule-based  interpretation. 
　all of the logics presented here are quite weak  at least compared to the  conservative core  or  equivalently  the system p of  kraus et al  1 . we argue however that such lack of inferential capability is characteristic of a  rulebased  interpretation of a conditional. moreover it proves to 
1 
be the case that nonmonotonic reasoning is defined very easily in these logics  and allows a rich set of inferences concerning the incorporation of irrelevant properties and of property inheritance. 
   an open question concerns how informal  commonsense defaults should be classified - whether as a defeasible classical conditional or as a rule. certainly past work has favoured the ''defeasible classical conditional  interpretation. however  a case can be made that many examples formerly interpreted as belonging to the first category are better interpreted as belonging to the  rule  category. consider lewis' approach to counterfactuals  lewis  1  in which the following example  concerning a past party  is given:  if john had gone it would have been a good party  and  if john and mary had gone it would have not been a good party . from this we deduce that  if john had gone  mary would not have gone . this  to most readers  is a strange result: john's going and mary's going are  presumably  independent events. arguably this result ought not to obtain  and so perhaps counterfactuals  as previously modelled by lewis' sphere semantics  may be better interpreted via the  rule  interpretation. 
acknowledgements 
1 thank the reviewers for their useful suggestions. this work was supported by a natural sciences and engineering council of canada discovery grant. 
