 
this paper proposes a dynamic model supporting multimodal state space probability distributions and presents the application of the model in dealing with visual occlusions when tracking multiple objects jointly. for a set of hypotheses  multiple measurements are acquired at each time instant. the model switches among a set of hypothesized measurements during the propagation. two computationally efficient filtering algorithms are derived for online joint tracking. both the occlusion relationship and state of the objects are recursively estimated from the history of measurement data. the switching hypothesized measurements  shm  model is generally applicable to describe various dynamic processes with multiple alternative measurement methods. 
1 introduction 
visual tracking is important in such application areas as human-computer interaction  surveillance  and visual reconstruction. given a sequence of images containing the objects that are represented with a parametric motion model  parameters of the motion model are required to be estimated in successive frames. tracking could be difficult due to the potential variability such as partial or full occlusions of objects  appearance changes caused by the variation of object poses or illumination conditions  as well as distractions from background clutter. 
　one principle challenge for visual tracking is to develop an accurate and effective model representation. the variability in visual environments usually results in a multimodal state space probability distribution. the kalman filter  brown  1; rohr  1   a classical choice employed in tracking work  is restricted to representing unimodal probability distributions. switching linear dynamic systems  slds   pavlovic and rehg  1  and their equivalents  shumway and stoffer  1; kim  1  have been used to describe dynamic processes. intuitively  a 
　complex dynamic system is represented with a set of linear models controlled by a switching variable. joint probabilistic data association  jpda   bar-shalom and fortmann  1  and multiple hypothesis tracking  mht  
 cox and hingorani  1  techniques  which represent multimodal distributions by constructing data association hypotheses  can be cast in the framework of slds as well. moreover  monte carlo methods such as the condensation algorithm  isard and blake  1  support multimodal probability densities with sample based representation. by retaining only the peaks of the probability density  relatively fewer samples are required in the work of cham and rehg . a switching model framework of the condensation algorithm is also proposed by isard and blake . 
   on the other hand  the measurement process is another essential issue to deal with the potential variability. measurements are not readily available from image sequences in visual tracking. even an accurate tracking model may have a poor performance if the measurements are too noisy. parametric models can be used to characterize appearance changes of target regions  hager and belhumeur  1 . in the work of galvin et al.   two virtual snakes  a background and a foreground snake for each object  are generated to resolve the occlusion when two objects intersect. rasmussen and hager  describe a joint measurement process for tracking multiple objects enumerating all possible occlusion relationships. the measurement with respect to the most possible occlusion relationship is determined from the current frame. moreover  layered approach  wang and adelson  1; 
ayer and sawhney  1; jojic and frey  1; tao et al.  1  is an efficient way to represent multiple moving objects. a moving object is characterized by a coherent motion model over its support region. 
　in this paper  the idea of switching hypothesized measurements  shm   which results in a shm model supporting multimodal distributions  is proposed to handle the potential variability in visual tracking. the approach acquires a set of hypothesized measurements for different occlusion hypotheses at each time instant. comparing with the above mentioned state space models  the shm approach switches among a set of hypothesized measurements rather than switches among a set of models. two computationally efficient filtering algorithms are derived for jointly tracking multiple objects. both the occlusion relationship and state of the objects are estimated from the history of measurements. 

1 	vision 

1 model 
1 hypothesized measurement 
for a hidden state sequence the objective of online tracking is to recursively estimate from the set of all available measurements up to time 
certain complex system  the estimation may be influenced by a mode or switching state sequence {sk} as well  with  
 specifically  the mode switching 
originates from the measurement process in our work. the notion of a measurement is extended to a set of l hypothesized measurements at each 
time instant. each measurement since it is obtained by assuming that the switching state is at time  
   to illustrate the idea of hypothesized measurement  consider the measurement process for jointly tracking two objects  e.g. a rectangle and a circle  in an image sequence 
 to deal with occlusions between the two objects when measuring the kih frame gk  the switching state sk is introduced to describe the depth ordering at time 1}  where sk equals 1 if the rectangle is in front of the circle  and 1 if the circle is in front of the rectangle. the hypothesized measurement where is the measurement for the 
rectangle  and 	is the measurement for the circle under 
theyth hypothesis. 
　under the hypothesis of = 1   i.e. the circle is occluded by the rectangle at time the rectangle should be measured first to acquire then the observed rectangle is masked in the image. the occluded area of the circle is ignored and only the visible region is matched normally to get  
similarly  under the hypothesis of  = 1  i.e. the rectangle is occluded by the circle  the circle should be matched first to get  then the masked image is used to measure  
thus  the occlusion will not affect the measurement result. it is obvious that both hypothesized measurements support the condition of nonocclusion since different depth orderings of nonoverlapping objects are visually equivalent. the probabilities of the hypotheses should be equal in the case of nonocclusion. 
   unfortunately  the occlusion relationship is not given before hand. the objective of our shm approach is to estimate both the switching state and the hidden state from the history of the hypothesized measurements. 
1 	linear shm model for joint tracking 
for joint tracking of  objects in the scene  the switching state sk represents the occlusion relationship at time  we assume the switching state follows a first order markov chain with the following transition probability  
 1  
is denoted as 
being the state 
for the mth object at time k. for a linear process with gaussian noise  the hidden state transition model becomes 
 1a  
 1b  
is the state transition matrix  n is a 
zero-mean gaussian noise with covariance matrix q  and  is a gaussian density with argument z  mean m  
and covariance z. 
figure 1: bayesian network representation of the shm model 
　given the switching state at time the corresponding hypothesized measurement yksi could be considered as a 
   proper measurement centering on the hidden state  while every other  is an improper measurement generated under a wrong assumption. the improper measurement should be weakly influenced by the hidden state  and have a large variance. to simplify the computation  we assume a normal distribution for a proper measurement and a uniform distribution for an improper measurement. the measurement model is simplified as 
 1a  
 1b  
m objects  is written as 
the conditional independence among the hypothesized measurements is assumed to make the model computationally efficient. 

vision 	1 

	 1  the shm model can be represented by a dynamic bayesian network shown in figure 1. 
1 	method 
1 measurement 
multiple  occluding objects are modeled using layer representation. layers are indexed by layer 1 being the layer that is closest to the camera and layer  being behind layer  there is one object in each layer. the number of all occlusion relationship hypotheses  or depth ordering permutations  is permutation is tagged with a index  
   under each permutation hypothesis  the object in the front layer 1 should be measured first from the image gk at time  then the object in layer 1 can be matched from the masked image  and so on. at last  the object in layer be measured. occluded points aie not matched when measuring 	the 	objects. 	measurement 
nonoverlapping objects should be equivalent for different depth ordering permutations. given the reference image gr  the measurement is based on minimizing the mean of squared intensity differences between the current image and the reference region. under theyth hypothesis  the hypothesized measurement of the mth object  and the corresponding squared difference mean at time k. the 
vector 	is written as 
is obtained by assuming that the 
components of the measurement noise are uncorrelated to each other  and the variances is proportional to the corresponding squared difference mean. 
1 	shm filter 
from a bayesian perspective  the online tracking problem is to recursively calculate the posterior state space distribution. given the measurement data up to time k  the probability density function  pdf  of the state is expressed as 
and 
gaussians. 
　at time  the set of hypothesized measurements  becomes available  and it is used to update   via bayes' rule. 
 1  
in principle  the filtering process has three stages: prediction  update  and collapsing  murphy  1 . from  1    1    1  and  1   the approximate inference algorithm can be derived in a similar way as that in a gaussian sum filter  anderson and moore  1 . 
   from  1  it can be seen that the computation of the shm filter is slightly more complex than that of multiple kalman filters or gaussian sum filters. 
1 	fast shm filter 
when occlusion is the main factor in the potential variability of joint tracking  we can assume that the measurement noise under the true occlusion hypothesis is small. when the noise becomes zero  the measurement model can be simplified as 

1 	vision  1a  
 1  
 1b  is the dirac delta function. consider the 
minimized mean of squared differences as a part of the 	can then be plugged into a kalman 
hypothesized measurement  so that the definition of measurement can be generalized as filter to achieve improved performance. such a shm-
kalman filter keeps the multimodality of the shm model   1  	and has attractive computation requirement. in addition  the and the 	collapsing stage is not necessary in the fast shm filter. 
posterior density of the squared difference mean is of exponential distribution for each object  more accurate 1 implementation expression could be derived using the the true hypothesis  the pdf of 
vision 	1 

1 	results and discussion 
test results of two video sequences are shown in our experiments. the state is the position and orientation  and the second order model is employed. fach measurement is a translation and rotation. 
   figure 1 shows the tracking of two hands of a person as they cross several times in an image sequence. figure 1a shows the three frames of the sequence. appearance variation of the hands due to pose changes can be seen. figure 1b and 1c demonstrate the tracking efficacy of the fast shm filter versus the kalman filter. the fast shm filter successfully tracks both hands under different occlusion relationships. in figure 1b  one hand is drawn in black contour when the detected depth order indicates that it is in front of the other hand. the kalman filter has a similar performance when occlusions are not severe  but poor under heavy occlusions. in figure 1c.1  the distraction from background clutter causes the kalman tracker to fail. the normalized posterior distributions for the vertical position of the left hand in figure 1a.1 and 1a.1 are shown in figure 1d.l and 1d.1. when the occlusion is not severe  measurements under the two hypotheses are the same  and the distribution is unimodal. under heavy occlusions  the distribution becomes multimodal since the two hypothesized measurements tend to be different. the measurement under true hypothesis matches the hand correctly  while the measurement under false hypothesis is distracted by background clutter. figure 1e shows the probabilities of the first occlusion hypothesis  the left hand being in the front  over the first 1 frames. the probabilities for the three frames in figure 1a are circled. the probabilities of the two hypotheses are equal in the nonoverlapping cases  while the probability of the true hypothesis becomes dominant under occlusions. 
　figure 1 shows the results of jointly tracking the four shanks of a man and a woman as they cross. the man's right shank has been totally occluded in the sequence. there should be totally 1! = 1 hypotheses if we directly apply the shm filter in section 1. to reduce the computation  two reasonable assumptions are made to prune less plausible hypotheses. firstly  one's legs can not simultaneously occlude and be occluded by the other's legs. secondly  the occlusion relationship between the man and woman can be determined from their bodies. thus the whole tracking procedure is divided into three trackers. the first one tracks the two bodies of the walkers. according to the detected occlusion relationship  the two shanks of the person in the front are then tracked. at last  the shanks of the other person are tracked in the masked image. figure 1a shows the results for the four frames of the sequence  circles are marked on the man's body and shanks  and rectangles are marked on the woman . figure 1b shows the posterior distributions for the horizontal position of the occluded body in figure 1a. 1a.1. when the two bodies are separated  the density is unimodal and of a small variance. the density variance increases when occlusions occur. it becomes multimodal under heavy occlusions. figure 1c shows the probabilities of the woman's body being in the front. the probabilities for the four frames in figure 1a are circled. 
   under realistic environments  it is understandable that comparing with the other hypothesized measurements  the measurement under the true occlusion hypothesis usually shows more regularity and has smaller variances  or squared difference means . thus  the true information  the switching state and the hidden state  could be enhanced through the propagation. in addition  the acquirement of multiple measurements helps decrease the information loss  e.g. caused by background clutter  during the measurement process. 
1 	conclusion 
1 	vision this paper proposes a shm model for state space representation of dynamic systems and derives two efficient filtering algorithms. our joint tracking approach explicitly 
reasons about the occlusion relationships. the occlusion relationship is quantitatively analyzed throughout the propagation. the information can be used for reference update and further analysis. moreover  experimental results show that our method helps handle appearance changes and distractions. 
   the shm model discusses the measurement switching in dynamic systems. it is complementary to the idea of model switching in  ghahramani and hinton  1 . our future study is to effectively combine these two ideas in visual tracking. furthermore  the shm model is generally applicable to various dynamic processes in which there are multiple alternative measurement methods. 
a inference in fast shm filter 

