 
the paper presents a novel expressive logic-based formalism intended for reasoning about numerical distances. we investigate its computational properties  in particular  show that it is exptimecomplete  and devise a tableau-based satisfiabilitychecking algorithm. to be able to express knowledge about implicit or unknown distances  we then extend the language with variables ranging over distances and prove that the resulting logic is decidable as well. 
1 introduction 
the numerical notion of distance or metric as a measure of closeness or similarity  in a great variety of senses  plays a fundamental role in many branches of science-including  naturally  knowledge representation  artificial intelligence and informatics in general. recent examples are such different fields as spatial kr&r and geographic information systems  cohn and hazarika  1; adam and gangopadhyay  1   computational molecular biology  setubal and meidanis  1; clote and backofen  1   text processing  salton  1  and data mining  dunham  1 . unlike classical physics and the corresponding mathematical models  the 'distance spaces' arising in these applications may be quite different from the standard euclidean spaces  e.g.  they are often finite and do not necessarily satisfy all of the metric axioms. another important feature is that properties of only some objects in the space may be known  and the task is to use the available information to determine properties of other elements of interest. traditional methods of dealing with metric data are mostly numerical or 'sub-symbolic'  e.g.  graphtheoretic or probabilistic  and usually do not involve any kind of  automated  reasoning which is based upon symbolic  explicit knowledge representation. the main aim of this paper is to present a new expressive logic-based formalism intended for reasoning about distances and to provide it with a tableau decision algorithm. 
　the language we propose is-as far as its algorithmic properties and expressiveness are concerned-a compromise between full first-order and propositional languages: it contains object names and unary atomic predicates from which complex predicates are constructed by means of the boolean operators and restricted quantifiers like   tor all objects within a circle of radius and  'for some object within a circle of radius r' . thus  denotes the set of all ob-
jects each of which is located at distance from at least one object with property p. to illustrate the expressive power of the language and to convince the reader that it can be useful  we give three concrete examples. 
example 1. consider a space of proteins  i.e.  sequences of amino acids ; some of them are well studied  but properties of the majority are not known. using one of the available techniques  we can define a 'similarity measure' between proteins which gives rise to a certain 'distance'  perhaps  metric  space. one of the typical problems is to recognise whether a given protein p has some property p  e.g.  whether it contains an ef-hand motif. the usual approach of comparing the structure of p with that of 'closely located' proteins whose properties are known can be supplemented with a knowledge base composed by an expert and containing information like 

note that  in view of incomplete information about properties of elements of the distance space  to answer the query whether/  can have p  we have to run a satisfiability-checking algorithm rather than a model-checking one. 
example 1. suppose now that we are trying to organise a web site for selling books  or any other goods  on-line. one way of classifying the existing books is to introduce a measure of closeness of the contents of some of them. we then obtain a database containing items of the form  = a  if the distance between books b1 and b1 is a  and  say   for some number c  if the distance between 
spatial reasoning 	1 b1 and b1 is only known to be greater than c. now we can built a sort of terminology by saying: 

and deduce  for instance  that al is not subsumed by computer science. 
example 1. perhaps the most natural application of this kind of formalism is spatial representation and reasoning. we can speak in terms of 'absolute' distances: 
   london  leipzig    1  
  house  restaurant  - 'the house is located within 1 mile distance from a shopping centre of radius 1/ 
  doughnut  {centre}. 
we can also deal with distances given implicitly by saying  for example  
   london  leipzig    1    liverpool  	manchester   
  my-house college   dov1 s-house  college  =  'i do not want to have a house that is located farther from my college than dov's house'  
without referring to concrete distances between the cities and perhaps having no idea where dov's house is. 
　the approach to reasoning about distances we advocate in this paper has grown up from four main sources. first  extensive research has been done by the  spatial/constraint  database community  revesz  1  aiming to deal efficiently with large sets of data which come equipped with some kind of distance  or similarity  measure; consult  e.g.  the literature on 'similarity search' and 'k-nearest neighbour queries'  bozkaya and ozsoyoglu  1; hjaltason and samet  1. although this paper does not contribute to this field 1 we were driven by the idea that it may be useful to extend the 'evaluation-based' methods by automated reasoning services. as was mentioned above  complete information about models based on distance spaces  and even distances themselves  are often not available  which means that the quality of solutions provided by the database technology can be significantly improved by using explicit knowledge of the field  or even con-
jectures  supported by appropriate reasoning procedures. 
　two approaches to extend the database technology by means of kr&r have been developed by the qualitative spatial reasoning community. one is based upon the representation of spatial data by means of constraint systems  renz and nebel  1   while the other uses first-order theories  e.g.  
 randell et al  1 . constraint systems are usually very efficient  at most np-complete ; however  their expressive power is rather limited  for instance  they do not allow any kind of quantification . on the other hand  the unrestricted quantification of first-order representations is a serious obstacle for their use in practical reasoning systems. 
　in a sense  our approach is similar to that taken by the description logic community which represents conceptual knowledge by means of restricted quantification  a kind of modal necessity and possibility operators  and uses reasonably effective tableau-based procedures even for expressive and complex  say  exptime-complete  formalisms  horrocks  1 . the chief difference from description logics is 
　　1 note  however  that our logics can express some of the clustering conditions. 
that we have to integrate rather sophisticated reasoning about quantitative data into a logic-based framework. 
　logics of distance spaces were introduced in  sturm et al  1; kutz et al.  1   where our main concern was to find out whether such logics can be decidable. unfortunately  the logics constructed in these papers were not supported by effective reasoning machinery. the aim of this paper is more practical. to begin with  in section 1  we present an application oriented variant  of a dis-
tance logic  containing location constants  set variables and restricted quantifiers  and show that the satisfiability problem for its formulas in metric  and some weaker distance  spaces is exptime-complete. as distance spaces used in computer science and ai are often finite  e.g.  data with a similarity measure  a model of a railway system  etc.   we consider also the problem of satisfiability of  knowledge bases in finite spaces. we show that the language does not 'feel' the difference between finite and infinite spaces: all the results presented for satisfiability in arbitrary spaces hold for finite spaces as well.  unfortunately  if we restrict attention to the two-dimensional euclidean space or its subspaces  then the satisfiability problem becomes undecidable.  then  in section 1  we devise a tableau-based satisfiability checking algorithm for this logic. an interesting and quite unexpected consequence of the proofs of these results is the following observation. the full contains both operators  and 1 u which together allow assertions like 

cated in precisely 1 mile distance from the house.' 
but in everyday life we often do not pay attention to the boundaries of spatial regions or treat them in a sort of vague manner. what happens if we keep only one of the operators  in our language  do the two resulting fragments behave differently  or to put it another way  does our language feel the difference between regions with and without boundaries  to our surprise  the answer turns out to be 'no'  for a precise formulation of the result see theorem 1 . 
　to be able to express knowledge about implicit or unknown distances  in section 1 we extend  with variables 
ranging over distances and prove that the satisfiability problem for the resulting language is decidable. 
　because of lack of space we had to omit all  rather nontrivial and lengthy  proofs. they are available at  
 here we only say that 
the complexity result as well as the proof of the correctness and completeness of the tableau algorithm are based on a representation of metric spaces in the form of relational structures kripke frames. this representation allows us to use advanced techniques from modal and description logics. 
1 	the logic  
let m be a non-empty subset of positive rational numbers 
 i.e.  a subset of  the language with the following alphabet and term and formula formation rules. the alphabet consists of 
  an infinite list of set  or region  variables  
  an infinite list of location constants  

1 	spatial reasoning 


spatial reasoning 	1 

	1 
 actually  at most /oc e    |trra ‘ |
1 	spatial reasoning 


spatial reasoning 	1 

and is an ms  ...  } -knowledge base. then the satisfiability problem for relative to t is exptimecomplete. 
　 in fact is satisfiable relative to iff is satisfiable  where a =1 and a = 1 + for 1  
1 	conclusion 
we have introduced and investigated a ' practical' variant of the distance logics from  sturm et al  1; kutz et al  1 . our main achievement is a tableau-based decision procedure similar to those implemented in working description logic systems like fact and racer  see  baader et al  1 . this similarity gives us some grounds to believe that a system based on this tableau procedure  which is currently being implemented  will be sufficiently fast for 'realistic' applications. as in spatial databases  however  a very important problem is to integrate the distance logic with other kr&r formalisms. although in the intended applications the extensions of relevant predicates may strongly depend on the distance measure  usually non-metric attributes and relations also play a rather significant role  e.g.  classifications of proteins  their topological properties  without an integration of formalisms taking care of these different aspects of the problem domain one cannot imagine a system powerful enough for real-world applications. fortunately  a framework for such an integration is already available. the terms of the language ms  are constructed from atomic predicates by means of distance and boolean operators. this makes it possible to treat ms  as an abstract description system in the sense of  baader et al  1  and combine it in an algorithmically robust way with other effective kr&r formalisms  say  description logics or spatial rcc-1 via e-connections  kutz et al  1 or fusions  baader et 
a/.  1 . 
acknowledgements 
the work on this paper was supported by the dfg-grant wo 
1-1 and by u.k. epsrc grants no. gr/r1 and gr/r1. thanks are due to anatoli degtyarev  ian 
hodkinson  carsten lutz  and oliver kutz for stimulating discussions and remarks on the preliminary versions of the paper. 
