 
in this paper  we evaluate the use of implicit interest indicators as the basis for user profiling in the digital tv domain. research in more traditional domains  such as web browsing or usenet news  indicates that some implicit interest indicators  e.g.  read-time and mouse movements  are capable of serving as alternative to explicit profile information such as user ratings. consequently  the key question we wish to answer relates to the type of implicit indicators that can be identified within the dtv domain and the extent to which they can accurately reflect a user's true preferences. 
1 introduction 
rccommcndcr systems combine user profiling  machine learning and information retrieval methods to help users locate information by learning their preferences and making personalized recommendations to individuals   hammond et al  1; balabanovic and shoham  1; smyth and cotter  1; good et al  1; goldberg et al. 1  . 
there are two basic profiling strategies. explicit profiling means asking the user direct questions about their preferences  usually in the form of an item rating; e.g. in ptvplus  www.ptvplus.com   a tv show recommender  smyth and cotter  1; 1   users rate individual shows on a five point scale from 'strong dislike' to 'strong like'. explicit profiling has been used in a range of scenarios  from movies  resnick et al.  1  to jobs  rafter et ai  1   and the resulting profiles are assumed to be reliable indicators of user preferences. however  users are lazy and do not like responding to explicit requests for feedback. as a result explicit profiles often contain few ratings  which can limit the degree to which they will accurately reflect a user's changing preferences over time. 
　implicit profiling methods construct user profiles by inferring user ratings from so-called interest indicators based on user's interactions with the system  claypool et al.  1; goecks and shavlik  1 . for example   morita and shinoda  1; konstan et ai  1; claypool et al  1  report a positive correlation between reading times  for usenet news and web pages  and content ratings.  claypool et ai  1  shows a correlation between content ratings and both mouse movements and scrolling although mouse movement was only found to be a useful rating predictor at lower rating levels. interestingly   claypool et ai  1  finds no correlation between user ratings and the number of clicks to links on a web page. 
　in this paper we seek to evaluate the use of implicit profiling in a very different application domain  digital tv  dtv . dtv users are finding it increasingly difficult to identify relevant tv shows among the hundreds of available channels and recommender systems such as ptvplus have been forwarded as a potential solution  smyth and cotter  1   ptvplus uses its recommendation engine to generate a set of tv programme recommendations for a target user based on their profiled interests using a combination of collaborative and case-based strategies  and presents these recommendations in the form of a personalized programme guide. so far research in the area of personalisation and recommendation within the dtv domain has focused almost exclusively on the use of explicit profiling. consequently  the key question we wish to answer relates to the type of implicit interest indicators that can be identified within the dtv domain and the extent to which they can accurately reflect a user's true preferences. 
1 implicit ratings in the dtv domain 
in this research we use the fischlar video library system 
 lee et ai  1  developed by the centre for digital video processing at dublin city university  www.cdvp.dcu.ie . fischlar has been fully operational for a number of years and attracts hundreds of users on a regular basis. it is a video library system that allows users to record  playback and browse tv shows through a normal web browser. users browse personalized television schedules  provided by the ptvplus personalization engine  smyth and cotter  1   to select programmes to be recorded by the system. tv shows are captured in mpeg-1 format and processed in order to index their content for storage and to extract key-frames for contentbased browsing. fischlar users can select programmes to record up to 1 days in advance of broadcast and can access previously recorded programmes for playback or browsing. 
poster papers 	1 　as fischlar takes advantage of the ptvplus personalized tv listings service  there exists the ability to capture explicit ratings feedback for its user profiles  figure 1  using the rating icons beside each programme's description. however  unlike ptvplus  fischlar users can interact directly with programming content  and this provides new profiling opportunities. in particular  the record  playback and browsing actions of users are suitable as implicit interest indicators; e.g.  selecting a programme to be recorded is surely a strong potential indicator of interest. thus  fischlar's profiling capabilities have been enhanced to capture implicit as well as the explicit profiles  by logging all record  playback and browsing actions  figure 1 . 
user #1 
channels bbc1.bbc1 .. 
	+progs 	friends  er  ... 
keywords comedy  soap times 	pnmetime 
figure 1: explicit profile example. 
user #1 
behaviour play 
	+progs 	scrubs  cheers  
figure 1: implicit profile example. 
1 	experimental evaluation 
our aim is to evaluate the usefulness of fischlar's implicit user profiles relative to its explicit profiles. in particular we wish to determine whether or not these implicit profiles are any more or less accurate at predicting user preferences than the explicit profiles gathered directly from user ratings. 
1 	test data 
our experiments draw on 1 live-user profiles from the 
fischlar system. in particular we make use of 1 different types of profile: 
1. explicit profiles contain explicit ratings that fischlar users have provided; 
1. play profiles contain only those programmes that a user has played back; 
1. record profiles contain only those programmes that a user has recorded; 
1. browse profiles contains only those profiles that a user has browsed using fischlar's key-frame browser; 
1. combined profiles are a combination of play  record and browse profiles. 
1 	algorithms 
in addition we make use of two different programme recommenders: 
1. cf is a traditional collaborative filtering recommender as described in  konstan et al.  1; o'sullivan et al.   1b ; it finds similar users by calculating program overlap between the target user and all others  and then recommends to the target user programs from the most similar users that they have yet not rated. 
1. sim is a similarity-based recommender that draws on similarity information mined from user profiles as described in  o'sullivan et al.  1b . it uses data mining techniques to find relationship between items and then harnesses this information both in profile similarity and recommendation ranking  ranking all possible recommendable programmes  to recommend programmes to the user. 
due to space constraints  it is not possible to discuss these recommenders in detail; the interested reader is referred to  o'sullivan et al.  1b; 1a . suffice it to say that they each draw on a fundamentally different recommendation strategy  be it collaborative as in the case of cf  or contentbased  as in sim. 
1 method 
first each profile is randomly split into a training profile and a test profile; this is repeated for a range of different split-ratios for each profile. the training profiles are used as the basis for recommendation; in each case we make 1 programme recommendations for each user. the quality of the resulting recommendations is evaluated with reference to the corresponding test profiles by computing the percentage of recommended programmes that appear in the target test profile. so  for example  we use the training play profiles to generate recommendations that are evaluated with respect to the test play profiles; similarly for record and browse profiles. in this way we can compare the quality of the recommendations generated using implicit play  record  browse and combined indicators to the quality of recommendations generated using 
explicit ratings profiles. 
1 	results 

figure 1: recommendation accuracy for explicit and implicit  play  record  browse  combined  profile groups. 
　the results are presented in figure 1 as an accuracy bargraph for the various different groups of explicit and implicit profiles  play  record  browse and combined . in each grouping we present the accuracy results obtained by the cf and sim recommenders. for example  we find that the explicit profiles deliver recommendation accuracies of 1% and 

1 	poster papers 

1%  for cf and sim recommenders  respectively; clearly the enhanced sim rccommcndcr offers significant benefits over the standard cf recommender as previously discussed in  ctsullivan et ai  1b . each of the implicit profiles generate consistently higher recommendation accuracies for both cf and sim recommenders. for instance  in the case of the play profiles  the recommendation accuracy is 1% and 1% for the cf and sim recommenders  which is a significant increase on the explicit profile accuracy  especially for the sim rccommcndcr. in fact  the implicit profiles yield recommendation accuracies in excess of 1% for the sim recommender compared to the 1% obtained for the explicit profiles. 
　these results indicate that playback  recording  browsing and combined behaviours in fischlar serve as competent interest indicators when it comes to profiling user preferences. in each case we find an increase in the quality of recommendations made from profiles containing implicit information. moreover  the scale of this increase is largest in the case of the sim recommender  due to the fact that this recommender directly mines the profiles in order to generate programme similarity knowledge as the basis for recommendations. the availability of the higher quality implicit profiles helps to improve the similarity rules used by sim when compared to the similarity rules mined from explicit profiles. 
1 	conclusions 
we have evaluated the use of implicit interest indicators as the basis for user profiling in the dtv domain. research in more traditional domains  such as web browsing or usenet news  indicates that some implicit interest indicators  e.g.  read-time and mouse movements  are capable of serving as reliable alternatives to explicit profile information such as user ratings. our research indicates that the same is also true in the dtv domain. we have compared the quality of recommendations generated from explicit and implicit profiles and found  through the use of a deployed video library system  that in each case the implicit profiles are capable of generating recommendations that are as good as those generated by the explicit profiles. 
acknowledgements 
the support of the informatics research initiative of enterprise ireland is gratefully acknowledged. the support and advice of the centre for digital video processing at dublin city university is also gratefully acknowledged. 
