bdio c t i 
obligations and the specification of agent behavior 
1 jan broersen 
ics  utrecht university 
 the netherlands broersen cs.uu.nl 
introduction 	mehdi dastani 	leendert van der torre 
ics  utrecht university cwi amsterdam the netherlands the netherlands mehdi cs.uu.nl torre cwi.nl 
a speciality of ctl is that some formulae - called path formulae- are not interpreted relative to a particular situation. what is relevant here are full paths. the reference to m is omitted whenever it is understood. 
poster papers 	1 

1 	single agent properties 
the following properties characterize the relation between mental attitudes of a single agent. 
1 	regimentation 
a main question when developing a normative system is whether the norms can be violated or not  i.e. whether the norms are soft or hard constraints. in the latter case  the norms are said to be regimented. regimented norms correspond to preventative control systems in computer security. for example  in the metro in paris it is not possible to travel without a ticket  because there is a preventative control system  whereas it is possible to travel without a ticket on the french trains  because there is a detective control system. norm regimentation for agent i is characterized by: 

strong and weak epistemic norm regimentation are: 

and intentional norm regimentation is: 

a variant of the latter regimentation is conditional to a conflict between agent i's internal and external motivations. for example  if an agent is obliged to work but desires to go to the beach  then it intends to go to work. or at least it does not intend to go to the beach. an agent is called strongly or weakly respectful if: 

moreover  a respectful agent can internalize its obligations in the sense that they turn into desires  or at least it cannot decide to violate the obligation. for example  if an agent is obliged to work then it also desires to work  or at least it cannot desire not to work. 

instead of respectful  agents may also be egocentric  which can be characterized by similar properties: 

1 	persistence 
obligations typically persist until a deadline  e.g. deliver the goods before noon  or they persist forever  e.g. don't kill. we denote a deadline obligation by oi p  d   where achievement of the proposition d is the deadline for the obligation to achieve p. a deadline obligation oi p d  persists until it is fulfilled or becomes obsolete because the deadline is reached: 

¡¡a deadline obligation 1{ p p   for which the only deadline is the achievement of the obligation itself  is called an 'achievement obligation'. we may characterize that oip is an achievement obligation by: 

¡¡alternatively  we may characterize that oip persists forever  i.e. that it is a 'maintenance obligation'  by: 

1 multi-agent obligations 
in a multi-agent setting agents interact with each other  thereby creating obligations. for example  in an electronic market where agents interact to buy and sell goods  sending a confirmation to buy an item creates the obligation of payment by the buyer and the obligation of shipment of the item by the seller. social systems may be designed in which obligations are related to the mental attitudes of other agents. for example  there may be communities in which agent i may adopt all the obligations of agent j. 

the following property characterizes that agent i adopts the desires of agent j as its obligations. for example  if agent j desires to eat then agent i is obliged to see to it that he gets something to eat. 

in a master slave relationship  the intentions of the master become the obligations of the slave. 

agent i is a dictator if for every other agent j it holds that: 

finally  a particular kind of dictator i is one whose desires immediately turn into obligations of another agent j. 

1 	summary 
in this paper we have introduced the bdioctl logic; a combination of rao and georgeff's bdictl formalism and standard deontic logic sdl. we have defined several specification and verification properties in this logic. the formalization of other properties is the subject of further research. the option most discussed in deontic logic is whether violations of norms can trigger new obligations  i.e. whether there is contrary-toduty reasoning. for example  it is often assumed that the legal code does not contain contrary-to-duty norms. properties related to contrary-to-do reasoning are therefore of particular interest. 
