 
the core of scientific theories are laws. these laws often make use of theoretical terms  linguistic entities which do not directly refer to observables. there is therefore no direct way of determining which theoretical assertions are true. this suggests that multiple theories may exist which are incompatible with each other but compatible with all possible observations. since such theories make the same empirical claims  empirical tests cannot be used to differentiate or rank such theories. one property that has been suggested for evaluating rival theories is coherence. this was only understood qualitatively until we  kwok  et.al. 1  introduced a coherence measure based on the average use of formulas in support sets for observations. the idea was to identify highly coherent theories with those whose formulas that are tightly coupled to account for observations  while low coherence theories contain many disjointed and isolated statements. our current approach generalizes that insight to accommodate fundamental ideas from the philosophy of science and better mirrors scientific practice. moreover  this new approach is neutral with respect to the philosophy and practice of science  and is able to explain notions like modularization using coherence. 
1 introduction 
this extended summary highlights the main points of the paper  a full version  kwok  et.al. 1  of which can be obtained electronically. this section motivates the problem and subsequent sections outline the definitions which formalize the intuitions behind coherence  describe some properties that flow from these definitions  and provide examples of their use. 
　scientific theories evidently comprise laws that use vocabularies that contain terms which on the one hand refer to observations  and on the other refer to postulated or theoretical entities that are not directly observable. it is in fact quite common for two theories t1 and t1 that agree on the status of their observational terms to differ in their theoretical terms. one way to compare tl and t1 is to say that tl is *supported in part by the australian research council. 
1 
australia 
more coherent than t1 if in accounting for the observations the formulas in tl  work together better  than those in t1  or are  more useful  than in t1. a persuasive advocate for such properties is bonjour ibonjour 1 . in a previous paper  kwok  et.al. 1  we proposed a definition that amounted to a quantitative measure of coherence of theories. in this paper we elaborate on the definition  repairing its deficiencies and extending its range of application. 
1 coherence 
definition 1  supports for observations  given an input set i and and output set o  a subset toft is a i-relative support for a set o of observations if 

let s t  i  o  denote the set of all i-relative supports for o. 
　this definition differs from that in  kwok  et.al. 1  in the relativisation of notion of support to the input set 1  which better models scientific practice. 
assumption 1  clausal basis assumption  all bases of theories are clauses. 

　informally  this is the relative frequency of occurence of a in the support sets for o. 
poster papers 

　informally  coherence is the average utility of the elements of t in supporting some observations with the help of others. the inputs do not figure directly in the counting because it is the internal laws  or rules  of t that we are assessing for how the outputs are supported. 
1 a typical application 
in the full paper there are applications of the above definitions to  i  demolish craig's trick  craig 1   alleged by some to show that theoretical terms are unnecessary  by demonstrating that it yields highly incohrent theories;  ii  argue that mendel's assumption of two independent theoretical characteristics to account for the observations of his pea plant experiments yields a highly coherent theory; and  iii  indicate that programs that realize the kolmogorov complexity of sequences are maximally coherent. here we focus on a typical application and its implication for coherence of modular theories. 
1 	the black swan fix 
prior to western ornithologists exploration of australia all the swans they had hitherto encountered were white in color. for this focussed domain  there is only one type of object  namely swans  that are of interest. the observational predicates are swan and white  and we regard the former as the input and the latter as the output. a succinct way to capture induction is the rule 1 in the theory t below: 
		 1  
　notice that t does not have any theoretical terms as we have specified that both the predicates are observational. in australia they saw black swans. here is an ad hoc way to revise t minimally if we can enumerate these black swans as additions to the original input set  i.e. these new swans are sw   sw1 ...  swn. call this fix tn. the revised rules that replace rule 1 are: 
 1 sentence  
		 1  
and {1n sentences  
		 1  
suppose the new observation terms are about swan color  i.e.  black or white. 
　tn has sentences. for any finite set of k black swans  there are exactly 1k sentences in tn that support their color. 
　each such support sentence has utility 1 for a particular swan swi  and 1 for other swans. 
　hence the coherence of tn for such k observations is  which is asymptotically 1 with large n. this is an argument against the fix. the  good  fix is what happens in inductive learning when a predicate is invented to summarize the discovery that black swans live in australia  viz.  the new theory x  wit 1 sentences 
 1  
　 1  the input set i now comprises pairs of the swan atoms and the new observable australian literals. the output o are the two color terms white and black. now for any one swan  call it c  observation  its color is supported either by the formulas 1 and  or by the formulas 1 and 
australian c . therefore  irrespective of the color the support set for each observation has cardinality 1. suppose there are k  white and k1 black swans in an observation sequence. it is then easy to see that the utilities of formula 1 is 1 for k1 observations but 1 for the k1 observations; formula 1 is the dual of the preceding. the coherence of this theory for any  swans is therefore  
1 	modularization and coherence 
in the above example  suppose we partition the output observational terms into black  swans  and white  swans   denoting the disjoint sets by 1b and ow respectively. likewise  we partition the input set into two  ib and iw denoting the pairs of hypothesized australian literal and swan atom. then it is not hard to see that the formula 1 is in all support sets of  but is not in any support set of dually  the formula 1 is in all support sets of 
in none of those of  the utility of each formula 
is 1 in their respective support sets  and 1 in the other. this is about as strong as we can get in modularizing a theory. 
　this idea has the following obvious generalization. suppose an observation set to be accounted for can be partitioned into and the theory t has invented theoretical 
  such that for each  is in every set of modularize the theory t with respect 
to the observation partitions. 
