 
controlling the sensing of an environment by an agent has been accepted as necessary for it's effective operation. usually  however  agents operate in partially observable domains where not all parameters of interest are accessible for direct sensing. sensing actions must then be chosen for what they will reveal indirectly  through an axiomatized model of the domain causal structure. this indirect form of sensing has received somewhat less attention in the literature. this article shows how sensing can be chosen so as to acquire and use indirectly obtained information to meet goals not otherwise possible. event calculus is extended with a knowledge formalism  and used to show how inferring unknown information about a domain leads to conditional sensing actions. 
1 integrating knowledge with event calculus 
to perform effectively in most practical domains  a rational agent must possess the ability to reason about  and create plans for sensing  conditional  and knowledge-producing actions. this requires the agent to not only reason about the state of objects in the domain  but also reason about the agent's own knowledge about the state of the domain  moore  1 . acquisition of knowledge may be achieved by direct sensing of the environment  or alternatively  indirectly through inference using existing or newly acquired knowledge. 
　providing an agent with the capability to reason about its knowledge of the environment requires that we provide a theory that can represent and reason about that part of itself devoted to describing the environment. we augment domain fluents with meta-level knowledge fluents which at any given time point are semantically attached to the corresponding domain fluent using the knowledge axioms. 
the language used to represent knowledge here  turner  
1  is a self-referential  amalgamated  language permitting a predicate to take a formula as an argument through the use of a naming relation to convert the formula to a unique term. for simplicity  we adopt the convention of sentences naming themselves. using such a language  very general expressions are possible  such as those describing incomplete information. 
　shown below are axioms employed in a first-order selfreferential theory of knowledge similar to modal logic's s1 system. event calculus as adopted here  shanahan  1a  uses the distinguished predicate holdsat to represent the state of all time varying fluents  including knowledge fluents  all knowledge axioms must be defined within this predicate. 
 kl  
 k1  
 k1  
 k1  
 k1  
 k1  
in order to reason about knowledge  we must define inference rules that will apply to formulae within the temporal structure: 
 kec1  
 kec1   neg  
1 acting in causal domains 
sensing actions can be axiomatized in a domain independent way by making an assumption that all fluents can be sensed directly. the effect of a pure sensing action is limited  by definition  to changing the agent's knowledge base. there will not be any effect on the domain. clearly  in many practical situations  sensing does impact the environment  but this will be handled as a refinement to the pure sensing action defined below. a function sense is introduced  mapping a 

1 	poster papers 

fluent to an action. the sensing action is defined as follows. 
 sa1   sp1  
many actions have effects on the domain as well as on the agent's knowledge of the domain's state. an agent may come to know the status of a door by sensing  or alternatively by performing an opendoor action. axioms ke1 and ke1 describe what the agent will come to know by performing actions. 
 ke1  
 ke1  
finally  we introduce the function if  from fluent and action pairs  to action  to represent conditional actions  executed just if the conditional fluent holds. 
 ca1  
 ca1   cp1  
figure 1: unobservable output. 
　to illustrate the use of indirect sensing  we use the domain of figure 1. sensing actions are chosen to allow an agent to infer the value of out. sensing is necessary on just one of the two inputs  as long as this input is found to be inactive. if found to be active  then a second sensing action must take place. either way  the goal of knowing whether the output is active is met. 
　there are two primary fluents: on1 and on1  both of which can be directly observed. the output is a derived fluent  which  for the sake of example is specified to be unobservable. the goal is a knowledge goal stating that the robot knows if the output is active or not: 
to describe the environment's ramification  we use a state constraint  and for the sake of simplicity also provide an associated knowledge constraint: 
 sc1  
 ksc1  
it is necessary to state that the fluents on1 and on1 are observable: 
 fd1  
 fd1  
a two-action narrative is defined; a sensing action of fluent 
on1 followed by a conditional sensing action of fluent on1  contingent upon on1 having been found active: 
 n1  
 n1  
using appropriate uniqueness-of-names axioms  and a circumscriptive solution to the frame problem  

we can prove the goal holdsat kw out  1 . this result demonstrates that the conditional sensing plan for knowledge acquisition in the domain of figure 1 will always yield information about the state of the unobservable output. however  depending on the state of the first sensed fluent on1  the agent may not have to sense on1 at all. 
1 	conclusion 
we have introduced a knowledge formalism into event calculus to allow an agent to represent it's knowledge of an environment sufficiently to reason about sensing  conditional actions  and inference of environmental unknowns through state constraints. it is hoped that this will form the basis for a comprehensive account of knowledge producing actions in further work. 
