 
current tools for interactive knowledge capture have little or no learning aptitude. they are mostly oblivious to the process or strategy that the user may be following in entering new knowledge  unaware of their progress during a session  and ignorant of typical skills expected from a good student. we present an approach to make acquisition interfaces more proactive by extending them with: 1  goals that represent what remains to be learned  1  strategies to achieve these goals and acquire further knowledge  and 1  awareness of the current status of the body of knowledge learned. the resulting interaction shows that the system is aware of its progress towards acquiring the new knowledge  and moves forward by understanding what acquisition goals and strategies to pursue. 
1 	introduction 
the goal of our work is to develop acquisition interfaces that are proactive learners  able to reason about learning activities and with initiative in participating in the process accordingly. our approach is to enable acquisition tools to have acquisition and learning goals represented explicitly and declaratively and be aware of the level of competence and confidence of the knowledge they are acquiring. this would enable acquisition tools to reason in terms of the learning/teaching process and to make interaction with the user dynamically generated given the situation at hand. we present our design and implementation of a new acquisition dialogue tool called slick  skills for learning to interactively capture knowledge  that is built based on the tutoring and learning principles we have compiled so far kim and gil  1 . slick makes acquisition tools more proactive by maintaining 1  goals that represent what remains to be learned  1  strategies to achieve these goals and acquire further knowledge  and 1  awareness of the current status of the body of knowledge learned. the tool has been used for acquiring two very different types of knowledge: biological process models and military plans. the resulting interactions show that the system is aware of its progress towards acquiring the new knowledge  and moves forward by understanding what acquisition goals and strategies to pursue. 
   teaching/learning principle   tutoring literature 1 introduce lesson topics and goals 1 atlas-andes  mcno-tutor 
| human tutonal dialog  human learning use topics of the lesson as a guide be&e.umfe subsumption to existing cognitive structure human learning  why  atlas-andes immediate feedback 　sophie  auto-tutor  lisp tutor | human tutorial dialog  human learning generate educated guesses human tutorial dialog 
quadratic. pact   keep on track | 	guidon  scholar  train-tutor indicate lack of understanding | | human tutorial dialog. why detect and fix  buggy  knowledge     scholar  meno -tutor  why  1 buggy  circsim  human learning learn deep models   	pact  atlas-andes learn domain language atlas-andes  mcno-tutor keep track of correct answers | 	atlas-andes prioritize learning tasks | 	why limit the nesting of the lesson to a handful |atlas 
 summarize what was learned   	excheck  train-tutor. meno-tutor assess learned knowledge   	west  human tutorial dialog table 1: some tutoring and learning principles  kim and gil  1ts-1  
1 tutoring and learning principles for proactive learning 
we have investigated various tutoring principles used by human tutors and instructional software that are relevant to acquisition tasks  figure 1 . they helped us understand the nature of good teacher-student interactions. we noticed that many useful learning principles could be seen as learning goals and teaching goals that students and teachers seem to pursue at different points throughout a lesson kim and gil  1 . 
　we also have investigated how these principles would benefit current acquisition tools  gil and kim  1 . we have found that the principles have only been used in some aspects of the functionality of acquisition tools  and are exhibited by some but not all the tools. 
1 declarative representation of tutoring and learning principles 
we have used the above principles in the context of building proactive acquisition interfaces. acquisition tools can be seen as students learning new knowledge from the user  teacher  and they should be able to use some of the strategies that good learners pursue during a tutoring dialogue. the 

1 	poster papers 

following presents the capabilities we provide to acquisition interfaces based on these principles. 
  acquisition interfaces should be able to represent acquisition goals explicitly. many of the tutoring principles suggest a more goal-oriented behavior for acquisition interfaces. having acquisition goals explicitly and declaratively is key to making a tool truly proactive because it could then steer the dialogue with the user to work towards those goals. the goals that are achieved at each point during the dialogue represent the progress made towards acquiring the desired body of knowledge. 
  acquisition interfaces should have acquisition strategies in order to understand and actively pursue what is involved in learning about a new topic. acquisition strategies outline how to achieve acquisition goals. because so many things are unknown to the system during the lesson  these strategies can only be pursued under the user's guidance and in a mixed-initiative interaction. 
  acquisition tools should have awareness of what they have learned already and what they do not know about yet  so that they can better assess their competence and confidence in specific topics  and steer the dialogue with the user in directions that improve their body of knowledge on both counts. 
　slick is developed as a front-end to existing basic acquisition tools by embodying these capabilities. for example  tools that acquire different forms of knowledge  such as problem-solving knowledge vs. concepts  may need different operational goals because they have different subcomponents and functions to build up knowledge bases. actions done by the user through the basic acquisition tool are intercepted by our system. while the backend tool will update the backend knowledge base and its own user interface  slick will update its own structures and user interface. 
1 	an implementation of slick 
slick have been used for acquiring two very different types of knowledge: biological process models and military plans. figure 1 shows the slick interface for acquiring military plans  army courses of actions . slick is presenting a report on a plan being entered by a military officer  pointing out how the system is understanding the plan. users describe their plans in terms of the steps  such as attack  seize  destroy  etc.  and the objects involved  military units  terrain features  etc. . as shown in figure l- a   slick keeps track of the lesson goal and the user's intention  e.g.  expected effect   which can be used to guide the user and to check if the plan is valid. the summary window illustrates the list of involved objects and their tasks  which are essential in viewing how the plan is being built. it highlights the objects with potential problems  such as unassigned units  in red and confident subtopics are shown in blue. the user can check details of each item by clicking on it  as shown in figure l- a . for example  slick presents confidence on knowledge items based on the number of times they were involved in test problems. 
　the user can view progress by checking the issues resolved over time. towards the end of the lesson  i.e.  building a 

figure 1: acquiring military plans with slick. 
plan   slick confirms that all the required roles  such as the information that existing knowledge indicates it must be provided  are specified  and identity among the objects are fine  none of the existing objects appear to be the same   figure l- b  . when slick notices remaining issues  it also collects 
the sources of the problems to help users understand the problems better. for example  figure l- c  shows that there is an inconsistency between the plan and existing definitions in the kb because in the existing definitions  the 'objectactcdon* should be a military unit  modernmilitaryunitdeployable   but currently the user has assigned a terrain feature to it. 
　note that slick's learning principles have derived this output. for example  in the figure  slick reports its understanding of the lesson and the remaining issues in terms of its goals such as  make new definitions consistent with existing knowledge    ensure that the introduced items are connected to the main concept    ensure that the required roles are all specified    establish identity among the items   etc. 
　we plan to extend the work with dialogue planning for acquisition tasks  and incorporate a plan recognition module that relates individual user changes with multi-step plans. 
