 
there have been many proposals to compute similarities between words based on their distributions in contexts. however  these approaches do not distinguish between synonyms and antonyms. we present two methods for identifying synonyms among distributionally similar words. 
1 introduction 
the distributional hypothesis states that words with similar meanings tend to appear in similar contexts  harris  1 . consider the words adversary and foe. both of them are often used as the objects of the verbs: batter  crush  defeat  demonize  deter  outsmart ... 
and modified by the adjectives: ardent  bitter  formidable  old  tough  worthy ... 
　there have been many proposals for computing distributional similarity of words  hindle  1; pereira et al  1; lin  1 . the list  1  shows the top-1 distributionally similar words of adversary  obtained with lin's method  lin  1  on a 1gb newspaper corpus. 
 1  adversary: enemy  foe  ally  antagonist  opponent  rival  detractor  neighbor  supporter  competitor  partner  trading partner  accuser  terrorist  critic  republican  advocate  skeptic  challenger 
　compared with manually compiled thesauri  distributionally similar words often offer much better coverage. compare  1  with the entry for adversary in webster collegiate thesaurus  kay  1 : 
 1  adversary: synonyms: opponent  antagonist  anti  con  match  opposer  oppugnant; related words: assaulter  attacker contrasted words: backer  supporter  upholder; antonyms: ally 
the thesaurus entry missed many synonyms such as: enemy  foe  rival  competitor and challenger. 
　a problem with the distributionally similar words  however  is that many of them are antonyms  e.g.  ally and sup-
porter in  1 . the problem gets worse if a word belongs to a semantic category with many members  since all of them tend to have similar distributions. this is demonstrated in 
1 
the following list of top-1 distributionally similar words for orange. 
 1  orange: yellow  lemon  peach  pink  lime  purple  tomato  onion  mango  lavender  avocado  red  pineapple  pear  blue  plum  cucumber  melon  turquoise  tangerine 
in many applications  such as information retrieval and machine translation  the presence of antonyms or other types of semantically incompatible words  e.g.  orange-pink  can be devastating. this paper presents two methods for identifying synonyms among distributionally similar words. 
1 methods 
1 	patterns of incompatibility 
consider the following phrasal patterns: 
 1  	a. from x to y 
b. either x or y 
if two words x and y appear in one of these patterns  they arc very likely to be semantically incompatible. for example  the following table shows the queries and the hits  the number of return documents  from the search engine altavista: 
 1  
 query adversary near ally 
 from adversary to ally   from ally to adversary  
 either adversary or ally   either ally or adversary  adversary near opponent  from adversary to opponent   from opponent to adversary  
 either adversary or opponent  
 either opponent or adversary  1 
1 
1  
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 given a query x neary  altavista returns documents where the words x andy appear close to each other. when two words are unrelated  the hits for the near query tend to be low. 
　motivated by the above examples  we propose to identify semantically incompatible word pairs by searching on the web for instantiations of the patterns in  1 . we define a score: 

poster papers 

where hits query  is the number of hits returned by altavista for the query  p is the set of patterns in  1  and c is a small constant to prevent the denominator of the above formula to be 1  we set e=1 . the lower the score  the less likely that the words x and y are synonyms. to determine whether or not distributionally similar words x and y are synonyms  we compute score x  y . if the value is higher than 1   x  y  is classified as a pair of synonyms. 
1 	using bilingual dictionaries 
the second method is based on the observation that translations of a word from another language are often synonyms of one another. for example   1  contains the english translations of the french word defenseur. many of them are synonyms. 
 1  advocate  attorney  counsel  fullback  intercessor  lawyer 
when two such words are not synonyms  the reason is typically that the french word have multiple senses and the english words are translations of the french word in different senses. under such circumstances  the distribution of the english words are usually quite different  e.g.  lawyer and fullback appear in very different contexts . we can therefore identify synonyms of a word w by intersecting the set of words that share with w the same french  or any other language  translation and the set of distributionally similar words of w. for example  the top-1 distributionally similar words of lawyer are: 
 1  lawyer: attorney  counsel  prosecutor  doctor  official  judge  executive  manager  investigator  consultant  
aide  agent  physician  expert  banker  officer  politician  lobbyist  teacher  accountant 
the intersection of  1  and  1  gives us the synonyms of lawyer  attorney and counsel. 
　since this method generally has high precision and low recall  see the next section   we can use this method with multiple bilingual dictionaries separately and take the union of the results. in our experiments  we used 1 dictionaries from http://www.freewaresite.com/onldict/ 
english-swedish  english-spanish  englishjapanese  english-german  english-french and english-esperanto. 
1 	evaluation 
using the algorithm in  lin  1  on a 1gb newspaper corpus  we computed the distributional similarity between about 1 words. we randomly selected 1 pairs of synonyms and 1 pairs of antonyms from webster's collegiate thesaurus  kay  1  that are also among the top-1 distributionally similar words of each other. we then used the methods presented in the previous section to determine which pairs are synonyms. let s be the set of true synonym pairs and s' be the set of pairs classified as synonyms. the precision and recall measures are defined as follows: 

the table in  1  shows the evaluation results: 
method precision recall pattern-based 
bilingual dictionaries 1% 
1% 1% 1% 1 related work 
the problem we address here is related to semantic orientation. the semantic orientation of a word is positive  or negative  if it is generally associated with good  or bad  things. for example  the words simple and simplistic have similar meanings  but simplistic has a negative semantic orientation. the algorithm in  hatzivassiloglou and mckeown  1  is based on the fact that conjoined adjectives generally have the same orientation. they use a small set of adjectives with known orientation to determine the orientations of other ad-
jectives.  turney  1  computed the degree of positive or negative semantic orientation of a word w with the hit counts from altavista for the queries w near excellent and w near poor. while semantic orientation is bipolar  the problem we are dealing with is multipolar. for example  turney's method is not able to tell that the words red  orange  yellow  green ... have incompatible meanings. 
1 	conclusion 
distributionally similar words include many antonyms and other semantically incompatible words  which minimizes their use in many applications. we have presented two methods for identifying synonyms among distributionally similar words. our preliminary evaluation with known synonyms and antonyms extracted from webster collegiate thesaurus has produced promising results. 
