 
this paper presents an action selection framework based on an assemblage of self-organizing neural networks called cooperative extended kohonen maps. this framework encapsulates two features that significantly enhance a robot's action selection capability: self-organization in the continuous state and action spaces to provide smooth  efficient and fine motion control; action selection via the cooperation and competition of extended kohonen maps to achieve more complex motion tasks. qualitative and quantitative comparisons for single- and multirobot tasks show our framework can provide better action selection than do potential fields method. 
1 introduction 
a central issue in the design of behavior-based control architectures for autonomous agents is the formulation of effective action selection mechanisms  asms  to coordinate the behaviors. this paper describes a neural network-based asm for autonomous non-holonomic mobile robots. our motivation is to develop a motion control strategy that can perform distributed multi-robot surveillance in unknown  dynamic  and unpredictable environments. by implementing the asm using an assemblage of self-organizing neural networks  it induces the following key features that significantly enhance the agent's action selection capability: self-organization of continuous state and action spaces to provide smooth  efficient and fine motion control  and action selection via the cooperation and competition of extended kohonen maps to achieve more complex motion tasks. 
1 action selection framework 
our proposed asm  termed cooperative extended kohonen 
maps  ekms   is implemented by connecting an ensemble of ekms. an ekm extends the kohonen self-organizing map. 
besides encoding a set of input weights that self-organize in the sensory input space  the neurons also produce outputs that vary with the incoming sensed inputs. our implementation extends the work of  low et al.  1  by connecting several ekms to form cooperative ekms. these neural networks cooperate and compete to produce an appropriate motor action for the robot to approach targets  negotiate unforeseen  possibly concave  obstacles  and keep away from robot kins when it is tracking moving targets  fig. 1 . 
　our asm framework consists of four types of ekms: target localization  obstacle localization  robot kin localization  and motor control ekms. in the presence of a target  neurons in the target localization ekm  which encodes target location in the local sensory input space u  are activated  fig. la . a target field with the shape of an elongated gaussian is produced  fig. lb  such that the neurons at and near the target location have the strongest activities. the elongated target field is crucial to the robot's avoidance of concave obstacles. 
　similarly  the presence of an obstacle activates neurons in the obstacle localization ekms. the neurons in these ekms at and near the obstacle locations will be activated to produce obstacle fields  fig. lc . these obstacle fields are stretched along the obstacle directions such that neurons beyond the obstacle locations are also inhibited to indicate inaccessibility. robot kin fields are activated in a similar way in the robot ekms in the presense of robot kins. 
　in activating the motor control ekm  the obstacle fields are subtracted from the target field  fig. id . if the target lies within the obstacle fields  the activation of the motor control ekm neurons close to the target location will be suppressed. consequently  another neuron at a location that is not inhibited by the obstacle fields becomes most highly activated  fig. id . this neuron produces a control parameter that moves the robot away from the obstacle. while the robot moves around the obstacle  the target and obstacle localization ekms are continuously updated with the current locations and directions of the target and obstacles. their interactions with the motor control ekm produce fine and smooth motion control of the robot to negotiate the obstacle and reach the target. in the case of multi-robot tracking of multiple targets  multiple target fields and robot kins fields are activated. the robots act like highly repulsive obstacles to other robots  thus separating them from each other. 
1 experiments and discussions 
two qualitative tests were conducted to demonstrate the capabilities of cooperative ekms in performing complex motion tasks. the experiments were performed using webots  an embodied simulator for khepera mobile robots  which incorporated 1% noise in its sensors and actuators. 

poster papers 	1 


figure 1: cooperative ekms.  a  in response to the target 1  the nearest neuron  black dot  in the target localization ekm  ellipse  of the robot  gray circle  is activated   b  the activated neuron produces a target field  dotted ellipse  in the motor control ekm.  c  three of the robot's sensors detect obstacles and activate three neurons  crosses  in the obstacle localization ekms  which produce the obstacle fields  dashed ellipses    d  subtraction of the obstacle fields from the target field results in the neuron at to become the winner in the motor control ekm  which moves the robot away from the obstacle. 

figure 1: motion of robot  dark gray  in an environment with unforeseen static obstacles  light gray . the robot successfully navigated through the checkpoints  small black dots  located at the doorways to reach the goal. 
　the environment for the first test consisted of three rooms connected by two doorways with unforeseen static obstacles  fig. 1 . the robot began in the top corner of the leftmost room and was tasked to move into the narrow corner of the right-most room via checkpoints plotted by a planner. the robot with cooperative ekms was able to move through the checkpoints to the goal by traversing between narrowly spaced convex obstacles in the first and the last room  and overcoming an concave obstacle in the middle room. a robot with potential fields would be trapped by these local minimas. 
　the second test  fig. 1  illustrates how two robots endowed with cooperative ekms cooperate to track four moving targets. when the targets were moving out of the robots' sensory range  the robot below chose to track the two targets moving to the bottom left while the robot above responded by tracking the two targets moving to the top right. in this manner  all targets could be observed by the robots. this test shows that the two robots can cooperate to track multiple moving targets without communicating with each other. 
　two quantitative tests were conducted to determine the overall tracking performance of the robot team based on the following performance index: 
		 1  
where n is total number of targets  n is number of targets being tracked at time t  and the experiment lasts t amount of time. for both tests  n and t were fixed respectively as 1 targets and 1 time steps at intervals of 1 ms. 
　the first test compared the mean observation coverage of robots adopting four different tracking strategies: cooperative ekms  potential fields  fixed deployment  and random deployment. the environment or arena was an enclosed obstacle-free region that varied in size. the mobile targets were forward-moving  obstacle-avoidance vehicles that changed their direction and speed with 1% probability. five 
1 

figure 1: cooperative tracking of moving targets. when the targets were moving out of the robots' sensory range  the robot below decided to track the targets moving to the bottom left while the robot above responded by tracking the targets moving to the top right. in this way  all targets could still be observed by the robots. 

	 a  	 b  
figure 1: comparison of observation coverage for  a  robots using different tracking strategies in varying arena size  and  b  varying number of robots with different sensing ranges. 
robots  each with target and robot sensing radius of 1 m  were deployed in this task. the fixed deployment approach distributed stationary robots uniformly over the arena. the random deployment approach allowed the robots to move randomly in a manner similar to the moving targets. test results in fig. 1 a  reveal that  in very large arenas  tracking strategies that respond dynamically to targets' motion  cooperative ekms and potential fields  are significantly better than those that do not  fixed and random . in particular  cooperative ekms offered the highest observation coverage as it could overcome local minimas posed by targets and robots. 
　the second test compared the mean observation coverage of the cooperative-ekm robots with different sensing ranges and number of robots. the size of the arena was 1 m1  which corresponded to the largest arena used for the first test. test results in fig. 1 b  show that observation coverage increases with increasing number of robots and sensing range. 
