 
admissible and consistent heuristic functions are usually preferred in single-agent heuristic search as they guarantee optimal solutions with complete search methods such as a* and ida*. larger problems  however  frequently make a complete search intractable due to space and/or time limitations. in particular  a path-planning agent in a realtime strategy game may need to take an action before its complete search has the time to finish. in such cases  incomplete search techniques  such as rta*  srta*  rtdp  dta*  can be used. such algorithms conduct a limited ply lookahead and then evaluate the states envisioned using a heuristic function. the action selected on the basis of such evaluations can be suboptimal due to the incompleteness of search and inaccuracies in the heuristic. it is usually believed that deeper lookahead increases the chances of taking the optimal action. in this paper  we demonstrate that this is not necessarily the case  even when admissible and consistent heuristic functions are used. 
1 lookahead pathologies in real-time single-agent search 
complete search methods such as a*  hart et al  1  and 
ida*  korf  1  produce optimal solutions when based on an admissible and monotonic heuristic function. the primary drawbacks are the exponential running time and the necessity to wait until the search completes before the first action can be taken  korf  1   this limits the applicability of complete search in practice as the deliberation time per action can be severely limited  higgins  1   the domain model can be expensive  bulitko and wilkins  1   the goal states can be difficult to recognize  levner et al  1 . consequently  despite numerous advances in improving heuristic functions 
 korf and taylor  1; culberson and schaeffer  1; reinefeld  1; korf  1   incomplete real-time/on-line search methods remain the practical choice for complex reallife problems. 
　various incomplete search methods have been proposed including: rta*  korf  1   rtdp  barto et al  1   srta*  and dta*  russell and wefald  1 . such algorithms base their decisions on heuristic information collected from a partial tree expansion  lookahead  prior to reaching the goal state. since the heuristic function is generally inaccurate and the search is incomplete  suboptimal solutions can be produced even with admissible and consistent heuristics. 
　it is widely believed that looking ahead deeper improves the chances of taking the right action. consequently  a considerable amount of effort has been put into increasing the lookahead depth by using selective search  search extensions  and hardware and software optimizations. 
　in this paper we demonstrate that looking ahead deeper can actually decrease the chances of taking the optimal action even when admissible and consistent heuristic functions are used. 
1 	related past research & our novel contributions 
lookahead pathologies within the mini-max search in twoplayer games have been investigated extensively in the past. in  nau  1; 1; beal  1; 1; 1; bratko and gams  1; pearl  1   the primary cause of pathologies was deemed to be the independence of heuristic values of the leaf nodes. such games were called non-incremental large branching factors were also considered contributing to a pathology. later   michon  1  added non-inertness  i.e.  the constant branching factor  to the  black list  of properties that can cause a pathology. 
　the efforts presented in this paper differ from the past work in several key areas:  i  we demonstrate lookahead pathologies in single-agent heuristic search;  ii  pathologies are shown to take place even when the true and heuristic values of sibling states are correlated  i.e.  in incremental domains ;  iii  unlike research in  schriifer  1; beal  1  that dealt with two-valued  win/loss  heuristics  we consider real-valued heuristic functions;  iv  we show pathologies with the smallest non-trivial branching factor  two ;  v  pathologies are demonstrated for admissible and consistent heuristic functions. 
1 	framework 
in this study we consider a single-agent heuristic search in a discrete state domain with a finite number of deterministic actions. the states  set s  and actions  set a  form a directed graph with certain specified vertices representing the goal states. the edges  actions  are weighed with action costs: 
　
poster papers 	1 
　

figure 1: illustration of p-ply binary lookahead tree. throughout the paper we display the true f* in the circles  the states or heuristic f values are shown next to the circles  and the edges are labeled with actions. here u+ and a' are the optimal and suboptimal actions respectively. 
c : a model: : s x a s. 
　we define the true distance-to-goal function sum of action costs along the shortest path from state s to the closest goal state. generally speaking  the agent uses an approximation h to the unavailable typically inaccurate insomuch as:  
　for a fixed starting state .s  function is defined as the sum of action costs along the shortest path from s to s'. finally  the sum of h or h* and g is typically denoted by / or /*. it easy to see that /* remains constant along any optimal path from a fixed state s to the closest goal. also note that  for any state .s-'  action a  is inferior to action u.1 iff 

　located in state s  the agent can use its perfect model s to predict the states it will get to upon taking various sequences of actions. a binary lookahead tree is illustrated in figure 1. for the sake of clarity and simplicity we will be using small binary lookahead trees to illustrate the discussion throughout the paper. 
　the lookahead policy  operates as follows:  i  start in the current state s;  ii  construct the lookahead search tree 
of;; plies deep by envisioning terminal states of all action sequences of p actions  whenever possible ;  iii  evaluate the leaf nodes of the lookahead tree using the / function and select the minimum-valued state;  iv  output the single action leading to selected leaf state  resolve ties randomly . 
　depending on the lookahead tree  random tie resolution  and the approximate heuristic /  the action a = output b y c a n b e suboptimal:   
the probability of such an er-
ror for state s s is denoted by err s p . additionally  we will consider the expected value of  over the states .s. such state-independent quantity will be referred to as err p . 
　the combination of domain and heuristic function h  /  is called pathological iff    p1  err s p1    err s p1  . the corresponding state-independent version is: p1  err p1    err p1  . the intuitive meaning is quite transparent: lookahead search is pathological iff looking deeper ahead is expected to increase the chances of taking 

figure 1: the 1-node 1-ply lookahead tree used in the analysis of pathologies with admissible and consistent heuristics. 
admissible & consistent heuristics 
complete searches  e.g.  a* and ida*  produce optimal solutions with admissible heuristics. thus  much effort has gone into derivation of admissible heuristics either manually or automatically  e.g.   korf and taylor  1; prieditis  1 . consistency of h leads to non-decreasing monotonia ity of / and often speeds up complete searches conducted by a*/ida*. incomplete searches  e.g.  rta*  can produce suboptimal solutions even with consistent and admissible heuristics. it is widely believed  however  that deeper lookahead reduces chances of such errors. remarkably  this is not necessarily the case. 
　consider the binary lookahead tree in figure 1. each node is shown with its true value f* s  inside the circle. 
for each state .s  heuristic f s  is drawn uniformly from 
  indicated with the '~' in the boxes next to the circles . the value  a  of the root state is drawn from  1  /* sroot  . this makes the / function admissible and monotonically non-decreasing. 
　we will refer to the drawn values of / as a b c d e f g  illustrated in the figure . assume that . by definition  the lookahead will be pathological iff 	the probability of taking the suboptimal action  i.e.  going to the right child of the root node  with the lookahead of one is: 
similarly we derive an expression for the lookahead of two: err sroot 1  which can not be reproduced in this short pa-
　
1 	poster papers 
　

figure 1: admissible and consistent heuristics: nonpathological and pathological lookahead trees. 

1 	future work & conclusions 
in practice  lookahead pathologies with real-time  singleagent or two-player  search are infrequently observed even when inadmissible heuristics are used  cf   thompson  1  for the game of chess . consequently  future work directions include:  i  identification of the properties of practically used heuristic functions  e.g.  manhattan distance in the 1 puzzle  that are responsible for the lack of pathologies   ii  extension of the current formal analysis to lookahead trees with a variable branching factor and a deeper lookahead   iii  methods for on-line and off-line pathology detection and correction 
and  iv  connections between the probability of taking suboptimal actions and a decrease in the cumulative expected reward. 
acknowledgements 
rene levia  dan lizotte  omid madani  xin li  and yiping zhou have contributed in various ways. we are grateful for the funding from the university of alberta  nsfrc  and the alberta ingenuity centre for machine learning. 
