 
the analysis and use of visual information is a first order task for ai researchers. due to the architecture of classical computers and to the computational complexity of state-of-the-art algorithms  it is required to find better ways to store  process and retrieve information for image processing. one plausible and exciting approach is quantum information processing  qip . in this poster we present an initial step towards the definition of an emerging field  quantum image processing  by showing how to store an image using a quantum system as well as some of the unique properties of that storage process derived from quantum mechanics laws. 
1 	introduction 
in 1 deutsch  deutsch  1  developed a theoretical machine named universal quantum turing machine  uqtm   that is  a machine based on quantum theory capable of performing computations  and showed that such machine was a generalization of a universal turing machine. it is also shown in  deutsch  1  that a quantum computer  qc   that is  a 
physical system capable of performing computations according to the rules of quantum mechanics  can perform certain tasks faster than its classical counterpart. deutsch and jozsa  deutsch and jozsa  1  and shor  shor  1  showed concrete problems where such speed-up is possible. among qc properties  we find: 
1. superposition of states. the basic component of a qc is a qubit  that is  a physical entity  such as an electron or a photon  that can be mathematically represented as a vector in a 1d hilbert space the general form of a qubit is  
	where 	are complex numbers constrained by  
　　= 1 and is an arbitrary basis of   nielsen and chuang  1 . thus  is a superposition of states and and therefore can be prepared in an infinite number of ways by varying the values of and see figure 1 .a. in contrast  classical computers measure bit values using only one basis  {1} and the only two possible states are those that correspond to the measurement outcomes  1 or 1. 
1. entanglement. entanglement is a special correlation among quantum systems that has no paragon in classical systems. entanglement is seen to be at the heart of qip unique properties  and an example of it is its role in quantum teleportation  nielsen and chuang  1 . 
　the previous properties may have deep implications in several fields of computer science  in particular in artificial intelligence  ai  both on theoretical  e.g. faster algorithms and secure tranmissions  and technological spheres  current technology is now being built taking into account quantum effects due to component size . 
　the purpose of this poster is to propose an initial step towards the integration of qip techniques in image processing and  as a future work  in related fields as computer vision and pattern recognition. 

figure 1: . mathematical representation for a qubit 
b  note that 
where  
1 storing an image in a qubit array 
1 	visual information storage in a multi particle quantum system 
let q 	=  be a set of qubits. 
our goal is to store visual information in q. in order to take advantage of  properties  allowed quantum states used to store visual information in a qubit  are m - 


poster papers 	1 


figure 1: . frequency to quantum state apparatus 
schematics of an apparatus capable of detecting electromagnetic frequencies and producing a set of quantum states as output. |i/'  being an overall state of that set of qubits 
　we define a machine b that divides the whole frequency range of the visible spectra into a partition and assigns a qubit array  that is  a set of spatially ordered qubit states  qt to each partition subset fi  see figure 1 . note that b must act as a bijective function between frequency partition subsets fi and sets of qubit states qt  i.e. it is not allowed to have the same qubit state distribution for two different frequency subsets. so  for each pixel from a given image  b produces a particular qubit array from the set  
let us suppose that machine b produces only qubit states and thus  the number of colors that can be repre-
sented in an array of n qubits is 1n  just like in the classical case  for gray scale or primary color values  for instance  but  if we include qubit states  then the number of different colors that can be stored is 1ln. 
　however  quantum mechanics has a constraint: reading  that is  measuring  non-orthogonal states and  are  is a probabilistic process. thus  if only one basis is used to measure all states in m  information retrieval will not be accurate. in addition  the postulates of quantum mechanics state that the post-measurement quantum state is  in general  different from the pre-measurement quantum state  they are equal if and only if the pre-measurement quantum state is equal to one of the orthogonal vectors of the measurement basis . 
　in order to perform accurate measurements  we now introduce per each pixel  a set of control qubits c  are the only allowed 
quantum states for elements in c. the purpose of this new element is to use qubit to know which basis has to be used to perform a measurement on  a generalization of this scheme is to allow the quantum programmer to choose only one storing basis for each pixel . so  by measuring qubit  in the canonical basis  it is possible to perform accurate measurements. formally speaking  the observable used to measure control qubits is  
the observables used to measure qubits are  in the case the outcome in measuring a  was a1 then  while in the case the outcome was then we mea-
sure a 1  
1 	quantum secrecy vs eavesdropping 
it is relevant to point out the fact that having no a priori knowledge of which measurement basis has to be used to read information in qubits  introduces two very convenient properties: secrecy and eavesdropping detection. indeed  if an eavesdropper tries to read the information in  without reading two main advantages with no counterpart in classical computers are found: a  the eavesdropper has an only 1% chance of reading accurate information  if he/she fails to choose the right measurement basis  he/she will get only a random outcome   and b  the post-measurement state of a measurement performed with a wrong basis allows us to detect eavesdropping  bouwmeester et ai  1 . this means that in order to provide secure transmission of information  it is sufficient to send only control qubits |pi  via secure cryptographic scheme. 
1 future work 
next steps include the use of entanglement for gray level and color image segmentation. the basic idea is to entangle qubits with similar colors and to develop quantum algorithms for image segmentation. 
acknowledgments 
s.e. venegas-andraca gratefully acknowledges the receipt of a conacyt scholarship from the mexican national council of science and technology. 
　the authors want to thank n. paunkovic for his very stimulating and wise comments about this work. 
