ness and simplicity of the tac approach helped to launch it as a research vehicle for studying bidding strategies  but are now perceived as a limiting factor for exploring the wide range of issues inherent in automated trading in open environments. 
　agentcities  is an international initiative designed to explore the commercial and research potential of agentbased applications by constructing an open distributed network of platforms hosting diverse agents and services. the ultimate goal is to enable the dynamic  intelligent and autonomous composition of services to achieve user and business tasks  thereby creating compound services to address changing needs. 
intelligent systems demonstrations 
　inspired by tac  we developed travel agent game in agentcities  taga  built on the foundation of fipa technology and the agentcities infrastructure. the agents and services use standard fipa supported languages  protocols and services to create the travel market environment providing taga with a stable communication environment in which messages in expressive semantic languages can be exchanged. . the travel market is the combination of auctions and varying markets including service registries  service brokerage  wholesalers  peerto-peer transactions  bilateral negotiation  etc. this provides a much richer test bed for experimenting with agents and web services as well as a rich and interesting scenario to test and challenge agent technology. 
1. taga game and agents 
we have designed taga as a general framework for running agent-based simulations and games. our first use of taga has been to build a travel competition along the lines of that used in the first three tacs. in this competition  customers travel from city a to city b and spend several days there. a travel package includes a 
round-trip flight ticket  corresponding hotel accommodation and ticket to entertainment events. a travel agent  an entrant to the game  competes with other travel agents in making contracts with customers and purchasing the limited travel services from the travel service agents. customer selects the travel agent with best travel itinerary. the objective of the travel agent is to acquire more customers  fulfill the customer's travel package  and maximize the profit. 
　taga provides a flexible framework to run the travel market game. figure 1 show the structure of taga. the collaboration and competition among six kinds of agents that play different roles in this market  simulating the real world travel market. we have found that basing our implementation on fipa compliant agents has made the framework extremely flexible. we'll briefly describe the different agents in our initial taga game. 
　the auction service agent  asa  operates all of the auctions and markets in taga. market types currently include english and dutch auctions as well as other dynamic markets similar to priceline and ebay's fastbuy. 
　a service agent  sa  offers travel related service units such as airline tickets  lodging and entertainment tickets. each class of travel related service has multiple providers with different service quality level and with limited service units; 
　a travel agent  ta  is a business that helps customers acquire travel service units and organizes travel plan. the units can be bought either directly from the service agents  or through an auction server. 
　a bulletin board agent  bba  provides a mechanism through which helps customer agents can find and engage one or more travel agents. 
1 
　a customer agent  ca  represents an individual customer who has particular travel constraints and preferences. its goal is to engage one or more tas  negotiate with them over travel packages  and select one to try to purchase. 
　the market oversight agent monitors the simulation and updates the financial model after each reported transaction and finally announces the winning ta when the game is over. 

figure 1: taga architecture 
　the basic cycle of the game is as follows. a customergenerating agent creates a new with particular travel constraints and preferences chosen from a distribution. the ca registers with the bba  which facilitates contact with a set of tas  each of which must decide whether to propose a travel package for the ca. those that do  contact the necessary asas and sas and assemble an itinerary to propose to the ca. note that a ta is free to implement a complex strategy using both aggregate markets  asas  as well as direct negotiation with sas. the final proposal to a ca includes a set of travel units  a total price and a penalty to be suffered by the ta if it is unable to complete the transaction. the ca negotiates with the tas ultimately selecting one from which to purchase an itinerary based on its constraints  preferences and purchasing strategy  which might  for example  depend on a tas reputation . once a ta has a commitment from a ca  it attempts to purchase the units in the itinerary from the asas and sas. there are two outcomes possible: the ta acquires the units and completes the transaction with the ca resulting in a satisfied ca and a profit or loss for the ta  or the ta is unable or unwilling to purchase all of the units  resulting in an aborted transaction and the invocation of the penalty  which can involve both a monetary and a reputation component . 
1. discussion 
tac relies on a few centralized market servers to handle all interactions and coordination  including service discovery  agent communication  coordination  and game control. in contrast  taga framework uses a distributed peer-to-peer approach based on standard agent languages  protocols and infrastructure components  fipa   agentcities   emerging standards for representing ontologies  knowledge and services  rdf  daml+oil  daml-s   and web infrastructure  e.g.  sun's java 
web start . several fipa platform implementations are currently used within taga  including jade  and app   demonstrating agent interoperability. 
　we see two contributions in our work. first  taga provides a rich framework for exploring agent-based approaches to ecommerce like applications. our current framework allows users to create their own agent  perhaps based on our initial prototype  to represent a ta  sa and to include it in a running game where it will compete with other system provided and user defined agents. we hope that this might be a useful teaching and learning tool. secondly  we hope that taga will be seen as a flexible  interesting and rich environment for simulating agent-based trading in dynamic markets. agents can be instantiated to represent customers  aggregators  wholesalers  and service provides all of which can make decisions about price and purchase strategies based on complex strategies and market conditions. 
1. conclusion and future work 
as a role-playing market game  taga can be used for business research on marketing and auction strategy. in the agentcities community  taga serves as a test-bed for fipa agent communication in a distributed and open environment. for our own research  has allowed us to explore the integration of multi-agent systems technology  fipa  and the semantic web. 
　the agentcities project is exploring the delivery and use of agent-based services in an open  dynamic and international setting. we are working to increase the integration of taga and emerging agentcities components and infrastructure and will include agents running on handheld devices using leap . we are also working to enhance the ontologies which underlie taga and to move them from rdf and daml+oil to the w1c's web ontology language owl . 
acknowledgments 
the research described in this paper is partly supported by darpa contract f1-1 and fujitsu laboratories of america. 
