
protein fold recognition is a crucial step in inferring biological structure and function. this paper focuses on machine learning methods for predicting quaternary structural folds  which consist of multiple protein chains that form chemical bonds among side chains to reach a structurally stable domain. the complexity associated with modeling the quaternary fold poses major theoretical and computational challenges to current machine learning methods. we propose methods to address these challenges and show how  1  domain knowledge is encoded and utilized to characterize structural properties using segmentation conditional graphical models; and  1  model complexity is handled through efficient inference algorithms. our model follows a discriminative approach so that any informative features  such as those representative of overlapping or long-range interactions  can be used conveniently. the model is applied to predict two important quaternary folds  the triple ¦Âspirals and double-barreltrimers. cross-family validation shows that our method outperforms other state-of-the art algorithms.
1 introduction
proteins  as chains of amino acids  tend to adopt unique threedimensional structures in their native environments. these structures play key roles in determining the activities and functions of the proteins. an important issue in computationally inferring the three-dimensional structures from aminoacid sequences is protein fold recognition and alignment. given a target protein fold 1   the task seeks to predict whether a test protein sequence adopts the fold and if so  provides its sequence-to-topology alignment against the fold.
¡¡there are different kinds of protein folds based on their structural properties. in this paper  we focus on the most complex ones  namely quaternary structural folds  which consist of multiple protein chains that form chemical bonds among the side chains of sequence-distant residues to reach a structurally stable domain. these folds commonly exist in many proteins and contribute significantly to evolutionary stability. some examples include enzymes  hemoglobin  ion channels as well as viral adhesive and viral capsids.
¡¡to date  there has been significant progress in protein tertiary fold  single chain topology  recognition  ranging from sequence similarity matching  altschul et al.  1; durbin et al.  1   to threading algorithms based on physical forces  jones et al.  1  and to machine learning methods  cheng and baldi  1; ding and dubchak  1 . however  there are three major challenges in protein sequence-to-structure mapping that hinder previous work from being applied to the quaternary fold recognition:  1  many proteins adopt the same structural fold without apparent sequence similarities. this property violates the basic assumption of many machine learning algorithms that similar observations tend to share the same labels;  1  amino acids distant in sequence-order  the distance is not known a priori  or on different chains may form chemical bondsin the three-dimensionalstructures. most of these bonds are essential in the stability of the structures and have to be considered for accurate prediction;  1  furthermore  previous methods for predicting folds with single chains are not directly applicable because the complexity is greatly increased both biologically and computationally  when moving to quaternary multi-chain structures.
¡¡from a machine learning perspective  protein fold recognition falls in the general problem of predicting structured outputs  which learns a mapping between input variables and structured  interdependent output variables. conditional graphical models  such as conditional random fields  crf   lafferty et al.  1   max-marginmarkov networks  taskar et al.  1   and semi-markov crf  sarawagi and cohen  1   have demonstrated successes in multiple applications. to address the challenges in protein fold recognition  we develop a new segmentation conditional graphical model. as an extension of the crf model  it defines the hidden nodes as labels assigned to segments  subsequences corresponding to one secondary structure element  rather than to individual amino acid  then connects two nodes with edges to hypothesize chemical bonds. the conditional probability of the hidden variables  i.e. the segmentation of each structure element  given the observed sequence is defined as an exponential form of the features. in addition  efficient approximation algorithms are examined to find optimal or near-optimal solutions. compared with previous work in crf  our model is novel in capturing the long-range dependencies of different subunits within one chain and between chains.
¡¡the major advantages of our approach for protein fold recognition include:  1  the ability to encode the output structures  both inter-chain and intra-chain chemical bonding  using the graph;  1  dependencies between segments can be non-markovian so that the chemical-bonding between distant amino acids can be captured;  1  it permits the convenient use of any features that measure the property of segments the biologists have identified.
¡¡the remainder of the paper is organized as follows. section 1 introduces the basic concepts of protein structures and fold recognition; section 1 describes the details of our model  followed by a discussion of efficient inference algorithms for training and testing. in section 1  we give two examples of the quaternary folds and show our successful experimentalresults. the paper concludes with suggestions for future work.
1 protein structure basics and fold recognition
to study protein structures  biologists have defined four conceptual hierarchies based on current understanding: the primary structure simply refers to the linear chain of amino acids; the secondary structure can be thought of as the local conformation of protein chains  or intuitively as building blocks for its global 1d structures. there are three types of standard secondary structures in nature  i.e. ¦Á-helix  a rodshape peptide chain coiled to form a helix structure  ¦Â-sheets  two or more peptide strands aligned in the same direction  parallel ¦Â-sheet  or opposite direction  antiparallel ¦Â-sheet  and stabilized by hydrogen bonds. these two types of secondary structures are connected by the remaining irregular regions  referred to as coil. the tertiary structure is the global three-dimensional structures of a single protein chain. sometimes multiple chains are associated with each other and form a unified structure  i.e. the quaternary structures.
¡¡protein folds are identifiable spatial arrangements of secondary structures. it is observed that there exist only a limited number of topologically distinct folds in nature  around 1  although we have discovered millions of protein sequences. as a result  proteins with the same fold often do not demonstrate sequence similarities  which might reveal important information about structural or functional conservation due to common ancestors. an example is the triple ¦Âspiral fold  a processive homotrimer which serves as a fibrous connector from the main virus capsid to a c-terminal knob that binds to host cell-surface receptor proteins. the fold has been identified to commonly exist in adenovirus  a dna virus which infects both humans and animals   reovirus  an rna virus which infects human  and bacteriophage prd1  a dna virus infecting bacteria   however  the similarity between these protein sequences are very low  below 1% similarity . identifying more examples of the triple ¦Â-spiral fold will not only help the biologists to establish that it is a common fold in nature  but also reveal important evolutionary relationships between the viral proteins.
¡¡the example above motivates the task of accurate protein fold recognition and alignment prediction. the problem setting is as follows: given a target protein fold  as well as a set of n training sequences x 1  x 1  ... x n  including both positive and negative examples with structural annotation  i.e. 1-d coordinates of each atom in the proteins  predict whether a new test sequence xtest  without structural annotation  adopts the fold or not  and if yes  identify its specific location in the sequence.
1 representation of domain knowledge
it can be seen that the fold recognition task is a typical segmentation and labeling problem except that we need to address the following questions to represent the domain knowledge: how to  1  represent the states and  1  capture the structural information within the observed sequences 
¡¡the chemical bonding physically exists at the atomic level on the side-chains of amino acids  however  the structural topology and interaction maps are conserved only at the secondary structure level due to the many possible insertions or deletions in the protein sequence. therefore it is natural for the state labels to be assigned to segments  subsequences corresponding to one secondary structure element  rather than to individual amino acids  and then connect nodes with edges indicating their dependenciesin three-dimensionalstructures. next  we define the formal representation of the structure information in the protein fold and discuss how to incorporate domain-knowledge features to help the prediction.
1 protein structure graph  psg 
an undirected graph g =  v e    called protein structure graph  psg   can be defined for the target protein fold  where is the set of nodes corresponding to the secondary structure elements within the fold and i is the node to represent the elements outside the fold. e is the set of edges between neighboring elements in sequence order  i.e. the polypeptide bonding  or edges indicating longrange dependencies between elements in three-dimensional structures  i.e. chemical bonding  such as hydrogen bonds or disulfide bonds . figure 1 shows an example of the simple ¦Â¦Á-¦Â motif. notice that there is a clear distinction between the edges colored in red and those in black in terms of probabilistic semantics: similar to a chain-structured crf  the black edges indicate state transitions between adjacent nodes; the red edges are used to model long-range interactions  which are unique to the protein structure graph. the psg for a quaternary fold can be derived similarly: first construct a psg for each component protein or a component monomeric psg for homo-multimers  and then add edges between the nodes from different chains if there are chemical bonds  forming a more complex but similarly-structured quaternary psg.
¡¡given the definition of the protein structure graph  our next question is how to automatically build the graph for a particular fold. the answer depends on the type of protein folds of concern and how much knowledge we can bring to bear. for folds that biologists have studied over the years and accumulated some basic knowledge of their properties  for example ¦Â-¦Á-¦Â motif or ¦Â-helix   the topology of this graph

figure 1: graph structure of ¦Â-¦Á-¦Â motif  a  1-d structure  b  protein structure graph: node: green=beta-strand  yellow=alpha-helix  cyan=coil  white=non-¦Â-¦Á-¦Â  i-node .
can be constructed easily by communicating with the experts. if it is a fold whose structure is totally unknown to biologists  we can follow a general procedure with the following steps: first  construct a multiple structure alignment of all the positive proteins  among themselves ; second  segment the alignment into disjoint parts based on the secondary structures of the majority proteins; third  draw a graph with nodes denoting the resulting secondary structure elements and then add edges between neighboring nodes. finally  add the longrange interaction edge between two nodes if the average distance between all the involved residues is below the threshold required for side-chain hydrogen-bonding. we skip the details of the latter case as it is a separate line of research and assume that we are given a reasonably good graph over which we perform our learning  since this is the focus of the paper.
1 segmentation conditional graphical models  scgm 
given a structure graph g defined on one chain and a protein sequence x = x1 ...xn  we can have a possible segmentation label of the sequence  i.e. y = {m w}  where m is the number of segments and wj = {sj pj qj}  in which sj  pj  and dj are the state  starting position and ending position of the jth segment. following the idea of crf  the conditional probability of a segmentation y given the observation x is defined as follows:
 
where z1 is the normalization constant.
¡¡more generally  given a quaternary structure graph g with c chains  i.e. {xi|i = 1...c}  we have a segmentation initiation of each chain yi =  mi wi  defined by the protein

figure 1: graphical model representation of scgm model with multiple chains. notice that there are long-range interactions  represented by red edges  within one chain and between chains
structure graph  where mi is the number of segments in the ith chain  and wi j =  si j pi j qi j   si j  pi j and qi j are the state  starting position and ending position of the jth segment. following the same definition as above  we decompose the potential function over the cliques as a product of unary and pairwise potentials:
 
where fk and gk are node-features and pair features respectively  ¦È1 k and ¦È1 k are the corresponding weights  and z is the normalizer over possible segmentation configurations of all the sequences jointly  see figure 1 for its graphical model representation . notice that joint inference is required since the quaternary fold is stabilized by the chemical bonding between all component proteins and that is the key computational challenge.
1 feature extraction
the scgm model provides an expressive framework to handle the structural properties for protein fold recognition. however  the choice of feature functions fk and gk play a key role in accurate predictions. following the feature definition in the crf model  we factor the features as follows: and qi j  
 s 	gk xa xb wa u wb v  =
pa v ¡Ê length range  s   and qb v   pb v ¡Ê length range  s    1 otherwise.
   next we discuss how to define the segment-based features  and. the node feature covers the properties of an individual segment  for example   whether a specific motif appears in the subsequence    averaged hydrophobicity   or  the length of the segment . the pairwise feature  captures the dependencies between segments whose corresponding subsequences form chemical bonds in the 1-d structures. for example  previous work in structural biology suggests different propensities to form the bonds between the amino acids pairs. therefore the pairwise features could be the propensity scores of the two subsequences to form hydrogen bonds. notice that the feature definitions can be quite general  not limited to the examples above. the discriminative setting of the model enables us to use any kinds of informative features without additional costs.
1 efficient inference
to find the best conformation of test sequences  we need to consider the labels of all the protein chains jointly since every chain contributes to the stability of the structures. given the enormous search spaces in quaternary folds  we need to find efficient inference and learning algorithms.
1 training phase
the feature weights {¦È1 k} and {¦È1 k} are the model parameters. in the training phase  we estimate their values by maximizing the regularized conditional probability of the training data  i.e
 {¦È 1 ¦È 1} = argmax.
there is no closed form solution to the equation above  therefore we use the iterative searching algorithm l-bfgs  a limited-memory quasi-newton code for large-scale unconstrained optimization . taking the first derivative of the log likelihood l ¦È1 ¦È1   we have
 1 
n	 x    ep y n   fk x	¦Ò1
	 1 
.
since psgs may be complex graphs with loops and multiple chains  with an average degree of 1 for each node   we explored efficient approximation methods to estimate the feature expectation. there are three major approximation approaches in graphical models: sampling  variational methods and loopy belief propagation. sampling techniques have been widely used in the statistics community  however  there is a problem if we use the naive gibbs sampling. notice that in each sampling iteration the dimension of hidden variables yi varies in cases where the number of segments of mi is also a variable  e.g. unknown number of structural repeats in the folds . reversible jump markov chain monte carlo  reversible jump mcmc  algorithms have been proposed to solve the problem and demonstrated success in various applications  such as mixture models  green  1  and hidden markov model for dna sequence segmentation  boys and henderson  1 .
reversible jump markov chain monte carlo given a segmentation yi =  mi wi   our goal is propose a new move yi . to satisfy the detailed balance defined by the mcmc algorithm  auxiliary random variables v and v  have to be introduced. the definitions for v and v  should guarantee the dimension-matching requirement  i.e. d yi  +
  and there is a one-to-one mapping from
  namely a function ¦· so that ¦· yi v  =
. the acceptance rate for
the proposed transition from yi to yi  is
min{1 posterior ratio ¡Á proposal ratio ¡Á jacobian}
 
where the last term is the determinant of the jacobian matrix.
¡¡to construct a markov chain on the sequence of segmentations  we define four types of metropolis operators:
 1  state transition: given a segmentation yi =  mi wi   select a segment j uniformly from  1 m   and a state value s uniformly from state set s. set yi  = yi except that.  1  position switching: given a segmentation yi =  mi wi   select the segment j uniformly from  1 m  and a position assignment except that.
 1  segment split: given a segmentation yi =  mi wi   propose yi  =  mi  wi   with mi  = mi + 1 segments by splitting the jth segment  where j is randomly sampled from u 1 m . set wi k  = wi k for k = 1 ... j   1  and wi k  +1 = wi k for k = j + 1 ... mi. sample d j+1 from u dj +1 dj+1  1 . with probability 1  we set sj  = sj and sj+1  = snew with snew sampled from s and with probabildo the reverse.
 1  segment merge: given a segmentation yi =  mi wi   propose by mergingthe jth segmentand j+1th segment  where j is sampled uniformly from  1 m   1 . set   and wi k   1 = wi k for
¡¡in general  many protein folds have regular arrangements of the secondary structure elements so that the state transitions are deterministic or almost deterministic. therefore the operator for state transition can be removed and segment split or merge can be greatly simplified. there might be cases where the inter-chain or intra-chain interactions are also stochastic. then two additional operators are necessary  including segment join  adding an interaction edge in the protein structure graph  and segment separate  deleting an interaction edge in the graph . the details are similar to state transition  and we omit the discussion due to limited space.
1 testing phase
given a test example with multiple chains {x1 ... xc}  we need to search the segmentation that yields the highest conditional likelihood. similar to the training phase  it is an optimization problem involving search in multi-dimensional space. since it is computationally prohibitive to search over all possible solutions using traditional optimization methods  simulated annealing with reversible jump mcmc is used. it has been shown theoretically and empirically to converge onto the global optimum  andrieu et al.  1 .
algorithm-1 shows the detailed description of reversible jump mcmc simulated annealing. ¦Â is a parameter to control the temperature reduction rate  which is set to 1 in our experiments for rapid convergence.
1 experiments
to demonstrate the effectiveness of different recognition models  we choose two protein folds as examples  including the triple ¦Â-spiral  van raaij et al.  1   a virus fiber  and the double-barrel trimer  benson et al.  1   which is a building block for the virus capsid hexons. we choose these two folds specifically because they are both involved in important biological functions and shared by viruses from different species  which might reveal important evolution relationships in the viral proteins. moreover  tbs should fit our algorithm-1: reversible jump mcmc simulated annealing

input: initial value of y1  output: optimized assignment of y
1. set y  = y1.
1. for t ¡û 1 to ¡Þ do :
1 t ¡û ¦Ât. if t = 1 return y 
1 sample a value from ynew using the reversible jump mcmc algorithm as described in section 1.  e = p ynew    p y  
1 if  e   1  then set y  = ynew; otherwise set y  = new with probability exp  e/t 
y
1. return y 

predictive framework well because of the structure repeats while dbt could be extremely challenging due to the lack of structural regularity. both folds have complex structures with few positive examples in structurally-resolved proteins. notice that our model may be used for any protein folds  however their advantages are most evident in predicting these complex and challenging protein folds.
1 protein structure graph of target fold
triple ¦Â-spiral fold tbs  is a processive homotrimerconsisting of three identical interacting protein chains  see figure 1 . it provides the structural stability for the adhesion protein to initiate a viral attack upon the target cell wall. up to now there are three proteins of this fold with resolved structures. however  its common existence in viruses of different species reveals important evolutionary relationships. it also indicates that tbs might be a common fold in nature although very few examples have been identified so far.
¡¡to provide a better prediction model  we notice the following structural characteristics in tbs: it consists of three identical protein chains with a varied number of repeated structural subunits. each subunit is composed of:  1  a ¦Â-strand that runs parallel to the fiber axis;  1  a long solvent-exposed loop of variable lengths;  1  a second ¦Â-strand that forms antiparallel ¦Â-sheets with the first one  and slightly skewed to the fiber axis;  1  successive structural elements along the same chain are connected together by tight ¦Â-turns  weigele et al.  1 . among these four components  the two ¦Âstrands are quite conserved in sequences and van raaij et al. characterize them by labeling each position using character 'a' to 'o'  van raaij et al.  1 . specifically  i-o for the first strand and a-h for the second strand  see figure 1- topright  . based on the discussion above  we define the psg for the tbs fold in figure 1. there are 1 states altogether  i.e. b1  t1  b1 and t1  which correspond to the four components of each repeated structural subunits respectively  and the null state i  which refers to the non-triple ¦Â-spiral region. we fix the length of b1 and b1 as 1 and 1 respectively due to their sequence conservation; in addition  we set the length of t1 and t1 in  1  and  1  individually since longer insertions will bring instability to the structures  this is an example of prior biological knowledge constraining the model space . the pairs of interacting residues are marked on the edges  which are used to define the pairwise features.
van raaij etal.innature 1 

 b 
figure 1:  top-left  demonstration graph of triple ¦Â-spirals: 1-d structures view. red block: shaft region  target fold   black block: knob region.  top-right  top view and maps of hydrogenbonds within a chain and between chains.  bottom  psg of the triple ¦Â-spirals with 1 structural repeats. chain c is a mirror of chain c for better visual effects. dotted line: inter-chain interactions; solid line: intra-chain interactions. the pairs of characters on the edges indicate the hydrogen bonding between the residues denoted by the characters.
double-barrel trimer  dbt  is a protein fold found in the coat proteins from several kinds of viruses. it has been suggested that the occurrence of dbt is common to all icosahedral dsdna viruses with large facets  irrespective of its host  benson et al.  1 . however  it is not straightforward to uncover the structural conservation through sequences homology since there are only four positive proteins and the sequence similarity is low.
¡¡the dbt fold consists of two eight-stranded jelly rolls  or ¦Â-barrels  see figure 1 . the eight component ¦Â-strands are labeled as b  c  d  e  f  g  h and i respectively. some general descriptive observations include:  1  the lengths of the eight ¦Â-strands vary  ranging from 1 to 1 residues  although the layout of the strands is fixed. the loops  insertions  between the strands are in general short  1 - 1 residues   however  there are some exceptions  for example the long insertions between the f and g strand  1 - 1 residues ; further long loops between d-e strand  1 - 1 residues ; and the short ¦Âturn between e and f.  1  the chemical bonds that stabilize the trimers are located between the fg loops. unfortunately  the specific location and bonding type remain unclear. we denote the fg loop in the first double-barrel trimer as fg1  and that in the second one as fg1. based on the discussion above  we define the psg of the double-barrel trimer as shown in

figure 1:  top   a  1-d structure of the coat protein in bacteriophage prd1  pdb id: 1cjd .  b  1-d structure of prd1 in trimers with the inter-chain and intra-chain interactions in the fg loop. color notation: in fg1  green: residue #1  red: residue #1  purple: residue #1; in fg1  blue: residue #1.  down  psg of double-barrel trimer. the within-chain interacting pairs are shown in red dash line  and the inter-chain ones are shown in black dash line. green node: fg1; blue node: fg1.
figure 1. there are 1 states in the graph altogether  i.e. b  c  d  e  f  g  h  i as the eight ¦Â-strands in the ¦Â-barrels  lbc  lcd  lde  lef  lfg  lgh  lhi  lib as the loops between the ¦Â-strands. the length of the ¦Â-strands are in the range of  1 . the length range of the loops lbc  lcd  and lef is
 1 ; that of lde and lfg is  1 ; that of lgh  lhi  lib is  1 .
1 experiment results
in the experiments  we test our hypothesis by examining whether our model can score the known positive examples higher than the negative ones by using the positive sequences from different protein families in the training set. following the setup described in  liu et al.  1   we construct a pdbminus dataset as negative examples  1 proteins in total   which consists of all non-homologous proteins with known structures and confirmed not having the tbs  or dbt  fold. a leave-family-out cross-validation was performed  withholding all the positiveproteins fromthe same family 1. similarly  the pdb-minus set was also randomly partitioned into three subsets  one of which is placed in the test set while the rest serve as the negative training examples. since negative data dominate the training set  we subsample only 1 nega-
scop familypfamhmmerthreaderscgmadenovirus11reovirus11prd111table 1: rank of the positive tbs proteins against the pdbminus set  negative ones  in cross-validation using pfam  hmmer and scgms. scgm clearly outperform all other methods in ranking positive proteins higher in the rank list.
adenovirus
	i	j	k	l	m	n	o	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h
g	m	l	a	l	k	m	g
g	n	l	t	s	q	n	v
s	n	i	s	l	d	t	s
g	a	l	t	v	a	t	t
g	a	l	s	v	q	s	q
s	k	l	s	i	a	t	k
g	k	l	a	l	q	t	s
d	t	l	t	v	t	a	s
g	s	l	g	i	n	m	e
g	k	i	g	i	k	i	s
d	t	l	t	v	v	t	g
n	s	l	r	t	k	v	a
n	n	m	e	i	k	t	g
n	l	l	i	l	d	v	de	p	l	d	t	s	h
s	g	l	t	l	d	k
q	p	l	k	k	t	k
a	p	l	t	i	t	s
p	l	i	v	t	s	g
a	p	l	t	v	q	d
g	p	i	t	v	s	d
a	p	l	s	g	s	d
p	p	l	t	t	a	t
d	p	i	y	v	n	n
g	p	l	q	v	a	q
p	g	v	t	v	e	q
g	a	i	g	y	d	s
g	g	m	r	i	n	n1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1a	-	-	-	-	-	-	-t	t	v	t
	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-a	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1s	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
1n	s	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
1s	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
	1 y	p	f	d	a	q	t	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	t	k	l	r	l	k	l	g	q	-	-	-
h n l d i n y n k k l e v s i k
t	a	i	a	i	n	a	g
n	p	i	k	t	k	i	g
g	a	m	i	t	k	l	g
g	a	i	t	i	g	n	kg	p	l	y	i	n	a
r g	l	y	l	f	n
s g	l	n	f	d	n
k	g	l	e	f	d	t
s	g	i	d	y	n	e
a	g	l	s	f	d	n1s - - - - - - -- - - 1a s n n t - - -k s - 1- - - - - - - -- - - 1n t s e s p d i- - - 1n - - - - - - -- - - -
	1s	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
reovirus
	i	j	k	l	m	n	o	a	b	c	d	e	f	g	h
1 a	p	l	s	i	r	n	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-	n	r	m	t	m	g	l	n	-	-	-	1 d	g	l	t	l	s	g	n	n1 -	-	-	-	-	l	a	i	r	l	p	g	n	-	-	-	-
g	g	l	q	f	r	f	n
n	n	l	t	l	k	t	t
e	q	s	y	v	a	s	a k	v	l	d	m	l	i	d
g	q	l	t	v	r	s	tt	g	l	n	i	q	n
d	q	f	q	i	v	n
d	s	i	n	s	r	i
t	p	l	r	l	n	s
s	t	l	e	i	n	s1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-t	-	-	1-	-	-	-	-	-	-	-v	f	-	1g	a	t	-	-	-	-	-v	-	-	1s	t	-	-	-	-	-	-s	-	-	1s	-	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
prd1	i	j	k	l	m	n	oa	b	c	d	e	f	g	hg	k	i	l	v	k	r	i d	q	v	e	i	e	a	se	s	l	l	d	t	t s	g	i	t	v	t	d1s	e	p	-	-	-	-	-s	g	g	1y	g	-	-	-	-	-	--	-	-	-
figure 1: segmentation results by scgm for the known tbs proteins. predicted b1 strands are shown in green bar and predicted b1 strands in red bar.
tive sequences most similar to the positive ones. the node features include template matching and hmm profile score for b1 and b1 motifs  for tbs fold   averaged secondary structure prediction score  hydrophobicity  solvent accessibility and ionizable scores. the pairwise features include side-chain alignment score as well as parallel/anti-parallel ¦Âsheet alignment score. we compare our results with standard sequence similarity-based algorithm psi-blast  altschul et al.  1   profile hidden-markov model methods  pfam  bateman et al.  1  and hmmer  durbin et al.  1  with structural alignment  as well as free-energy based algorithm threader  jones et al.  1 . for our model  the number of iterations in simulated annealing is set to 1. it may not provide the globally optimal solutions  but the suboptimal ones we get seem to be very reasonable as shown below. the rank is sorted based on the log ratio of the probability of the best segmentation to that of degrading into one segment with null state.
¡¡we can see all the methods except the scgm model perform poorly for predicting the tbs fold  table 1 . with psiblast  we can only get hits for the reovirus when searching against adenovirus  and vice versa. neither can be found when we use the prd1 as the query. the task of identifying the tbs fold is very difficult since it involves complex structures  yet there are only three positive examples. however  our methods not only can score all the known triple ¦Â-spirals higher than the negative sequences  but also is able to recover table 1: rank of positive dbt proteins against the pdbminus set  negative ones  in cross validation using hmmer with sequence alignment  seq-h  and structural alignment  struct-h   threader and scgm.
scop familyseq-hstruct-hthreaderscgmadenovirus1  1prd111pbcv11stiv11most of the repeats from the segmentation  figure 1 . the next step is to predict the presence of the tbs fold on proteins with unresolved structures  leading to targeted crystallography experiments for validation.
¡¡from table 1  we can see that it is an extremely difficult task to predict the dbt fold. our method is able to give higher ranks for 1 of the 1 known dbt proteins  although we are unable to reach a clear separation between the dbt proteins and the rest. the results are within our expectation because the lack of signal features and unclear understanding about the inter-chain interactions makes the prediction significantly harder. we believe more improvement can be achieved by combining the results from multiple algorithms.
1 conclusion
in this paper  we presented a new and effective learning model  the segmentation conditional graphical model  for protein quaternary fold recognition. a protein structure graph is defined to capture the structural properties. following a discriminative approach  our model permits the use of any types of features  such as overlapping or long-range interaction features. due to the complexity of the graph  reversible jump mcmc is used for inference and optimization. our model is applied to predict the triple ¦Â-spiral and doublebarrel trimer fold with promising results. furthermore  since the long-range dependencies are common in many other applications  such as machine translation  we anticipate that our approach can be productively extended for other tasks.
acknowledgments
this material is based upon work supported by the national science foundation under grant no. 1. we thank anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions.
