
the profile of an individual is a record of the types and areas of skills of that individual   topical profile   plus a description of her collaboration network   social profile  . in this paper we define and formalize the task of automatically determining an expert profile of a person from a heterogeneous corpus made up of a large organization's intranet. we propose multiple models for addressing the topical profiling task. our main methods build on ideas from information retrieval  while refinements bring in filtering  allowing an area into a person's profile only if she is among the top ranking experts in the area . an evaluation based on the w1c-corpus made available by trec  shows significant improvements of the refined methods over the baseline. we apply our profiling algorithms to significantly enhance the performance of a state-ofthe-art expert finding algorithm and to help users of an operational expert search system find the person they would contact  given a specific problem  topic or information need. finally  we address the task of determining a social profile for a given person  using graph-based methods.
1 introduction
some of the most valuable knowledge in an enterprise resides in the minds of its employees. enterprises must combine digital information with the knowledge and experience of employees. expert finding addresses the task of finding the right person with the appropriate skills and knowledge:  who are the experts on topic x   the task has recently received increased attention  especially since the launch of an expert finding task as part of the enterprise track at trec in 1  trec  1 . given a query  describing the area in which expertise is being sought   participating systems have to return a ranked list of person names in response.
　like most tasks assessed at retrieval evaluation platforms such as trec  ntcir  clef  and inex  the expert finding task is an abstraction of a real task. the abstractions are important when trying to set up experiments that will lead to stable and re-usable test sets  voorhees and harman  1 . but when people search for expertise  they are often looking for experts  but not in isolation-the desired output should be more than a ranked list of person names  hawking  1 . context and evidence are needed to help users of expertise finding systems decide whom to contact when seeking expertise in some area. e.g.  given an expert whose name is returned in response to a query  what are her areas of expertise  who does she work with  what are her contact details  is she well-connected  just in case she is not able to help us herself 
　the main aim of this paper is to introduce the task of determining an expert's profile-i.e.  a concise description of the areas in which she is an expert plus a description of her collaboration environment-  and to devise and assess algorithms that address this profiling task. to make matters more concrete  let us look at an expert finding system that is currently being developed; it started out as  a ranked list of person names  system and is now evolving so as to include the type of context and evidence discussed above. figure 1 provides a screen dump. in figure 1 we see the information dis-

figure 1: screen dump of the expert search interface.
played for one person  one of the hits produced in response to a query on  authoring tools  . in the top row we see the person's name  optionally his internal id or username   and his relevance for the given topical query. below this  the contact details  e-mail  web address  phone  fax number  are shown. the keywords serve as a type of context  in the form of a  tag cloud   describing the general interests and activities of the person; these keywords are extracted from documents that the person is associated with. the candidate's topical profile is presented as a list of knowledge areas  and the level of competence in each  which is reflected by the size of the bars in our example . the relative ranking is shown when the person is among the top experts given that field.  as an aside the full interface also includes links to documents associated with the person  as well as a link to a figure depicting the candidate's social profile; see section 1 for more on the latter. 
　our main contribution in this paper is the introduction of expert profiling as a task  together with algorithms for addressing the task. we first ask whether existing expert finding algorithms can be used for topical profiling-effectively  these algorithms build up a matrix with experts along one dimension  and topical areas along the other: given an area  determine the candidate experts with the highest expertise levels. can these algorithms be  inverted : given a candidate  find the areas for which her expertise levels are highest 
　our answer to this question is a clear  no -implying that expert finding and expert profiling are two distinct tasks. the next question  then  becomes: how can we compute expert profiles  we propose two models for extracting expert profiles; the first uses information retrieval techniques to obtain a set of relevant documents for a given knowledge area  and aggregates the relevance of those documents that are associated with the given person. our second model represents both candidates and knowledge areas as a set of keywords  and the skills of an individual are estimated based on the overlap between these sets. we demonstrate that both models perform significantly better than the  inverted  expert search results  which serves as our baseline. moreover  we introduce a filtering algorithm  which rejects areas to be part of the individual's profile  if there is not enough evidence found to support that the person has reasonably high knowledge on that topic  compared to others within the enterprise.
　while profiling algorithms are important for feeding the sort of interface described above  they are also helpful in other ways within expertise finding scenarios: we show that they can be used for re-ranking expert search results. our re-ranking method is very effective  improving upon state-ofthe-art expert finding methods in terms of mean average precision  mean reciprocal rank  as well as precision 1 scores.
　colleagues and collaborators play an important role in the value of a person as an expert: an  isolated  expert might be able to answer specific questions  but a well-connected expert might put us on track to explore new or additional areas  cross et al.  1 . a social profile of a person contains information about her collaborative network. we propose to capture the social profile of a person by examining the documents associated with her  and determining which other people are also associated with those documents.
　in section 1 we provide background on expert finding and profiling. section 1 is devoted to topical profiling. in section 1 we put expert profiles to work to improve expert finding algorithms. then  in section 1 we turn to social profiles. we conclude in section 1.
1 background
initial approaches to expert finding employed a database housing the skills and knowledge of each individual in the organization  maron et al.  1; davenport and prusak  1   and were mainly focused on how to unify disparate and dissimilar databases of the organization into one data warehouse that can easily be mined. most of this early work was performed by the knowledge management and computer supported cooperative work community  usually called yellow pages  people-finding systems or expertise-management  ecscw  1 . most of the tools rely on people to self-assess their skill against a predefined set of keywords  and there is a need for intelligent technologies that could enhance the process of updating profiles  becerra-fernandez  1 .
　more recently there has been a move to automatically extract such representations from heterogeneous document collections such as those found within a corporate intranet  craswell et al.  1 . however  until recently much of the work in this area has been performed in industry with only sketchy solutions  tailored to specific organizational needs  and without formal evaluations.
　trec 1  trec  1  has introduced the expert finding task and provided a common platform with the enterprise search track for researchers to evaluate and assess methods and techniques. the following scenario is presented: given a crawl of the world wide web consortium's web site  a list of candidate experts and a set of topics  the task is to find experts  provide a ranked list of candidates  for each of these topics. this scenario is ideal for measuring the accuracy and effectiveness of different methods  and for making a fair comparison between the performance of expert finder systems.
　to the best of our knowledge  the task introduced in this paper-expert profiling-is new. more precisely  topical expert profiling has not been previously identified as a task amenable to computational approaches. in contrast  social profiling  finding collaboration networks around an expert  is a task that has been gaining increasing attention  especially from researchers with a background in social network analysis. see  e.g.   abrol et al.  1  for an industrial example.
1 topical profiles
in this section we define what a topical profile is  and propose two methods for creating such profiles.
　a topical profile of an individual is a record of the types and areas of skills and knowledge of that individual  together with an identification of levels of 'competency' in each   what does expert y know   . we model the profile of a candidate as a vector  where each element of the vector corresponds the person's skills on the given knowledge area. this skill is expressed by a score  not a probability   reflecting the person's knowledge on the given topic.
1 algorithm
the output of a profiling algorithm is a ranked list of knowledge areas  the estimated level of competency in each as well as the evidence that supports these results  e.g.  a list of documents . the task of determining expert profiles is naturally decomposed into two stages.
 1. discovering and identifying possible knowledge areas.
 1. measuring the person's competency in these areas.we assume that a list of possible knowledge areas  ka = {kai|i = 1 ... n}  is given  and restrict ourselves to stage 1 . we represent the profile of a person ca as a vector of n values  where the ith element of the vector corresponds to the knowledge area kai  and score ca kai  reflects the individual's knowledge in the given area:
profile ca  =
 score ca ka1  ... score
baseline
as a baseline topical profiling method we use the results generated by an  existing  expert search method  balog et al.  1 . the expert search method estimates pes ca|q : what is the probability of a candidate ca being an expert given the query topic  knowledge area  q  let rankes ca q  = 1 ... m be the rank of candidate ca on topic q  where the ranking of candidates is proportional to pes ca|q :
.
we can use both the scores and the ranking generated by the expert search method to estimate the level of competence  or knowledge  of a given candidates. that is
  baseline probability : score ca ka  = pes ca|ka 
  baseline rank : score ca ka  = 1/rankes ca 
a shortcoming of forming scores this way is that they are relative to the capabilities of other candidates  and do not reflect the individual's absolute knowledge. hence  given a knowledge area  we assume the candidate's skill to be higher if she is a higher ranked expert on the corresponding topic.
method 1
we now describe the first of two profiling methods that go beyond the baseline. the intuition behind this first method is that a person's skill can be represented as a score over documents that are relevant given a knowledge area.
　for each knowledge area ka a query-biased subset of documents dka is obtained by using the top n documents retrieved for the query ka. we iterate over the relevant documents  and sum up the relevance of those that are associated with the given candidate. formally  the score of an individual ca given the knowledge area ka is:
	scorerelevance d ka a d ca .	 1 
the association method a d ca  returns 1 if the name or the e-mail address of person ca appears in the document d; otherwise it returns 1. the recognition of candidates is approached as a  restricted and  specialized named entity recognition task. we do not differentiate between the roles of the person  author  contact person  mail recipient  etc.   or the level of the contribution the person may have made to d.
　to estimate the relevance of a document  we use standard generative language model techniques  baeza-yates and ribeiro-neto  1 . specifically  relevance d ka  = p ka|θd  expresses how likely the document d would generate a certain knowledge area ka. the document model is constructed by taking a product of a linear combination of the background model p t  and the smoothed estimate for each term
 1 
the specific choice of language modeling  lm  techniques is pragmatic. for the topical profiling task  we could have used any other information retrieval method for ranking documents. our recent work on expert search used lm techniques  and by re-using that work we can analyze  and obtain a better understanding of  differences and similarities between the expert finding and profiling tasks.
　conceptually  this method is similar to the expert finding method model 1  introduced by  balog et al.  1   but associations are not turned into probabilities  thus their strength is not estimated-practically  and realistically  speaking  we simply cannot capture the extent to which the candidate is responsible for a document's content  compared to other individuals that may also be associated with the same document.
method 1
our next method takes a completely different approach  where the profiling scores are estimated using keyword similarity of candidates and knowledge areas. we first tokenize documents  and remove standard stopwords  no stemming is applied   then extract the top 1 keywords for each document  using the tf，idf weighting formula  baeza-yates and ribeiro-neto  1 . let kw d  be the set of keywords that are extracted from document d.
　we can obtain the set of keywords of a knowledge area ka by looking at a query-biased subset of documents dka  using the top n documents retrieved using ka as the query and the w1c corpus as the document collection. then we use all keywords from these documents to form a list of keywords of the given area. formally:
		 1 
similarly  we can obtain keywords of individuals  by taking keywords of documents that they are associated with:
		 1 
having the set of keywords both for knowledge areas and for candidates in hand  we estimate the profile scores with the ratio of co-occuring keywords:
	score ca ka  = |kwka ” kwca|/|kwka|.	 1 
filtering
we introduce a filtering technique that is to be applied on top of an existing profiling method. in the experimental section we present its performance both on method 1 and on method 1. the intuition behind the method is to provide us with a natural cut-off point that will restrict the number of people returned in a profiling setting so as to only retain experts whose topical profile we are highly confident about: a knowledge area can be part of an individual's profile if and only if the person is among the top ranked experts on that field. this means that she has a reasonable knowledge on the given topic both individually and compared to others.
　we allow a given knowledge area to appear in a candidate's profile only if the individual scores within the top f among all candidates on that field. actually  we create a ranking of experts  using the profile scores  and hence solve an expert finding task. to do that  we need a list of potential expert candidates  which we assume to be given. then we use the
methodmapmrrbaseline probability 11baseline rank 11method 1.1.1method 1.1.1table 1: results of the topical profiling methods. the columns are map: mean average precision  and mrr: mean reciprocal rank. best scores are in boldface.
results of the expert finding task to refine the output of the profiling method. formally 

1 evaluation
we performed experiments to answer the following questions: is  inverted expert finding  a viable solution to the profiling problem  how well do method 1 and method 1 perform  and what is the impact of filtering 
experimental setup
the document collection we use is the w1c corpus  w1c  1   a heterogenous document repository containing a mixture of different document types crawled from the w1c website. the corpus contains 1 documents  adding up to 1gb. a list of 1 candidate experts was made available  where each candidate is described with a unique candidate id  name s  and one or more e-mail addresses. we took the topics created within the expert finding task of the 1 edition of the trec enterprise track: 1 in total; these are the topics for which experts have to be sought.
profiling
in our evaluation methodology we utilize the fact that the trec 1 topics are actually names of w1c working groups  and experts on a given topic are members of the corresponding working group. a person may be member of multiple working groups  meaning that she is an expert on multiple topics. we use the w1c working group names as knowledge areas  and consider a knowledge area to be part of the individual's profile if the person is a member of the corresponding working group. that is  we reverse the original trec expert search assessments.
　table 1 reports the results of our experiments. the answer to our first question  can an expert search algorithm be  inverted  to obtain an effective topical profiling method   is a clear  no  since both profiling methods significantly outperform both baselines; the probability baseline significantly outperforms the rank baseline.1 hence  expert finding and topical profiling are two different tasks. their mathematical foundation is common  since in both cases a candidate-topic
retrievedfilteredmethodmapmrrremovederror ratemethod 1.1.1--f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f= 1.1.1.1.1method 1.1.1--f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1f=1.1.1.1.1table 1: results of filtering on the topical profiling methods. the columns are map: mean average precision  mrr: mean reciprocal rank  removed: fraction of the original results that is filtered out  and error rate: fraction of incorrectly filtered out profile elements. best scores are in boldface.
matrix is calculated and then the values are sorted along one of the dimensions. however  when one is developing algorithms for filling that matrix  different aspects of the data may need to be taken into account: documents on a topic are examined for expert finding  and documents associated with a specific person are considered for expert profiling.
　finally  both method 1 and method 1 achieved fairly high map and mrr scores on the profiling task  with method 1 significantly outperforming method 1.
filtering
recall that filtering  as defined above  allows a knowledge area to appear in the individual's profile only if the person is among the top f ranked experts on that topic. low f values imply that the profile will contain only the expertise areas of a person. as a consequence of filtering  an individual's profile may become empty  in which case we get a smaller  but far more precise result set. the questions we should ask are: how much do we gain for the experts that we retain  and how many valid profile elements do we lose  i.e.  what is the error ratio   see table 1: for method 1 and 1 we can obtain significant improvements  in terms of mrr scores  when filtering  where the original method  with no filtering  acts as a baseline.1 thus  filtering has an early precision enhancing effect. however  in most cases the map scores drop  which suggests that recall drops: we lose knowledge areas. this is confirmed by an inspection of the error ratios. the two profiling methods behave somewhat differently w.r.t. this measure 
#rel mapmrrp 1	p 1 p 1ef  baseline  1.1.1.1.1.1+ method 1:
 a 	1.1*1*1* 1 1 b  λ =1 1.1.1*1* 1 1+ method 1:
 a 	1.1.1*1	1 1 b  λ =1 1.1.1*1	1 1table 1: results of reranking expert finding results using individual's profile. the columns are: reranking method  number of relevant retrieved candidates  mean average precision  mean reciprocal rank  precision after 1  1 and 1 candidates retrieved. best results bold face; * denotes significant improvements over the baseline.
when filtering is applied. but in both cases filtering substantially reduces the size of the result set  and at the same time  they keep the error ratio of the filtering low. the drop in map scores indicates that we lose appropriate knowledge areas that were initially ranked highly  while the rise in mrr indicates that the remaining appropriate ones are ranked higher.
1 an application to expert finding
in this section we describe an application of the extracted topical profiles to expert finding. our approach takes the results of an existing expert finding method-treated as a black box-as input  and adjust the results using the individuals' profiles: if a knowledge area ranks low on a person's profile  we push the candidate down on the list of experts returned to the user. we expect this idea to have a precision enhancing effect  possibly hurting recall. since we take the expert finding method used to be a black box  we do not have any information about the applied scoring method  which leaves us no other option than to use the ranking of the expert finding results: we do not make any assumptions about the scores. we combine the reciprocal of these ranks either in a multiplicative or in an additive way: i.e. 

table 1 shows the results of our reranking methods; we only include scores with the best performing λ parameter for  b . method 1 achieved the highest scores with equal weights on both the expert finding and profiling rankings  while method 1 operated best when less changes were allowed on the original expert search results. all configurations improve mrr and p 1 over the baseline  and this fact confirms that profiling can be used for improving upon an existing expert finding method in terms of early precision. moreover  this special application of the extracted profiles allows us to make further comparisons between the profiling methods: method 1 outperforms method 1  here and on the original profiling task.
　the combination methods we presented here are fairly simple  but still proved to have a positive impact on application of the profiles. further improvements could be pursued using more sophisticated methods for combining the retrieval results; consult  kamps and de rijke  1  for an overview.
1 social profiles
collaborators play an important role when one is searching for expertise. people that an individual is working with are part of her personal workspace  and can serve as a background  or context  in which the system's recommendations should be interpreted. this collaboration network can also help us to explore the roles of the individuals within an organization. we might have a specific  well-defined need  where we are looking for an expert  or even for a  specialist.  another typical user scenario is to find a  librarian   who has access to a wide range of knowledge  and can direct us to a specialist  after the request has been narrowed down.
1 collaboration network
we interpret the social profile as a collaboration network  and describe an algorithm for building such a network.
　a collaboration network cn is a directed graph  v e   where the nodes correspond to people  and a weighted directed edge  x y  （ e indicates the strength of the collaboration between x and y. given a topic t  a topical collaboration network cn t  is a special cn where we restrict ourselves to collaborations  between people  relevant for t.
　given our enterprise  personal workspace  setting we can create a topical collaboration network cn q  given the user's query q. the level of the collaboration between two people x and y is estimated by the relevance of the documents dxy that are associated with both x and y. the weight of the edge between the two individuals is expressed using
		 1 
where dxy = {d （ dq|a x d  … a y d }. a query-biased subset of documents dq is obtained by using the top n documents retrieved for the query q  and a x d  is a binary function denoting whether the person x is associated with the document d  see section 1 for details .
　the topical collaboration network cn q  is built using the following algorithm:
init obtain a query-biased subset of documents dq
step 1 calculate the topical relevance of each individual

step 1 calculate the level of collaboration w x y  between individuals using formula 1.
step 1 make the edges directed and normalize them using the individuals' topical relevance. we allow nodes to be connected with themselves.

where vx denotes the set of nodes connected to x: vx = {y （ v |w x y    1}.

figure 1: screen dump of a topical collaboration network displayed for the query  authoring tools. 
1 visualization
once a collaboration network has been built  we need to present it to end-users of the search system. we opted to visualize it centered around a selected candidate  where the thickness of the directed edges reflects the strength of the relations. figure 1 presents a screen dump from our system  where we search for experts on  authoring tools.  the thickness of an edge corresponds to its weight. the full interface also displays individual's profile on mouse-over.
1 evaluation
topical and social profiling go together and form a complete picture. however  assessment of social profiles is an issue that we are not addressing in this paper. an indirect way of evaluation is to conduct user studies to measure how  useful  a collaboration network is  when one is searching for expertise. a direct evaluation may be performed by using the social collaboration network itself for inferring experts  by using methods from graph-theory.
1 conclusions
we presented methods for providing the context and the evidence that supports the recommendations of an operational expertise search system. we introduced the profile of an individual  which is a record of the types and areas of skills of that individual   topical profile   plus a description of her collaboration network   social profile  . we proposed multiple models for addressing the topical profiling task  and showed that they significantly outperform an  inverted  expert search baseline. refinements brought in filtering  allowing an area into a person's profile only if she is among the top ranking experts in the area. experimental evaluation showed that more than 1% of the retrieved results could be filtered out  while keeping the error rate as low as 1%. we applied our profiling algorithms to significantly enhance the performance of a state-of-the-art expert finding algorithm. our reranking method is very effective in terms of early precision. finally  we addressed the task of determining a social profile for a given person. we introduced a graph representation of the collaboration network  where nodes represent people  and  weighted  directed  edges reflect the level of collaboration. we described an algorithm for estimating the weights of edges  based on  co-authored  documents.
　possible improvements include more sophisticated algorithms for extracting topical profiles  e.g.  taking similarities and overlap between knowledge areas into account. we are also developing methods to assess the quality and  usefulness  of social profiles.
acknowledgments
krisztian balog was supported by the netherlands organisation for scientific research  nwo  under project numbers 1-1  1.1 and 1.1. maarten de rijke was supported by nwo under project numbers 1.1  1-1  1-1  1-1  1.1  1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  1.1  and by the e.u. ist programme of the 1th fp for rtd under project multimatch contract ist-1.
