
we study the bidding behavior of spiteful agents who  contrary to the common assumption of selfinterest  maximize a convex combination of their own profit and their competitors' losses. the motivation for this assumption stems from inherent spitefulness or  for example  from competitive scenarios such as in closed markets where the loss of a competitor will likely result in future gains for oneself. we derive symmetric bayes nash equilibria for spiteful agents in 1st-price and 1nd-price sealedbid auctions. in 1st-price auctions  bidders become  more truthful  the more spiteful they are. surprisingly  the equilibrium strategy in 1nd-price auctions does not depend on the number of bidders. based on these equilibria  we compare the revenue in both auction types. it turns out that expected revenue in 1nd-price auctions is higher than expected revenue in 1st-price auctions in the case of even the most modestly spiteful agents  provided they still care at least at little for their own profit. in other words  revenue equivalence only holds for auctions in which all agents are either self-interested or completely malicious. we furthermore investigate the impact of common knowledge on spiteful bidding. divulging the bidders' valuations reduces revenue in 1nd-price auctions  whereas it has the opposite effect in 1st-price auctions.
1 introduction
over the last few years  game theory has widely been adopted as a tool to formally model and analyze interactions between rational agents in the field of ai. one of the fundamental assumptions in game theory is that agents are self-interested  i.e.  they maximize their own utility without considering the utility of other agents. however  there is some evidence that certain types of behavior in the real world as well as in artificial societies can be better explained by models in which agents have other-regarding preferences. while there are settings where agents exhibit altruism  there are also others where agents intend to degrade competitors in order to improve their own standing. this is typically the case in competitive situations such as in closed markets where the loss of a competitor will likely result in future gains for oneself  e.g.  when a competitor is driven out of business  or  more generally  when agents intend to maximize their relative rather than their absolute utility. to give an example  consider the popular trading agent competition  tac  where an agent's goal  in order to win the competition  should be to accumulate more revenue than his competitors instead of maximizing his own revenue. other examples include the german 1g mobile phone spectrum license auction1 in 1  where one of the network providers  german telekom  kept raising the price in an  unsuccessful  attempt to crowd out one of the weaker competitors  grimm et al.  1   and sponsored search auctions where similar behavior has been reported  zhou and lukose  1 . clearly  a reduced number of competitors is advantageous for the remaining companies because it increases their market share.
¡¡sealed-bid auctions are an example of well-understood competitive economic processes where questioning the assumption of self-interest is particularly pertinent. for instance  in a 1nd-price auction  it is a dominant strategy for a self-interested agent to truthfully submit his valuation  even if he is informed about the other bids. however  a competitive agent who knows he cannot win might feel tempted to place his bid right below the winning bid in order to minimize the winner's profit. in order to account for the behavior of such spiteful agents  which are interested in minimizing the returns to their competitors as well as in maximizing their own profits  we incorporate other-regarding preferences in the utility function. to this end  we define a new utility measure for agents with negative externalities  section 1 . the tradeoff between both goals is controlled by a parameter ¦Á called spite coefficient. setting ¦Á to zero yields self-interested agents whereas a spite coefficient of one defines completely malicious agents  whose only goal is to reduce others' profit. we find that the well-known equilibria for 1st- and 1nd-price auctions no longer apply if ¦Á   1. in sections 1 and 1  respectively  we derive symmetric bayes nash equilibria of both auction types in the case of spiteful agents. with respect to these equilibria  we obtain further results on auction revenue and the impact of common knowledge in section 1. the paper concludes with section 1.
1 related work
numerous authors in experimental economics  fehr and schmidt  1; saijo and nakamura  1; levine  1   game theory  sobel  1   social psychology  messick and sentis  1; loewenstein et al.  1   and multiagent systems  brainov  1  have observed and explored otherregarding preferences  usually with an emphasis on altruism. levine  1  introduced a model in which utility is defined as a linear function of both the agent's monetary payoff and his opponents' payoff  controlled by a parameter called  altruism coefficient . this model was used to explain data obtained in ultimatum bargaining and centipede experiments. one surprising outcome of that study was that an overwhelming majority of individuals possess a negative altruism coefficient  corresponding to spiteful behavior. he concludes that  one explanation of spite is that it is really 'competitiveness'  that is  the desire to outdo opponents   levine  1 . most papers  including levine's  also consider elements of fairness in the sense that agents are willing to be more altruistic/spiteful to an opponent who is more altruistic/spiteful towards them. brainov  1  defines a generic type of  antisocial  agent by letting   uuji   1 for any j  i  using the notation defined in section 1 . a game-theoretic model in which buyers have negative identity-dependent externalities which  can stand for expected profits in future interaction  has been studied by jehiel et al.  1 .
¡¡we extend our previous work on spitefulness in auctions  brandt and wei   1   where we have already given an equilibrium strategy for spiteful agents in 1nd-price auctions with complete information. recently  other authors have studied the effects of negative externalities in auctions  morgan et al.  1; maasland and onderstal  1 . perhaps closest to our work is the work by morgan et al.  1 . although we derived our results independently  there are some similarities as well as differences  and so we should make both clear. in contrast to morgan et al.  we model spite as a convex combination of utilities which allows us to capture malicious agents who possess no self-interest at all  permitting results like corollary 1 . morgan et al.'s definition approaches this case in the limit  but such limits are not considered in their paper. the main benefit of our definition of spite is the re-translation of bidding equilibria from bulky integrals to more intuitive conditional expectations which in turn greatly facilitates the proof of the main result  theorem 1 . furthermore  we quantify the difference of revenue in both auctions types  theorem 1   analyze the impact of common knowledge by computing equilibria for the complete information setting  section 1   and find that the difference in revenue stems from the uncertainty about others' valuations. morgan et al.  on the other hand  also provide an equilibrium strategy for english auctions and discuss risk aversion  interpersonal comparisons  and  the love of winning  as alternative explanations for overbidding in auctions.
¡¡interestingly  a special case of our results-the bayes nash equilibrium for two spiteful bidders in vickrey auctions with a uniform prior  see corollary 1 -was found independently by an algorithmic best-response solver  reeves and wellman  1 .
1 preliminaries
in this section  we define the utility function of rational spiteful agents and the framework of our auction setting.
1 spiteful agents
a spiteful agent i maximizes the weighted difference of his own utility ui and his competitors' utilities uj for all j  i. in general  it would be reasonable to take the average or maximum of the competitors' utilities. however  since we only consider single-item auctions where all utilities except the winner's are zero  we can simply employ the sum of all remaining agents' utilities.
definition 1 the utility of a spiteful agent is given by
ui =  1   ¦Ái  ¡¤ ui   ¦Ái ¡¤ uj
ji
where ¦Ái ¡Ê  1  is a parameter called spite coefficient.
in the following  we speak of  utility  when referring to spiteful utility ui and use the term  profit  to denote conventional utility ui. obviously  setting ¦Ái to zero yields a self-interested agent  whose utility equals his profit  whereas ¦Ái = 1 defines a completely malicious agent whose only goal is to minimize the profit of other agents. when ¦Ái =   we say an agent is
balanced spiteful.1
¡¡as mentioned in section 1  other authors have suggested utility functions with a linear trade-off between self-interest and others' well-being. in contrast to these proposals  our definition differs in that the weight of one's own utility is not normalized to 1  allowing us to capture malicious agents who have no self-interest at all. this opens interesting avenues for future research like the possibility to analyze the robustness of mechanisms in the presence of worst-case adversaries.
1 auction setting
except for a preliminary result in section 1  we assume that bidders are symmetric  in particular they all have the same spite coefficient ¦Á. before each auction  private values vi are drawn independently from a commonly known probability distribution over the interval  1  defined by the cumulative distribution function  cdf  f v . the cdf is defined as the probability that a random sample v drawn from the distribution does not exceed v: f v  = pr v ¡Ü v . its derivative  the probability density function  pdf   is denoted by f v .
¡¡once the auction starts  each bidder submits a bid based on his private value. the bidder who submitted the highest bid wins the auction. in a 1st-price auction  he pays the amount he bid whereas in a 1nd-price  or vickrey  auction he pays the amount of the second highest bid. extending the notation of krishna  1   we will denote equilibrium strategies of 1st- and 1nd-price auctions by bi¦Á v  and bii¦Á v   respectively. when bidders are self-interested  ¦Á = 1   there are wellknown equilibria for both auction types. the unique bayes nash equilibrium strategy for 1st-price auctions is to bid at the expectation of the second highest private value  conditional on one's own value being the highest  bi1 v  = e x | x   v  where x is distributed according to g x  = f x n 1  vickrey  1; riley and samuelson  1 . 1nd-price auctions are strategy-proof  i.e.  bii1  v  = v for any distribution of values  vickrey  1 . vickrey also first made the observation that expected revenue in both auction types is identical which was later generalized to a whole class of auctions in the revenue equivalence theorem  myerson  1; riley and samuelson  1 .
1 first-price auctions
as is common in auction theory  we study symmetric equilibria  that is  equilibria in which all bidders use the same bidding function  mapping from valuations to bids . symmetric equilibria are considered the most reasonable equilibria  but in principle need not be the only ones  we will later provide an asymmetric equilibrium in auctions with malicious bidders . furthermore  we guess that the bidding function is strictly increasing and differentiable over  1 . these assumptions impose no restriction on the general setting. they are only made to reduce the search space.
theorem 1 a bayes nash equilibrium for spiteful bidders in 1st-price auctions is given by the bidding strategy
¡¡¡¡bi¦Á v  = e x | x   v  where x is drawn from gi¦Á x  = f x 1n  ¦Á1 .
proof: we start by introducing some notation. let wi = bi vi    b 1  v i  be the event that bidder i wins the auction  b 1  v i  be the highest of all bids except i's  v 1  be the highest private value  and ¡¥vi b  denote the inverse function of bi v . we will use the short notation ¡¥v for ¡¥v 1  bi vi   to improve readability. it is important to keep in mind that ¡¥v is a function of bi vi   e.g.  when taking the derivative of the expected utility.
¡¡recall that agent i knows his own private value vi  but only has probabilistic beliefs about the remaining n 1 private values  and bids . thus  the expected utility of a spiteful agent in a 1st-price auction is given by
	eui bi vi  	=	 1¡¤  ¦Á   ¡¤ pr wi  ¡¤¡¤ vi  bi |  vi   
	¦Á  1	pr wi  	e v 1 	wi	 1 
eb 1  v i  |  wi.
we can ignore ties in this formulation because they are zero probability events in the continuous setting we consider. by definition  the probability that any private value is lower than i's value is given by f vi . since all values are independently distributed  the probability that bidder i has the highest private value is f vi n 1. thus  the probability that i submits the highest bid can be expressed by using the inverse bid function
	pr wi  = f ¡¥v n 1.	 1 
the cd f of the highest of n   1 private values is f 1  v  = f v n 1. the associated pd f is f 1  v  =  n   1 f v n 1 ¡¤ f v . using standard formulas for the conditional expectation  see appendix a   this allows us to compute both expectation values on the right-hand side of equation 1. the expectation of the highest private value is
1
 ev 1  |  wi = 1   f1 ¡¥v n 1	v¡¥ t¡¤ n 1 f t n 1¡¤ f t  dt  1  whereas the expectation of the highest bid is
bi 1 
1
	e b 1  v i  |  wi	=		bi vi  t ¡¤  n   1 ¡¤
f ¡¥v t     ¡¤ f ¡¥v t   ¡¤ v¡¥ t  dt.
inserting these expectations in equation 1 and simplifying the result yields
	eui bi vi  =	 1   ¦Á  f ¡¥v n 1vi   f ¡¥v n 1bi vi   
1
	¦Á n   1  	t ¡¤ f t n 1 ¡¤ f t  dt 
v¡¥
bi 1  t ¡¤ f ¡¥v t  n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v t   ¡¤ v¡¥ t  dt.
bi vi 
when taking the derivative with respect to bi vi   both integrals vanish due to the fundamental theorem of calculus and the observation that
	dtgv¡¥ b 		
 bb
in order to obtain the strategy that generates maximum utility we take the derivative and set it to zero. thus 
	1	=	 1   ¦Á  n   1 f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥ ¡¤ vi 
 n   1 f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥ ¡¤ bi vi    f ¡¥v  n 1  
¦Á n   1¡¤   v¡¥ ¡¤ f ¡¥v¡¤ n 1 ¡¤¡¤f ¡¥v ¡¤ v¡¥  1   bi vi  f ¡¥v n 1 f ¡¥v  v¡¥ .
from this point on  we treat vi as a variable  instead of bi vi   and assume that all bidding strategies are identical  i.e.  ¡¥v = v¡¥ 1  bi vi   = vi. using the fact that the derivative of the inverse function is the reciprocal of the original function's derivative  ¡¥v bi vi   = bi 1vi    we can rearrange terms to obtain the differential equation
	b.	 1 
it follows that b v  ¡Ü v because the fraction on the right-hand side is always non-negative  recall that the bidding function is strictly increasing . since we assume that there are no negative bids  this yields the boundary condition b 1  = 1. the solution of equation 1 with boundary condition b 1  = 1 is
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡1	v	n	1 b v  =	1	t ¡¤	  	¡¤ f t 1n  ¦Á1 ¡¤ f t  dt.
	f	¦Á	1	¦Á
strikingly  the right-hand side of this equation is a conditional expectation  see appendix a . more precisely  it is the expectation of the highest of ¦Á 1n  ¦Á1 private values below v  ignoring the fact 1n 1 is not necessarily an integer   i.e. 
	b v  = e x | x   v 	n 1
where the cd f of x is given by gi¦Á x  = f x 1  ¦Á. it remains to be shown that the resulting strategy is indeed a mutual best response. we omit this step for reasons of limited space.  in 1st-price auctions  bidders face a tradeoff between the probability of winning and the profit conditional on winning. an intuition behind the equilibrium for spiteful agents is that the more spiteful a bidder is  the less emphasis he puts on his expected profit. whereas a self-interested bidder bids at the expectation of the highest of n   1 private values below his own value  a balanced spiteful agents bids at the expectation of the highest of 1 n   1  private values below his value. interestingly  agents are  least truthful  when they are selfinterested. any level of spite makes them more truthful. furthermore  parameter ¦Á defines a continuum of nash equilibria between the well-known standard equilibria of 1st-price and 1nd-price auctions. even though gi¦Á x  is not defined for ¦Á = 1  it can easily be seen from equation 1  that bi1 v  = v.
corollary 1 the 1st-price auction is  bayes nash  incentivecompatible for malicious bidders  ¦Á = 1 .
this result is perhaps surprising because one might expect that always bidding 1 is an optimal strategy for malicious bidders. the following consideration shows why this is not the case. assume that all agents are bidding 1. agent i's expected utility depends on the tie resolution policy. if another bidder is chosen as the winner  i's expected utility is positive. if he wins the auction  his utility is zero. by bidding less than 1  he can ensure that his expected utility is always positive.
¡¡curiously  there are other  asymmetric  equilibria for malicious bidders  e.g.  a  threat  equilibrium where one designated bidder always bids 1 and everybody else bids some value below his private value. it is well-known that asymmetric equilibria like this exist in 1nd-price auctions  see blume and heidhues  1  for a complete characterization . however  asymmetric equilibria in 1nd-price auctions are  weakly  dominated whereas the one given above is not  making it more reasonable.
¡¡one way to gain more insight in the equilibrium strategy is to instantiate f v  with the uniform distribution.
corollary 1 a bayes nash equilibrium for spiteful bidders in 1st-price auctions with uniformly distributed private values is given by the bidding strategy
bi¦Á v.
whereas one can get full intuition in the extreme points of the strategy  ¦Á ¡Ê {1}   the fact that the scaling between both endpoints of the equilibrium spectrum is not linear in ¦Á  even for a uniform prior  is somewhat surprising.
1 second-price auctions
in this section  we derive an equilibrium strategy for spiteful agents in 1nd-price auctions using the same set of assumptions made in section 1.
theorem 1 a bayes nash equilibrium for spiteful bidders in 1nd-price auctions is given by the bidding strategy bii¦Á v  = e x | x   v  where x is drawn from gii¦Á x  = 1    1   f x  ¦Á1 .
proof: we use the same notation introduced in the proof of theorem 1. the expected utility of spiteful agent i in 1ndprice auctions can be described as follows. there are two general cases depending on whether bidder i wins or loses. in the former case  the utility is simply vi minus the expected highest bid  except i's . in the latter case  we have to compute the expectations of the winner's private value and the selling price. in order to specify the selling price  we need to distinguish between two subcases: if bidder i submitted the second highest bid  the selling price is his bid bi. otherwise  i.e.  if the second highest of all remaining bids is greater than bi  we can again give a conditional expectation. thus  the overall expected utility of agent i is
ui bi vi   =  1   ¦Á  ¡¤ pr wi  ¡¤ vi   e b 1  v i  | wi  
	 1   pr wi   ¡¤ e v 1 	 
prb 1  v i   ¡¤ bi vi  
	pr bi vi    b 1  v i   ¡¤ e b 1  v i  | bi   b 1  v i  .	 1 
according to the formula given in appendix a  the conditional expectation of the remaining highest bid  in case bidder i wins  is
eb 1  v i  | wi =
bi vi 
	1n 1	bi 1 	t ¡¤  n   1 f ¡¥v t  n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v t   ¡¤ v¡¥ t  dt.
f ¡¥v 
 1 
we have already given a formula for ev 1  |  wi in equation 1. the probability that bi is the second highest bid equals the probability that exactly one bid is greater than bi and n 1 bids are less than bi. depending on who submitted the highest bid  there are n   1 different ways in which this can occur  yielding
pr bi vi    b 1  v i   ¡Ä  bi vi     b 1  v i  ¡¤ =  
	 n	1 f ¡¥v n 1	 1	f ¡¥v  .
the cd f of the second highest private value  of n   1 values  can be derived by computing the probability that the second highest value is less than or equal to a given v. either all n 1 values are lower than v  or n   1 values are lower and one is greater than v. as above  there are n   1 different possibilities in the latter case. thus 
f 1  v  = f v n 1 +  n   1 f v n 1   f v   =
 n   1 f v n 1    n   1 f v n 1.
it follows that the pd f is f 1  v  =  n   1  ¡¤  n   1  ¡¤  1   f v   ¡¤ f v n 1 ¡¤ f v . finally  the conditional expectation of the second highest bid times the probability of this bid being higher than bi is
pr bi vi    b 1  v i   ¡¤ e b 1  v i  | bi   b 1  v i   =
bi 1 
	 n 1 ¡¤ n 1 ¡¤i	i	t¡¤ 1 f ¡¥v t   ¡¤f ¡¥v t  n 1¡¤ f ¡¥v t  ¡¤v¡¥ t  dt.
b  v  
inserting both expectations and the probability of winning
 see equation 1  into equation 1 yields
eui bi vi   =  1   ¦Á  ¡¤  f ¡¥v n 1vi 
bi vi 
	 n   1  ¡¤i	t ¡¤ f ¡¥v t  n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v t   ¡¤ v¡¥ t  dt 
b  1 
1
¦Á ¡¤  n   1  ¡¤t ¡¤ f t n 1 ¡¤ f t  dt 
v¡¥
f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤  1   f ¡¥v   ¡¤ bi vi  
bi 1 
	 n 1 ¡¤i	i	t¡¤ 1 f ¡¥v t   ¡¤f ¡¥v t  n 1¡¤ f ¡¥v t  ¡¤v¡¥ t  dt.
b  v  
as in the previous section  we now take the derivative with respect to bi vi  and set it to zero. all integrals vanish due to the fundamental theorem of calculus and the formula given in equation 1. we get
1	=	 1   ¦Á  ¡¤  n   1 f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥ ¡¤ vi 
 n   1  bi vi  ¡¤ f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥   ¦Á ¡¤   n   1 ¡¤	¡¤ 1   ¡¤v¡¥ ¡¤ f ¡¥v¡¤ n 1¡¤ ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥ 	 
  n 1  f ¡¥v n 1 f ¡¥v  v¡¥ bi vi  + f ¡¥v n 1  n   1  ¡¤ f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  ¡¤ v¡¥ ¡¤ bi vi    f ¡¥v n 1  ¡¤ 
 n   1  ¡¤  1   bi vi  ¡¤  1   f ¡¥v   ¡¤ f ¡¥v n 1 ¡¤ f ¡¥v  v¡¥ .
using the fact that the derivative of the inverse function is the reciprocal of the original function's derivative  ¡¥v bi vi   = bi 1vi   and ¡¥v = vi  we can simplify and rearrange terms to
obtain the differential equation
b v  = v +	¡¤	 	¡¤	.	 1  ¦Á 
f v 
it turns out that b 1  = 1 does not hold for 1nd-price auctions. however  a boundary condition can easily be obtained by letting v = 1. by definition  f 1  = 1 which yields b 1  = 1. given this boundary condition  the solution of equation 1 is
	  1 t ¡¤  1   f t  ¦Á1 ¡¤ f t 
	b v  =	1	dt.	 1 
	 1	f v  ¦Á	v	¦Á
like in proof of theorem 1  the right-hand side of equation 1 resembles a conditional expectation. in fact  the bidding strategy can be reformulated as the expectation of some random variable x  given that x   v  b v  = e x | x   v 
where the cd f of x is given by gii¦Á x  = 1    1   f x  ¦Á1 .
¡¡it can easily be checked that gii¦Á x  is indeed a valid cd f  gii¦Á 1  = 1  gii¦Á 1  = 1  and gii¦Á x  is non-decreasing and differentiable . by inserting this cd f in equation 1  we obtain the equilibrium bidding strategy. the resulting expectation is the expected value of the lowest of  values above v. gii¦Á x  is not defined for ¦Á = 1  but the correct  well-known  equilibrium can quickly be read from equation 1. it remains to be shown that the resulting strategy is indeed a mutual best response. we omit this step for reasons of limited space.  remarkably  the resulting equilibrium strategy is independent of the number of bidders n  though it does depend on the prior distribution of private values . for example  a balanced spiteful bidder bids at the expectation of the lowest of two private values above his own value. as in the previous section  we try to get more insight in the equilibrium by instantiating the uniform distribution.
corollary 1 a bayes nash equilibrium for spiteful bidders in 1nd-price auctions with uniformly distributed private values is given by the bidding strategy
bii¦Á v  = v + ¦Á
1 + ¦Á
for example  given a uniform prior  the optimal strategy for balanced spiteful agents is b v  =  ¡¤ v +   regardless of the number of bidders. as in the 1st-price auction setting  the surprising equilibrium strategies are those for 1   ¦Á   1. there is no linear scaling between both extreme points of the equilibrium spectrum. as we will see in the following section  this leads to important consequences on auction revenue.
1 consequences
in order to obtain instructive results from these equilibria  we compare a key measure in auction theory-the seller's revenue-and investigate the impact of common knowledge on bidding and revenue.
1 revenue comparison
the well-known revenue equivalence theorem  which states that members of a large class of auctions all yield the same revenue under certain conditions  does not hold when agents are spiteful. figure 1 shows the expected revenue in both
auction types when agents are balanced spiteful and private values are uniformly distributed.
¡¡it can be shown that the revenue gap visible in the figure exists for any prior and spite coefficient as long as agents are neither self-interested nor malicious.
theorem 1 for the same spite coefficient 1   ¦Á   1  the 1ndprice auction yields more expected revenue than the 1st-price auction. when ¦Á ¡Ê {1}  expected revenue in both auction types is equal in the symmetric equilibrium.
proof: the statement can be deduced from the following three observations:
  when agents are malicious  expected revenue in both auction types is identical.
in the 1st-price auction  truthful bidding is in equilibrium. in the 1nd-price auction  the second highest bidder bids at the expectation of the highest private value. in both cases  revenue equals the expectation of the highest value.
  b¦Ái  v  and bii¦Á v  are strictly increasing in ¦Á. in the 1st-price auction  bidders bid at the  conditional  expectation of the highest value of a number of private values that increases as ¦Á grows. in the 1nd-price auction  bidders bid at the expectation of the lowest

1 1 1 1
n
figure 1: expected revenue  interpolated for non-integer n 
value of a number of private values that decreases as ¦Á grows. obviously  both expectations are increasing in ¦Á. more formally  gi¦Á stochastically dominates gi¦Â and gii¦Á stochastically dominates gii¦Â for any ¦Á   ¦Â.
  b¦Ái  v  is convex in ¦Á. bii¦Á v  is concave in ¦Á. since both equilibria are symmetric  we just need to consider the curvature of expectations distributed according to gi¦Á x  and gii¦Á x  for variable ¦Á. bids in 1st-price auctions are the  conditional  expectation of the highest of  values. the slope of this expectation increases as ¦Á rises. in 1nd-price auctions  bids are the expectation of the lowest of  values. if it were the highest value  the slope would be increasing too. however  since it is the expectation of the lowest value  the slope is strictly decreasing in ¦Á.
let e ri¦Á  and e rii¦Á  be the expected revenue in 1st- and 1ndprice auctions  respectively  and consider these as functions of ¦Á. so far  we know that both functions are equal for ¦Á ¡Ê {1} and strictly increasing. furthermore  e ri¦Á  is convex and e rii¦Á  is concave. these facts imply that e rii¦Á    e ri¦Á  for any 1   ¦Á   1  see figure 1 . 
¡¡naturally  more revenue for the seller results in less profit for the bidders. however  if you look at  spiteful  utility  the utility of winning bidders in 1nd-price auctions is lower than in 1st-price auctions  whereas the utility of losing bidders is higher in 1nd-price auctions. as a consequence  social welfare  if one is willing to consider such a notion in a setting of spitefulness  is higher in 1nd-price auctions than in 1st-price auctions if the number of bidders is sufficiently large.
¡¡revenue inequalities for other special conditions such as when bidders or the seller are risk-averse have been used to argue in favor of one auction form over another. hence  theorem 1 can be interpreted as an advantage of the 1nd-price auction  from the perspective of a seller  because it yields more revenue than the 1st-price auction whenever bidders exhibit the slightest interest in reducing their competitors' profit

	1 1 1 1	1
¦¡
figure 1: expected revenue for n = 1 and varying ¦Á
 and they still care about their own profit . on the other hand  the difference in expected revenue is relatively small  even for just few bidders. for example  the difference in expected revenue for ten bidders with uniformly distributed private values is less than 1% for any ¦Á. interestingly  the revenue difference is maximal for some ¦Á slightly below 1.
theorem 1 the difference in expected revenue between 1ndprice and 1st-price auctions is maximal for some ¦Á ¡Ü 1 that approaches  in the limit as n rises  when private values are uniformly distributed.
proof: by definition  the revenue difference is the difference of the expectation of the second highest bid in 1nd-price auctions minus the highest expected bid in 1st-price auctions. instantiating with the uniform distribution  we get
erii¦Á
=	n +1 + ¦Á¡¤  ¡¤n    1 ¡Ý¡¤	n	 1  n
	1 + ¦Á	n	¦Á	n + 1
	 1	¦Á  ¦Á
	=	1.
	 ¦Á + 1   n	¦Á 
in order to obtain the maximal revenue difference  we take the derivative of the expression given in equation 1 with respect to ¦Á and set it to zero:
   ¦Á1 + ¦Á   ¡¤n   ¦Á ¡¤ n 1	¦Á1 + ¦Á¡¤  n   ¦Á ¡¤ n + n
	=  ¦Ámax =	¡Ì	¡¤ ¡Ì	¡¤	 	.
	n +	1	n  n	1 
when there are only two bidders  ¦Ámax = 1. ¦Ámax is strictly decreasing as n increases and
           1 lim ¦Ámax =	¡Ì	¡Ö 1. n¡ú¡Þ	1 +	1

1 complete information
in this section  we give bidding equilibria for spiteful agents in a model with complete information  i.e.  all private values are common knowledge. this allows us to examine the influence of uncertainty on spiteful bidding.
theorem 1 a nash equilibrium for both 1st- and 1nd-price auctions in a model of complete information is given by the bidding strategy profile
bii ¦Á = biii ¦Á	=	v1 + ¦Á v1   v1  for i ¡Ê {1} and bii ¦Á = biii ¦Á	 	v1 + ¦Á v1   v1  for i ¡Ê {1 ... n}
where 1 and 1 are the indices of the bidder with the highest and second highest valuation  respectively.1
proof: let us first consider why bidder 1 and 1 would not deviate from the given strategy profile in a 1st-price auction. bidder 1's utility for bidding b1  given that bidder 1 bids according to the equilibrium strategy is
	u¦Ái  b1 	=	      1¦Á  v¦Á1    vb1i  ¦Á b1 	ifif bb1 ¡Ü¡Ý¡Ü bbi1i ¦Á ¦Á
	=	      1¦Á1  v1¦Á  vv1   b1 	ifif bb1 ¡Ý bb1i ¦Á ¦Á .
bidder 1 cannot increase his utility by deviating from the equilibrium strategy. if he bids less  his utility stays the same. if he bids more  his utility is diminishing  it is less than  1   ¦Á 1 v1   v1  . the same holds for bidder 1 whose
utility is
	u¦Ái  b1 	=	          1     ¦Á  v1    b 1 	ifif bb1 ¡Ü¡Ý bb1ii¡Ü¡Ý ¦Á ¦Á
	=	 1 ¦Á  ¦Á v¦Á1 v1 v1  	ifif bb1	bbi1 ¦Á ¦Á .
the equilibrium point is exactly the strategy for which bidder 1 is indifferent between winning and losing since both payoffs are equal. it also coincides with his maximin strategy  i.e.  the strategy that guarantees the highest payoff regardless of other players' rationality  see also brandt and wei   1 . it follows that the remaining bidders have no incentive to interfere  by bidding at least as much as bidder 1 and 1  because their utility would only decrease.
¡¡in 1nd-price auctions  the argumentation is analogous. when the other bidders employ the equilibrium strategy  bidder 1's utility is
	u¦Áii b1 	=	      1 ¦Á  v¦Á1     vb1   b1ii ¦Á 	ifif bb	¡Ü	 ¦Á ¦Á
	¦Á v1	b1 	if b1	b
	=	     1   ¦Á 1 v1   v1  	if b .
bidding more will not change anything and bidding less results in less utility  u¦Áii b1    ¦Á1 v1  v1  . like above  bidder 1  whose utility is
	u¦Áii b1 	=	           1 ¦Á   v¦Á1     vb1   bii1 ¦Á 	ifif bb ¡Ü	 ¦Á ¦Á
= ¦Á v1 b1  if b1 bii1 ¦Á    1 ¦Á ¦Á v1 v1  if b1  ¦Á
is indifferent between winning and losing in equilibrium. 
¡¡since the main purpose of considering the complete information model is a comparison with the equilibria given in sections 1 and 1  we just provided an equilibrium for symmetric spite. computing equilibria for any given profile of spite coefficients is straightforward in the complete information model.
¡¡apparently  equilibria for 1st- and 1nd-price auctions are identical and scale linearly between the second highest and highest valuation  see figure 1 . this has interesting consequences on the availability of information and expected revenue: whereas revealing private values increases expected revenue in 1st-price auctions  it decreases revenue in 1nd-price auctions  whenever 1   ¦Á   1. this effect is quite surprising because expected revenue in a setting with self-interested bidders is identical in the incomplete and complete information model  see e.g.  osborne  1 .
1 asymmetries
an important extension of our setting is one that deals with asymmetries in spitefulness. for example  it would be very desirable to extend the revenue inequality  theorem 1  to arbitrary profiles of spite coefficients  ¦Á1 ¦Á1 ... ¦Án  or a general prior from which each ¦Ái is drawn. a first step towards this direction can be made by observing that the equilibrium strategies of self-interested bidders are in a sense  robust  against spiteful bidding.
proposition 1 rational self-interested bidders will stick with their bidding strategy when other agents bid according to the strategies given in theorems 1 and 1  respectively  and private values are uniformly distributed.
proof: the statement for 1st-price auctions follows from a result by porter and shoham  1  who proved that bidders in 1st-price auctions will stick with their equilibrium strategy even when other bidders bid constant fractions of their private value larger than n n1 ¡¤ v  in the case of a uniform prior . this holds for a certain class of probability distributions  including the uniform distribution.
the statement for 1nd-price auctions trivially follows from the fact that bidding truthfully is a dominant strategy for selfinterested agents and therefore holds for any given prior. 
the previous proposition can be interpreted as a setting in which there are self-interested and spiteful agents participating in the same auction. self-interested agents are aware of this asymmetry whereas spiteful agents believe that everybody is spiteful.
1 conclusion
we studied the bidding behavior of spiteful agents who  contrary to the common assumption of self-interest  maximize a convex combination of their own profit and their competitors' losses. we derived symmetric bayes nash equilibria for spiteful agents in 1st-price and 1nd-price sealed-bid auctions. the main results are as follows. in 1st-price auctions  bidders become  more truthful  the more spiteful they are. when bidders are completely malicious  truth-telling is in nash equilibrium. surprisingly  the equilibrium strategy in 1nd-price auctions does not depend on the number of bidders. based on these equilibria  we compared the revenue in both auction types. it turned out that revenue equivalence breaks down for this setting. expected revenue in 1nd-price auctions is higher than revenue in 1st-price auctions whenever the spite coefficient ¦Á satisfies 1   ¦Á   1. however  revenue equivalence holds at each extreme: auctions where all agents are selfinterested  ¦Á = 1  and auction where all agents are malicious  ¦Á = 1 . we showed that the difference in revenue stems from the uncertainty about others' valuations. whereas revealing private values increases expected revenue in 1st-price auctions  it decreases revenue in 1nd-price auctions if 1   ¦Á   1.
¡¡there are several open problems left for future work. most importantly  we intend to extend the revenue inequality  theorem 1  to settings with asymmetric spite and investigate the mechanism design problem for spiteful agents.
acknowledgements
we thank christina fong  kate larson  chris luhrs  ryan porter  michael rothkopf  moshe tennenholtz  gerhard wei   and michael wellman for valuable comments.
¡¡this material is based upon work supported by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft under grant br 1-1 and by the national science foundation under itr grants iis1  iis-1  and iis-1  and a sloan fellowship.
a	conditional expectations
let x be a random variable drawn from the interval  1  according to the cumulative distribution function f x . the
1
expectation of x is e x  =t ¡¤ f t  dt. the conditional
1
expectation that x is smaller or greater than some constant x  respectively  is given by
e x | x   x  = 	t ¡¤ f t dt 	and
	f x 	1 1 	1
e x | x   x  =	 	t ¡¤ f t dt. 1	f x 	x 1 	1	x
references
a. blume and p. heidhues. all equilibria of the vickrey auction. journal of economic theory  1 :1  1.
s. brainov. the role and the impact of preferences on multiagent interaction. in intelligent agents vi  volume 1 of lecture notes in artificial intelligence  lnai . springerverlag  1.
f. brandt and g. wei . antisocial agents and vickrey auctions. in j.-j. ch. meyer and m. tambe  editors  intelligent agents viii  volume 1 of lecture notes in artificial intelligence  lnai   pages 1. springer-verlag  1.
e. fehr and k. schmidt. the economics of fairness  reciprocity and altrusim - experimental evidence and new theories. in handbook of the econonmics of giving  altruism and reciprocity  pages 1. north-holland  1.
v. grimm  f. riedel  and e. wolfstetter. the third generation  umts  spectrum auction in germany. ifo studien  1   1.
p. jehiel  b. moldovanu  and e. stacchetti. how  not  to sell nuclear weapons. american economic review  1- 1  1.
v. krishna. auction theory. academic press  1.
d. k. levine. modeling altruism and spitefulness in experiments. review of economic dynamics  1-1  1.
g. loewenstein  l. thompson  and m. bazerman. social utility and decision making in interpersonal contexts. journal of personality and social psychology  1 :1  1.
e. maasland and s. onderstal. auctions with financial externalities. working paper  1.
d. m. messick and k. p. sentis. estimating social and nonsocial utility functions from ordinal data. european journal of social psychology  1-1  1.
j. morgan  k. steiglitz  and g. reis. the spite motive and equilibrium behavior in auctions. contributions to economic analysis & policy  1 :1  1.
r. b. myerson. optimal auction design. mathematics of operations research  1-1  1.
m. osborne. an introduction to game theory. oxford university press  1.
r. porter and y. shoham. on cheating in sealed-bid auctions. in proceedings of the 1th acm conference on electronic commerce  acm-ec   pages 1. acm press  1.
d. reeves and m. wellman. computing best-response strategies in infinite games of incomplete information. in proceedings of the 1th annual conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence  uai   pages 1. auai press  1.
j. riley and w. samuelson. optimal auctions. american economic review  1-1  1.
t. saijo and h. nakamura. the  spite  dilemma in voluntary contribution mechanism experiments. journal of conflict resolution  1 :1  1.
j. sobel. interdependent p