
abstract argumentation systems are formalisms for defeasible reasoning where some components remain unspecified  the structure of arguments being the main abstraction. in the dialectical process carried out to identify accepted arguments in the system some controversial situations may appear. these relate to the reintroduction of arguments into the process which cause the onset of circularity. this must be avoided in order to prevent an infinite analysis. some systems apply the sole restriction of not allowing the introduction of previously considered arguments in an argumentation line. however  repeating an argument is not the only possible cause for the risk mentioned  as subargumentsmust be taken into account. in this work  we introduce an extended argumentationframeworkand a definition for progressive defeat path. a credulous extension is also presented.
1 introduction
different formal systems of defeasible argumentation have been defined as forms of representing interesting characteristics of practical or common sense reasoning. the central idea in these systems is that a proposition will be accepted if there exists an argument that supports it  and this argument is regarded as acceptable with respect to an analysis performed considering all the available counterarguments. therefore  in the set of arguments of the system  some of them will be acceptable or justified or warranted arguments  while others will be not. in this manner  defeasible argumentation allows reasoning with incomplete and uncertain information and is suitable to handle inconsistency in knowledge-basedsystems.
모abstract argumentation systems  dung  1; jakobovits  1; vreeswijk  1; kowalski and toni  1; benchcapon  1  are formalisms for defeasible reasoning where some components remain unspecified  being the structure of arguments the main abstraction. in this type of systems  the emphasis is put on elucidating semantic questions  such as finding the set of accepted arguments. most of them are based on the single abstract notion of attack represented as a relation among the set of available arguments. if  a b  are in the attack relation then in order to accept b it is necessary to find out if a is accepted or not  but not the other way around. from that relation  several argument extensions are defined as sets of possible accepted arguments. this primitive notion of defeat between arguments is the basis of the study of argumentation semantic  but a more detailed model will be useful to capture specific behaviour of concrete systems and to model well-structured argumentation processes.
모defeat between arguments must be defined over two basic elements: a notion of conflict and a comparison criterion for arguments. finding a preferred argument is essential to determine a defeat relation  simari and loui  1; prakken and sartor  1; amgoud  1; stolzenburg et al.  1 . however  the task of comparing arguments to establish a preference is not always successful. in this case  the classic abstract attack relation is no longer useful as a modelling tool.
모in the dialectical process carried out to identify accepted arguments in the system  some controversial situations may be found. these situations are related to the reintroduction of arguments in this process  causing a circularity that must be avoided in order to prevent an infinite analysis. consider for example three arguments a b and c such that a is a defeater of b  b is a defeater of c and c is a defeater of a. in order to decide the acceptance of a  the acceptance of its defeaters must be analyzed first  including a itself.
모an argumentation line is a sequence of defeating arguments  such as  a b  or  a b c a . whenever an argument a is encountered while analyzing arguments for and against a  a circularity occurs. some systems apply a single restriction to argumentation lines: no previously considered argument is reintroduced in the process. in  simari et al.  1   the relation between circularity in argumentation and the comparison criteria used in the system is established. arguments in such situations are called fallacious arguments and the circularity itself is called a fallacy. in somes systems such as  jakobovits  1; jakobovits and vermeir  1   these arguments are classified as undecided arguments: they are not accepted nor rejected.
모in this work  we show that a more specific restriction needs to be applied  other than to the prohibit reintroduction of previous arguments in argumentation lines. in the next section  we define the extended abstract framework  where conflicts and preference between arguments are considered  in order to characterize progressive argumentation lines.
1 abstract argumentation framework
our argumentation framework is formed by four elements: a set of arguments  and three basic relations between arguments.
definition 1 an abstract argumentation framework  af  is a quartet  where ar is a finite set of arguments   is the subargument relation  c is a symmetric and anti-reflexive binary conflict relation between arguments  c   ar 뫄 ar  and r is a preference relation among arguments.
모here  argumentsare abstract entities  dung  1  that will be denoted using calligraphic uppercase letters. no reference to the underlying logic is needed since we are abstracting the structure of the arguments. the symbol  denotes subargument relation: a  b means  a is a subargument of b . any argument a is considered a superargument and a subargument of itself. any subargument b  a such that is said to be a non-trivial subargument  denoted by symbol . the following notation will be also used: given an argument a then a  will represent a subargument of a  and a+ will represent a superargument of a. when no confusion may arise  subscript index will be used for distinguishing different subarguments or superarguments of a.
모the conflict relation between two arguments a and b denotes the fact that these arguments cannot be accepted simultaneously since they contradict each other. for example  two arguments a and b that support complementary conclusions l and  l cannot be accepted together. the set of all pairs of arguments in conflict on the af is denoted by c. given a set of arguments s  an argument a 뫍 s is said to be in conflict in s if there is an argument b 뫍 s such that  a b  뫍 c. the set conf a  is the set of all arguments x 뫍 ar such that  a x  뫍 c.
모as stated by the following axiom  conflict relations have to be propagated to superarguments.
axiom 1  conflict inheritance  let an af  and let a and b be two arguments in ar. if  a b  뫍
c  then  a b+  뫍 c   a+ b  뫍 c  and c  for any superargument a+ of a and b+ of b.
모the constraints imposed by the conflict relation lead to several sets of possible accepted arguments. for example  if ar = {a b} and  a b  뫍 c  then {a} is a set of possible accepted arguments  and so is {b}. therefore  some way of deciding among all the possible outcomes must be devised. in order to accomplish this task  the relation r is introduced in the framework and it will be used to evaluate arguments  modelling a preference criterion based on a measure of strength.
definition 1 given a set of arguments ar  an argument comparison criterion r is a binary relation on ar. if arb but not bra then a is preferred to b  denoted a  b. if arb and bra then a and b are arguments with equal relative preference  denoted a 뫖 b. if neither arb or bra then a and b are incomparable arguments  denoted
모as the comparison criterion is treated abstractly  we do not assume any property of r. any concrete framework may establish additional rationality requirements for decision making.
example 1  where ar = {a  b 
 c d e}  c = {{a b}  {b c}  {c d}}  {c e}}1 and  is an af according to
definition 1.
모for two arguments a and b in ar  such that the pair  a b  belongs to c the relation r is considered. if a concrete preference is made     then a defeat relation is established. it is said that the preferred argument is a proper defeater of the non-preferred argument. if the arguments are indifferent according to r  then they have the same relative conclusive force. for example  if the preference criterion establishes that smaller arguments are preferred  then two arguments of the same size are indifferent. on the other hand  arguments may be incomparable. for example  if the preference criterion states that argument a is preferred to b wheneverthe premises of a are included in the premises of b  then arguments with disjoint sets of premises are incomparable. this situation must be understood as a natural behaviour.
모when two conflictive arguments are indifferent or incomparable according to r  the conflict between these two arguments remains unresolved. due to this situation and to the fact that the conflict relation is a symmetric relation  each of the arguments is blocking the other one and it is said that both of them are blocking defeaters  pollock  1; simari and loui  1 . an argument b is said to be a defeater of an argument a if b is a blocking or a proper defeater of a. in example 1  argument a is a proper defeater of argument b  while c is a blocking defeater of d and vice versa  d is a blocking defeater of c.
모abstract frameworks can be depicted as graphs  with different types of arcs. we use the arc      to denote the subargument relation. an arrow      is used to denote proper defeaters and a double-pointed arrow      connects blocking defeaters. in figure 1  a simple framework is shown. argument c is a subargument of a. argument b is a proper defeater of c and d is a blocking defeater of b and viceversa.
		 b  d
c  
figure 1: defeat graph
모some authors leave the preference criteria unspecified  even when it is one of the most important components in the system. however  in many cases it is sufficient to establish a set of properties that the criteria must exhibit. a very reasonable one states that an argument is as strong as its weakest subargument vreeswijk  1 . we formalizethis idea in the next definition.
definition 1  monotonic preference relation  a preference relation r is said to be monotonic if  given a  b  then a  c  for any argument b  c.
모we will assume from now on that the criterion r included in the af is monotonic. this is important because any argument a defeated by another argument b should also be defeated by another argument b+. in figure 1  argument b defeats c  but it should also be a defeater of a  because c is its subargument.
1 defeat paths
in  dung  1   several semantic notions are defined. other forms of clasifying argumentsas accepted or rejected can be found in  jakobovits  1; jakobovits and vermeir  1 .
모from a procedural point of view  when evaluating the acceptance of an argument  a set of conflict-related arguments are considered. an important structure of this process is captured in the following definition.
definition 1  defeat path  a defeat path 뷂 of an argumentation framework  is a finite sequence of ar-
guments  a1 a1 ... an  such that argument ai+1 is a defeater of argument ai for any 1   i   n. a defeat path for an argument a is any defeat path starting with a.
모a defeat path is a sequence of defeating arguments. a maximal defeat path is a path that is not included in other path as a subsequence. the length of the defeat path is important for acceptance purposes  because an argument a defeated by an argument b may be reinstated by another argument c. in this case  it is said that argument c defends a against b. if the length of a defeat path for argument a is odd  then the last argument in the sequence is playing a supporting or defender role. if the length is even  then the last argument is playing an interfering or attacker role  simari et al.  1; garc뫣 a and simari  1 . a partner of an argument ai in the path 뷂 is any argument aj playing the same role in 뷂.
모the notion of defeat path is very simple and only requires that any argument in the sequence must defeat the previous one. under this unique constraint  which is the basis of argumentation processes  it is possible to obtain some controversial structures  as shown in the next examples.
example 1 let an argumentation framework where	 
c	and
.
모by axiom 1 if c then also  a b  뫍 c. the same is true for  a c   due the inclusion of .
모the sequence 뷂1 =  a b c a  is a defeat path in 붯  because b is a proper defeater of a  c is a proper defeater of b and a and c are blocking defeaters of each other. the argument a appears twice in the sequence  as the first and last argument. note that in order to analyze the acceptance of a  it is necessary to analyze the acceptance of every argument in 뷂  including a. this is a circular defeat path for a.
모the sequence 뷂1 =  a b c a1   is also a defeat path  because and c are blocking defeaters of each other. note that even when no argument is repeated in the sequence  the subargument was already taken into account in the path  as argument b is its defeater. this sequence may be considered another circular defeat path for a.
모the sequence 뷂1 =  a b c a1   is a defeat path in 붯  because and c are blocking defeaters of each other. in this case  a subargument a1  of a appears in the defeat path for a. however  this is not a controversial situation  as was not involved in any previous conflict in the sequence. argument b is defeating a just because c  and is not related to. defeat path 뷂1 is correctly structured.
모the initial idea of restricting the inclusion of arguments previously considered in the sequence is not enough. even more  example 1 show that forbidding the inclusion of subarguments is not accurate  because valid argumentation lines  as path 뷂1  are thrown apart. two main problematic situations must be taken into account  as shown in figures 1 a  and 1 b . the marked argument is reinserted in the defeat path. in the first case  it appears again as a defeater of c. in the second case  ai is indirectly reinserted by including a superargument in the sequence.
 
	   			
		
	 a 	a	b	c	 a 
 
			
 b 
 
 
		
		
figure 1:  a  direct reinsertion and  b  indirect reinsertion
모both situations are controversial and some well-formed structure must be devised. in the next section we explore these ideas.
1 progressive defeat paths
in this section  we present the concept of progressive defeat paths  a notion related to acceptable argumentation lines defined for a particulary concrete system in  garc뫣 a and simari  1 . first  we formalize the consequences of removing an argument from a set of arguments. this is needed because it is important to identify the set of arguments available for use in evolving defeat paths.
모suppose s is a set of available arguments used to construct a defeat path 뷂. if an argument a in s is going to be discarded in that process  i.e.  its information content is not taken into account   then every argument that includes a as a subargument should be discarded too. let s be a set of arguments and a an argument in s. the operator  is defined as where sp a  is the set of all superarguments of a.
모as stated in axiom 1  conflict relations are propagated through superarguments: if a and b are in conflict  then a+ and b are also conflictive arguments. on the other hand  whenever two arguments are in conflict  it is always possible to identify conflictive subarguments. this notion can be extended to defeat relations. let a and b be two arguments such that b is a defeater of a. then both arguments are in conflict and. by axiom 1  there may exist a subargumentsuch that  b ai  뫍 c. it is clear  as r is monotonic  that  and therefore b is also a defeater of ai. thus  for any pair of conflictive arguments  a b  there is always a pair of conflictive arguments  c d  where c  a and d  b. note that possibly c or d are trivial subarguments  that is the reason for the existence of the pair to be assured.
definition 1  core conflict  let a and b be two arguments such that b is a defeater of a. a core conflict of a and b is a pair of arguments  ai b  where  i  defeater of ai and  iii  there is no other argument such that aj is defeated by b.
모the core conflict is the underlying cause of a conflict relation between two arguments  due to the inheritance property. observe that the core conflict is not necessarily unique.
모it is possible to identify the real disputed subargument  which is causing other arguments to fall in conflict. in figure 1  argument b defeats a because it is defeating one of its subarguments c. the core conflict of a and b is c. in this case the defeat arc between the superarguments may not be drawn.
definition 1  disputed subargument  let a and b be two arguments such that b is a defeater of a. a subargument is said to be a disputed subargument of a with re-
spect to b if ai is a core conflict of a and b.
모the notion of disputed subargument is very important in the construction of defeat paths in dialectical processes. suppose argument b is a defeater of argument a. it is possible to construct a defeat path 뷂 =  a b . if there is a defeater of b  say c  then  a b c  is also a defeat path. however  c should not be a disputed argument of a with respect to b  as circularity is introduced in the path. even more  c should not be an argument that includes that disputed argument  because that path can always be extended by adding b again.
모the set of arguments available to be used in the construction of a defeat path is formalized in the following definition.
definition 1  defeat domain  an af and let 뷂 =  a1 a1 ... an  be a defeat path in 붯. the function di 뷂  is defined as
  d1 뷂  = ar
    where bn is the disputed subargument of ak 1 with respect to ak in the sequence  with 1 뫞 k 뫞 n.
모the defeat domain discards controversial arguments for a given path. the function dk 뷂  denotes the set of arguments that can be used to extend the defeat path 뷂 at stage k  i.e.  to defeat the argument ak. choosing an argument from dk 뷂  avoids the introduction of previous disputed arguments in the sequence. it is important to remark that if an argument including a previous disputed subargument is reintroduced in the defeat path  it is always possible to reintroduce its original defeater.
모therefore  in order to avoid controversial situations  any argument ai of a defeat path 뷂 should be in di 1 뷂 . selecting an argument outside this set implies the repetition of previously disputed information. the following definition characterizes well structured sequences of arguments  called progressive defeat paths.
definition 1  progressive defeat path  let be an argumentation framework. a progressive defeat path is defined recursively in the following way:
   a  is a progressive defeat path  for any a 뫍 ar.
  if 뷂 =  a1 a1 ... an   n 뫟 1 is a progressive defeat path  then for any defeater b of an such that
 b 뫍dn 뷂   and b is not defeated by a partner in 뷂   is a progressive defeat path.
모progressive defeat paths are free of circular situations and guarantees progressive argumentation  as desired on every dialectical process. note that it is possible to include a subargument of previous arguments in the sequence  as long as it is not a disputed subargument.
		 

a       c 
	 	
	b	
   a1 
figure 1: controversial situation
모in figure 1 a controversial abstract framework is shown. for space reasons we do not provide the formal specification  although it can be deduced from the graph. there are seven arguments. there exists an infinite defeat path  a1 b c a1 b c..  which is not progressive. lets construct a progressive defeat path 뷂 for argument a1. we start with 뷂 =  a1 . the pool of arguments used to select a defeater of.
the only defeater belonging to d1 뷂  is b  with disputed subargument a   so we add it to 뷂. now 뷂 =  a1 b  and the pool of available arguments is d1 뷂  = {b b  c c }  where a  and its superarguments were removed. c 뫍 d1 뷂  is a defeater of b so we add it to the path and now 뷂 =  a1 b c . the potential defeater arguments are now in d1 뷂  = {c c }. as there are no defeaters of c in d1 뷂   then the path can not be extended. thus  the resulting sequence  a1 b c  is a progressive defeat path.
1 progressively acceptable arguments
in dung's approach  dung  1  several semantic notions are defined as argument extensions. the set of accepted arguments is characterized using the concept of acceptability. an argument a 뫍 ar is acceptable with respect to a set of arguments s if and only if every argument b attacking a is attacked by an argument in s. it is also said that s is defending a against its attackers  and this is a central notion on argumentation. a set r of arguments is a complete extension if r defends every argument in r. a set of arguments g is a grounded extension if and only if it is the least  with respect to set inclusion  complete extension. the grounded extension is also the least fixpoint of a simple monotonic function:
faf s  = {a : a is acceptable wrt s}.
모the framework of figure 1 may be completed with inherited defeat relations. for example  an arc from b to a1 can be drawn  as shown in figure 1  argument positions are relocated in order to simplify the graph . a cycle is produced involving arguments b  c and a1. according to a skeptical point of view  the grounded extension of the completed framework is the empty set  and no argument is accepted. other notions as stable or preferred extensions may be applied to this framework. however  as a non-conflictive relation is present  a new premise must be stated: if an argument is accepted  then all of its subarguments are accepted. therefore  any extension including  for example  argument a1 should also include argument a .
모when considering subarguments  new semantic extensions can be introduced in order to capture sets of possible accepted arguments.
	a1	b	c	b 
	 	   
			
			     
		 
	a 	a1	c 
figure 1: completed framework
모we will focus here in the impact of progressivedefeat paths in the acceptance of arguments.
definition 1  dialectical space  let  be an af. the dialectical space of an argument a 뫍 ar is the set spa = {뷂|뷂 is a defeat path for a}.
모the dialectical space for a given argument is formed by all of the defeat paths for that argument.
example 1 in the simple argumentation framework of figure 1  spa = { a b   a c d e } and spb = { b }.
	a    	b	 e
		

c   d
figure 1: simple framework
모the dialectical space may be infinite  if cycles are present. in figure 1 every argument has an infinite set of defeat paths. consider the path  b c a1 . because of the cycle   b c a1 b  is also a defeat path. therefore  defeat paths of any lenght may be constructed. in fact  every dialectical space in this framework is infinite.
모cycles of defeaters are very common in argumentation  usually called fallacies. the status of fallacious arguments cannot be determined  although they are not considered accepted as they are controversial in the framework. in many cases  using skeptical semantic concepts  dung  1   an argument that is not taking part of a cycle cannot be accepted due to a fallacy. this is the case of argumenta1 in figure 1. a credulous semantic may be defined using progressive defeat paths.
모several definitions are needed. we consider only progressive argumentation in order to evaluate the acceptance of an argument. maximality of paths is important because all possible arguments must be taken into account.
definition 1  progressive dialectical space  let a be an argument. the progressive reduction of spa  denoted spar  is the set of all maximal progressive defeat paths for a.
모a notion of acceptability analogous to  dung  1  may be defined  using a progressive dialectical space. as usual  an argument a is said to be defended by a set of arguments s if every defeater of a is defeated by an element of s. the defense of a by s occurs in a path 뷂 =  a1 ... an  if a = ai  1 뫞 i 뫞 n and the defender argument ai+1 is in s.
definition 1  defense  given an argument a  a set p of defeat paths and a set of arguments s  a is said to be acceptable with respect to s in p if for every defeater b of a  s defends a against b in at least one element of p.
모if a is defended against b in at least one defeat path in p then argument b is no longer a threat for a  no matter what is the situation in other defeat paths. in the framework of figure 1  argument c is defended by {e} in the defeat path  a c d e  and therefore c is acceptable with respect to {e} in p = { a c d e }. this fact cannot be changed adding new defeaters for d. argument a  however  is not acceptable in spar  because it cannot be defended in  a b .
definition 1  grounded extension  let p be a set of defeat paths. the grounded extension of p is the least fixpoint of the function fp s  = {a : a is acceptable wrt s in p}.
모the grounded extension for a set of defeat paths is analogous to the dung's grounded extension for basic argumentation frameworks. in the framework of figure 1  { a1 b c }. in this set  f    = {c}  f {c}  = {c a1} and f {c a1}  = {c a1}. then  the grounded extension of.
definition 1  warranted extension  let  
r be an argumentation framework. a set of arguments s   ar is said to be a warranted extension  if every argument x in s belongs to the grounded extension of. every argument of s is said to be warranted in 붯.
모in the framework of figure 1   is the warranted extension  as all of those arguments are in the grounded extension of its own progressive dialectical space.
1 related work
since the introduction of dung's seminal work  dung  1  on the semantics of argumentation this area has been extremely active. this approach begins by defining an abstract framework in order to characterize the set of accepted arguments independently of the underlying logic. we followed this line in this work. in dung's presentation no explicit preference relation is included  and the basic interaction between arguments is the binary  non-symmetric  attack relation. this style of argument attack is used in a number of different abstract frameworks  but none of them separates the notion of preference criteria from the conflict relation  as it is usually done in concrete systems. the classic attack relation allows the definition of mutual defeaters: two arguments attacking each other. this is not very realistic  as there is not an attack situation  in the sense of being conflictive and preferred to the opponent  but a controversial situation due to the lack of decision in the system. in our framework  this leads to blocking defeaters.
모several frameworks do include a preference relation. vreeswijk  in  vreeswijk  1   defines a popular abstract framework  making important considerations on comparison criterions. other frameworks that consider the issue of preference relations are introduced in  amgoud  1    amgoud and cayrol  1  and in  amgoud and perrussel  1 . in these frameworks the basic interaction between agents is the classic attack relation  and the preference order is used as a defense against conflictive arguments. the defeat relation arises when the preferences agree with the attack. a similar situation occurs in  bench-capon  1   where a framework that includes a way to compare arguments is defined. a set of values related to arguments is defined in the framework. the defeat occurs when the value promoted by the attacked argument is not preferred to the value promoted by the attacker. again  the preference order is used to check if the attacker argument is preferred  not to elucidate symmetric conflicts as it is used in our framework.
none of these proposals consider the subargumentrelation.
1 conclusions
abstract argumentation systems are formalisms for argumentation  where some components remains unspecified  usually the structure of arguments. in the dialectical process carried out to identify accepted arguments in the system  some controversial situations may be found  related to the reintroduction of arguments in this process  causing a circularity that must be treated in order to avoid an infinite analysis process. some systems apply a single restriction to argumentation lines: no previously considered argument is reintroduced in the process. in this work  we have shown that a more specific restriction needs to be applied  taking subarguments into account in the context of an extended argumentation framework. we introduced an extended argumentation framework and a new definition of progressive defeat path  based on the concept of defeat domain  where superarguments of previously disputed arguments are discarded. we finally defined a credulous semantic for the proposed framework.
1 acknowledgments
this paper was partially supported by the dept. of computer science and engineering  secyt  u.n.sur  the conicet  agencia nacional de promocion cient뫣 뫣 fica y tecnologica뫣  pict 1  pict 1 and pav1   argentina.
references
 amgoud and cayrol  1  leila amgoud and claudette cayrol. on the acceptability of arguments in preferencebased argumentation. in 1th conference on uncertainty in artificial intelligence  uai'1    madison  wisconsin  pages 1  san francisco california  juillet 1. morgan kaufmann.
 amgoud and perrussel  1  leila amgoud and laurent perrussel. arguments and contextual preferences. in computational dialectics-ecai workshop  cd1    berlin  august 1.
 amgoud  1  leila amgoud. using p