
in order to evaluate ontology matching algorithms it is necessary to confront them with test ontologies and to compare the results with some reference. the most prominent comparison criteria are precision and recall originating from information retrieval. precision and recall are thought of as some degree of correction and completeness of results. however  when the objects to compare are semantically defined  like ontologies and alignments  it can happen that a fully correct alignment has low precision. this is due to the restricted set-theoretic foundation of these measures. drawing on previous syntactic generalizations of precision and recall  semantically justified measures that satisfy maximal precision and maximal recall for correct and complete alignments is proposed. these new measures are compatible with classical precision and recall and can be computed.
1 introduction
ontology matching is an important problem for which many algorithms have been provided  euzenat and shvaiko  1 . given a pair of ontologies  these algorithms compute a set of correspondences between entities of these ontologies  called alignment.
¡¡in order to evaluate such algorithms  they are confronted with ontologies to match and the resulting alignment  a  is compared to a reference alignment  r  based on some criterion. the usual approach for evaluating the returned alignments is to consider them as sets of correspondences and to apply precision and recall originating from information retrieval  van rijsbergen  1  and adapted to the matching task. precision and recall are the ratio of the number of true positive  |r ¡É a|  on that of the retrieved correspondences  |a|  and those expected  |r|  respectively. these criteria are well understood and widely accepted.
¡¡there are problems with using precision and recall in this context. as reported in  ehrig and euzenat  1   these measures have the drawback to be of the all-or-nothing kind. an alignment may be very close to the expected result and another quite remote from it and both sharing the same precision and recall values. the reason for this is that the criteria only compare two sets of correspondences without considering if these correspondences are close or remote to each other: if they are not the same exact correspondences  they score zero. they both score identically low  despite their different quality.
¡¡moreover  there can be semantically equivalent alignments which are not identical. a fair measure of alignment quality should rank these alignments with the same values  or at least  closer values than non equivalent alignments . it is thus necessary to design semantically grounded alignment measures instead of measures based on their syntactic equality.
¡¡in this paper we investigate some measures that generalize precision and recall in order to overcome the problems presented above. we first provide the basic definitions of alignments  semantics  precision and recall as well as a motivating example  ¡ì1 . we then present the framework for generalizing precision and recall introduced in  ehrig and euzenat  1   ¡ì1 . from that point we investigate and propose new semantically justified evaluation versions of precision and recall. we discuss their properties and define complementary measures  ¡ì1 . we show on the motivating example that the proposed measures improve on previous ones  ¡ì1 .
1 foundations
we first precisely define what are alignments through their syntax  ¡ì1  and semantics  ¡ì1  before introducing precision and recall adapted to alignments  ¡ì1 .
¡¡we will consider ontologies as logics. the languages used in the semantics web such as rdf or owl are indeed logics. the semantics of the ontologies are given through their set of models.
1 alignments
the result of matching  called an alignment  is a set of pairs of entities from two ontologiesthat are supposed to satisfy a certain relation r with a certain confidence n.
 definition 1  alignment  correspondence . given two ontologies and   an alignment between and is a set of correspondences  i.e.  1-uples :  with e ¡Ê o and being the two matched entities  r being a relationship holding betweenexpressing the level of confidence in this correspondence.
¡¡for the sake of simplicity  we will here only consider correspondences as triples . the best way to compare results with confidence is to plot their precision/recall functions. the examples are only provided for simple ontologies  which are class hierarchies but do not depend on this simple language.
¡¡figure 1 presents two ontologies together with five alignments r  a1  a1  a1  and a1. r is the reference alignment and can be expressed by the following equations:
r = productionemployee =¡Ü workerjapan	accountingmarketing =¡Ü headquartersspain
the other alignments share the first two correspondences with the reference alignment and have additional ones:
 employee = worker	accounting = headquarters electronics ¡Ü japan	computer ¡Ü spain
 employee = worker	accounting = headquarters electronics ¡Ü worker	computer ¡Ü worker
employee = worker	accounting = headquarters optics ¡Ý spain	marketing ¡Ý saleforce
alignment a1 contains more correspondences than the others  it is made of the following:
	employee ¡Ü worker	accounting ¡Ü headquarters
1	employee ¡Ý worker	accounting ¡Ý headquarters production ¡Ü japan	marketing ¡Ü spain
1 semantics of alignments
in the line of the work on data integration  ghidini and serafini  1   we provide a first-order model theoretic semantics. it depends on the semantics of ontologies but does not interfere with it. in fact  given a set of ontologies and a set of alignments between them  we can evaluate the semantics of the whole system in function of the semantics of each individual ontology. the semantics of an ontology is given by its set of models.
definition 1  models of an ontology . given an ontology o  a model of o is a function m from elements of o to elements of a domain of interpretation ¦¤. the set of models of an ontology is noted m o .
¡¡because the models of various ontologies can have different interpretation domains  we use the notion of an equalising function  which helps making these domains commensurate.
definition 1  equilising function . given a family of interpretations  of a set of ontologies ¦¸  an equalising function for is a family of functions ¦Ã =  ¦Ão : ¦¤o  ¡ú u o¡Ê¦¸ from the domains of interpretation to a global domain of interpretation u. the set of all equalising functions is called ¦£.
¡¡when it is unambiguous  we will use ¦Ã as a function. the goal of this ¦Ã function is only to be able to  theoretically  compare elements of the domain of interpretation. it is simpler than the use of domain relations in distributed first order

figure 1: five class alignments between two ontologies  only the classes involved in correspondences are displayed .
logics  ghidini and serafini  1  in the sense that there is one function per domain instead of relations for each pair of domains.
¡¡the relations used in correspondences do not necessarily belong to the ontology languages. as such  they do not have to be interpreted by the ontology semantics. therefore  we have to provide semantics for them.
definition 1  interpretation of alignment relations . given r an alignment relation and u a global domain of interpretation  r is interpreted as a binary relation over u  i.e.  ru   u ¡Á u.
¡¡the definition of correspondence satisfiability relies on ¦Ã and the interpretation of relations. it requires that in the equalised models  the correspondences be satisfied.
 definition 1  satisfied correspondence . a correspondence  is satisfied for an equalising function ¦Ã by two
 models	 	of  	if and only if  and

this is denoted as.
¡¡for instance  in the language used as example  if are respective models of:

definition 1  satisfiable alignment . an alignment a of two ontologiesis said satisfiable if and only if

¡¡thus  an alignment is satisfiable if there are models of the ontologies that can be combined in such a way that this alignment makes sense.
definition 1  models of aligned ontologies . given two ontologies  and an alignment a between these ontologies  a model of these aligned ontologies is a triple
  such that a is satisfied by.
¡¡in that respect  the alignment acts as a model filter for the ontologies. it selects the interpretation of ontologies which are coherent with the alignments. note  this allows to transfer information from one ontology to another since reducing the set of models will entail more consequences in each aligned ontology.
¡¡in this paper we consider those consequences of aligned ontologies that are correspondences.
definition 1  ¦Á-consequence of aligned ontologies . given two ontologies and an alignment a between these ontologies  a correspondence ¦Ä is a ¦Á-consequence of   and a  noted a |= ¦Ä  if and only if for all models
of   the set of ¦Á-consequences is noted by cn a  .
¡¡for ¦Á-consequences  a1 is strictly equivalent to r  i.e.  a1 |= r and r |= a1 . in fact  the aligned ontologies with a1 and r have exactly the same models.
¡¡it is noteworthy that  given an alignment  the ¦Áconsequences of this alignment can be larger than it. if the alignment is not satisfiable  then any correspondence is a ¦Áconsequence of it.
¡¡such a formalism helps defining the meaning of alignments: it tells what are the consequences of ontologies with alignments. it is particularly useful for deciding if delivered alignments are consistent and for specifying what is expected from matching algorithms and how they should be designed or evaluated. it can be naturally extended to distributed systems in the sense of  ghidini and serafini  1   i.e.  sets of ontologies and alignments.
1 precision and recall
precision and recall are commonplace measures in information retrieval. they are based on the comparison of an expected result and the effective result of the evaluated system. these results are considered as a set of items  e.g.  the documents to be retrieved.
¡¡since these measures are commonly used and well understood  they have been adapted for ontology alignment evaluation  do et al.  1 . in this case  sets of documents are replaced by sets of correspondences  i.e.  alignments. the alignment  a  returned by the system to evaluate is compared to a reference alignment  r .
¡¡like in information retrieval  precision measures the ratio of correctly found correspondences  true positives  over the total number of returned correspondences  true positives and


figure 1: two alignments seen as sets of correspondences and their relations.
false positives . in logical terms this is supposed to measure the correctness of the method. recall measures the ratio of correctly found correspondences  true positives  over the total number of expected correspondences  true positives and true negatives . in logical terms  this is a completeness measure. this is displayed in figure 1.
definition 1  precision and recall . given a reference alignment r  the precision of some alignment a is given by
.
and recall is given by
.
¡¡other measures  such as fallout  f-measure  noise  silence  etc. can be derived from precision and recall  do et al.  1 .
¡¡for the examples of figure 1  the two first columns of table 1 display precision and recall. as expected  evaluating the reference against itself yields a maximal precision and recall. all the other alignments share the two first correspondences with r and miss the two other ones so they have a precision and recall of 1%  but a1 which is handicapped by having more than 1 correspondences .
¡¡the semantics of alignments has not been taken into account since an alignment  like a1 equivalent to r score worse than an incorrect and incomplete alignment  like a1.
1 generalizing precision and recall
even if they are well understood and widely accepted measures  precision and recall have the drawback that whatever correspondence has not been found is definitely not considered. as a result  they do not discriminate between a bad and a better alignment.
¡¡indeed  when considering the example of figure 1  alignment a1 is arguably worse than the others  because its additional correspondences are measurably more different from the reference ones  but it scores the same as the other alignments.
¡¡as precision and recall are easily explained measures  it is useful to maintain the precision and recall structure when looking for new measures. this also ensures that measures derived from precision and recall  e.g.  f-measure  still can be computed easily.  ehrig and euzenat  1  proposed an abstract generalization of precision and recall that has been instantiated with syntactic measures. this allows to take into account  near misses   i.e.  incorrect correspondences that are close to the target  and that  for instance  can be more easily repaired .
¡¡instead of comparing alignments set-theoretically   ehrig and euzenat  1  proposes to measure the proximity of correspondence sets rather than the strict size of their overlap. instead of taking the cardinal of the intersection of the two sets  |r ¡É a|   the natural generalizations of precision and recall measure their proximity  ¦Ø a r  .
definition 1  generalized precision and recall . given a reference alignment r and an overlap function ¦Ø between alignments  the precision of an alignment a is given by

and recall is given by
.
¡¡in order  for these new measures to be true generalizations  ¦Ø has to share some properties with |r¡Éa|. in particular  the measure should be positive:
	 a b ¦Ø a b  ¡Ý 1	 positiveness 
and should not exceed the minimal size of both sets:
	 a b ¦Ø a b  ¡Ü min |a| |b| 	 maximality 
this guarantees that the given values are within the unit interval  1 . further  this measure should only add more flexibility to the usual precision and recall so their values cannot be worse than the initial evaluation:
	 a b ¦Ø a b  ¡Ý |a ¡É b|	 boundedness 
hence  the main constraint faced by the proximity is:
         |a ¡É r| ¡Ü ¦Ø a r  ¡Ü min |a| |r|  this is indeed a true generalization because  ¦Ø a r  = |a ¡É r| satisfies all these properties.
1 semantic precision and recall and other measures
our main goal is to design a generalization of precision and recall that is semantically grounded. in consequence  those correspondences that are consequences of the evaluated alignments have to be considered as recalled and those that are consequence of the reference alignments as correct.
¡¡for that purpose we will attempt to follow the guidelines introduced in  ehrig and euzenat  1  as far as possible. we add some more constraints to a semantic precision and recall which consider correctness and completeness of an alignment as their limit:
	r |= a  psem a r  = 1	 max-correctness 
	 max-completeness 
	and rsem a r  = 1	 definiteness 


figure 1: two alignments and their relations through the set of their consequences.
the classical positiveness depends on a = r  it is replaced here by its semantic counterpart. in addition  we rephrase the previous properties by applying them to precision and recall instead of ¦Ø  m is any of precision and recall and m its generalized counterpart :
 positiveness 
 maximality 
 boundedness 
1 ideal model
the natural semantic extension of these measures consists of using the set of ¦Á-consequences  or deductive closure on the prover side  instead of |a¡Ér|. this corresponds to taking as ¦Ø the size of the set identified by d instead of that identified by a in figure 1.
¡¡in this case  the true positive becomes the correspondences that are consequences of both alignments and the usual definitions of true and false positives and negatives are only extended to alignment consequences.
definition 1  ideal semantic precision and recall . given a reference alignment r  the precision of some alignment a is given by

and recall is given by

¡¡this ideal way of dealing with semantic precision and recall can be applied to any language with a semantics. it is not restricted to alignments and as soon as the notion of consequence is defined from an alignment  it can be applied.
¡¡these measures are different from the extensions of  ehrig and euzenat  1  because the divisor has changed. however  for a language with a well-defined semantics this measure is a natural extension of precision and recall. most of the required properties are satisfied by these ideal measures:
property 1. pideal and rideal satisfy:
- positiveness;
- maximality;
- completeness-maximality;
- correctness-maximality;
- definiteness;
pideal and rideal do not necessarily satisfy boundedness.
¡¡this extension has two drawbacks:  1  both numerator and divisor could be infinite  yielding an undefined result  and  1  contrary to the objective of  ehrig and euzenat  1   these measures do not guarantee to provide better results than precision and recall in general  i.e.  we do not have p a r  ¡Ü pideal a r  nor r a r  ¡Ü rideal a r . this is because there is no direct relation between the size of an alignment  or a set of axioms  and the size of its ¦Á-consequences.
1 semantic precision and recall
in order to deal with the problems raised by the infinite character of the set of ¦Á-consequences  a natural way would be to compare the deductive reductions instead of the deductive closures. unfortunately  the deductive reduction is usually not unique. we thus propose to use the deductive closure bounded by a finite set so that the result is finite. it is based on different sets of true positives as :
tpp a r  = {¦Ä ¡Ê a;r |= ¦Ä} = a ¡É cn r 
and
tpr a r  = {¦Ä ¡Ê r;a |= ¦Ä} = cn a  ¡É r
these two sets correspond respectively to the sets b and c in figure 1. they are obviously finite since they are the intersection of a set of ¦Á-consequences with a finite alignment. they are not  however  a real count of the true positive by any means.
the semantic precision and recall are based on these sets:
definition 1  semantic precision and recall . given a reference alignment r  the precision of some alignment a is given by

and recall is given by

¡¡both values are defined when the alignments are finite. moreover  the considered values can be computed if there exists a complete and correct prover for the languages because there is always a finite set of assertions to check  i.e. 
cn a  ¡É r = {¦Ä ¡Ê r;a = ¦Ä} .
property 1.satisfy:
- positiveness;
- maximality;
- boundedness;
- completeness-maximality;
- correctness-maximality;
- definiteness;
¡¡these measures satisfy positiveness and boundedness  since it is clear that cn x    x . they have the classically expected values: psem r r  = 1 and rsem r r  = 1. they do not satisfy anymore  if a ¡É r =    then psem a r  = 1 which is replaced by if cn a  ¡É cn r  =    then psem a r  = 1.
1 compactness and independence
now we can find that a particular alignment is semantically equivalent to some reference alignment. however  what makes that the reference alignment has been chosen otherwise  are there criteria that enable to measure the quality of these alignments so that some of them are better than others 
¡¡indeed  more compact alignments seem to be preferable. compactness can be measured as the number of correspondences. so it is possible to measure either  this absolute number or the ratio of correspondences in the reference alignments and the found alignments:

there is no reason that this measure cannot be higher than 1  if the found alignment is more compact than the reference alignment .
¡¡compactness depends on the raw set of correspondences is however primitive and non semantically grounded  it is especially useful for complete and correct alignments . a more adapted measure is that of independence.

which checks that alignments are not redundant.
¡¡it measures the ratio of independent correspondences in an alignment independently of a reference. if we want to measure independence with regard to the reference alignment  it is possible to measure the independence of correspondences that do not appear in the reference alignment:

in the examples considered here independence measures return 1. for all alignments.
1 examples
in order to compare the behavior of the proposed measure  we compare it with previously provided measures on the examples of figure 1. additionally to standard precision and recall we compare them with two measures introduced in  ehrig and euzenat  1 : symmetry considers as close a correspondence in which a class is replaced by its direct sub- or super-class; effort takes as proximity the measure of the effort to produce for correcting the alignment. a third measure  oriented  is not defined in this context  because of the presence of non-equivalent correspondences .
¡¡the results are provided in table 1. as can be expected  the results of the semantic measures match exactly the correctness and completeness of the alignment. these results
¦Østandardsymm.effortsemanticap	rp	rp	rp	rcomp.r1.	1.1.	1.1.	1.1.	1.1.a1.1	.1.1	.1.1	.1.	.1.a1.1	.1.1	.1.1	.1.	1..1a1.1	.1.1	.1.1	.1.	.1.a1.1	.1.1	.1.1	.1.1	.1.table 1: precision and recall results on the alignments of figure 1.
are far more discriminating than the other ones as far as a1 is concerned. the equivalent alignment a1 which did not stand out with the other measures is now clearly identified as equivalent. an interesting aspect for a1 which is correct but incomplete  is that the other measures fail to recognize this asymmetry. a1 and a1 are both correct and incomplete  they thus have the same semantic values while a1 is arguably more complete than a1  in fact a1 |= a1 : this is accounted better by the syntactic measures.
¡¡no redundancy was present in the selected alignments  so they all score 1% in independence. a1 is less compact than r  and the others  as expected.
1 related work
relevant related work is that of  langlais et al.  1  in computational linguistics   sun and lin  1  in information retrieval and  ehrig and euzenat  1  in artificial intelligence. all rely on a syntactic distance between entities of the ontologies  or words or documents . they have been compared in  ehrig and euzenat  1 . however  these work tackle the problem of measuring how far is a result from the solution. here  the semantic foundations only consider valid solutions: the semantic definitions account for the semantically equivalent but syntactically different results.
¡¡this explains why  with regard to  ehrig and euzenat  1   we used different but compatible properties not fully relying on a proximity measure ¦Ø. hence  it should be possible to combine the semantic precision and recall with the proposed syntactic relaxed measures.
¡¡the results of table 1 show how the semantic approach compares with  ehrig and euzenat  1  on a small example. one important difference is that the syntactic measures can be easily computed because they only work on the syntax of the alignments while the semantic measures require a prover for the ontology languages  and even for the alignment semantics .
1 discussion
evaluation of matching results is often made on the basis of the well-known and well-understood precision and recall measures. however  these measures are based on the syntax of alignments and are not able to take into account the semantics of the formalism.
¡¡in this paper we provided a semantics for alignments based on the semantics of ontologies and we designed semantic precision and recall measures that take advantage of this semantics. the definition of these measures is thus independent from the semantics of ontologies. we showed that these measures are compliant with  an adapted version of  constraints put on precision and recall generalization of  ehrig and euzenat  1  and that they behave as expected in the motivating example.
in particular  the new measures have the expected behavior:
- they are still maximal for the reference alignment;
- they correspond to correctness and completeness;
- they help discriminating between irrelevant alignmentsand not far from target ones.
¡¡the examples have been given based on the alignment of simple taxonomies with very limited languages. however  all the definitions are independent from this language. we plan to implement these measures and apply them to larger sets of data  results of the oaei1 evaluation campaigns for instance . this requires the use of a correct and complete prover for the considered ontology languages.
acknowledgements
this work has been partially supported by the knowledge web european network of excellence  ist-1 . thanks to mark ehrig for pushing me on this track  to stefano zanobini for complaining about oaei-1 results and to antoine zimmermann for his comments.
