
today  the demand of services for comic contents increases because paper magazines and books are bulky while digital contents can be read anytime and anywhere with cellular phones and pdas. to convert existing print comic materials into digital format such that they can be read using the cellular phones and the pdas with small screens  it is necessary to divide each page into scene frames and to determine reading order of the scene frames. the division of comic images into the scene frames can be considered as a type of document layout analysis. we analyzed layout of comic images using density gradient. the method can be applied to comics in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over scene frames. in this research  a method for detecting the scene frame division in comic images using the density gradient after filling the quadrangle regions in each image with black is proposed. experimental results show that 1 percent of 1 pages in four print comic booklets are successfully divided into scene frames by the proposed method.
1 introduction
in this paper  a technique for searching the order to be read and the position of the scene frame in the page is proposed based on structure analysis for the image of each page of print comic materials.
﹛today  communication networks are in wide spread use  copyrightmanagementsystems are in practical use  and many services using digital contents have been started in various fields. the demand of the service for comic contents increases because paper magazines and books are bulky while digital contents can be read anytime and anywhere with cellular phones and pdas. actually  some services for digital comics have been started. ebooksjapan1 is the specialty site which sells the digital books  and the number of selling comics has exceeded 1. in the portal site yahoo! japan  an online delivery service for comics is started by the name of a yahoo! japan comics1. digital comic of rakuten ichiba1 is selling comics of about 1 volumes. many of them provide comic images to users page by page. some of new comics such as  salary man
kintaro 1 are published as the exclusive use of online delivery services. they are displayed on personal computers with respect to each scene frame having bgms and sound effects. their presentations are advanced to next frames automatically.  comic i  and  comic cmoa 1  which are the services intended for cellular phones  have been favorably well received at the point of presenting each scene frame reedited with action effects.
﹛to convert existing print comic materials into digital format such that they can be presented using the cellular phones and the pdas with small screens  it is necessary to divide each page into scene frames and to determine reading order after converting each page into digital form using a scanner.
﹛it is very convenient not to have to use any keyboard or mouse when personal computer users would enjoy comic contents lying sprawled.
﹛as a method for providing such lazy viewing to us  automatic page turning by eye-gaze tracking is considered. in order to implement the automatic page turning  it is necessary to detect the timing when a user finishes the reading of a current page. to detect the timing  it is considered that a eye-gaze tracking system can be used. for that purpose  it is necessary to know the arrangement of scene frames and the reading order in the page.
﹛the division of comic images into the scene frames can be considered as document layout analysis for comic images. in document layout analysis  ishitani  1   the shape of region of interest is assumed to be only rectangle in most cases  while shapes of scene frames in comic images are fundamentally quadrangle which is not limited to rectangle. therefore  a new analysis method for comic images is needed.
﹛we find that the most of comic pages can be divided into scene frames by recursive guillotine cut  and that the process of the guillotine cut makes the tree structure of the scene frames which has an information to determine the order of the scene frames to be read. the concept of guillotine cut is used by optimization of cutting a sheet into quadrangles requested  ono  1 .
﹛as a layout analysis method of comics  yamada et al.  yamada et al.  1  has been realized an algorithm for division and alignment of the scene frame by tracking white region between the scene frame of the comic image. but  only 1 images of comics pages are used by experiments  since main purpose is a realization of the method of image compression and extraction efficiently considered built-in memory capacity and telecommunications cost of cellular phone. and  when the comic balloon or picture are drawn over scene frame  the division of the scene framecan not be well detected in this algorithm.
﹛we analyzed layout of comic images using density gradient  tanaka et al.  1 . the method can be applied to comics in which comic balloons or pictures are drawn over scene frames. experimental results of the method show that 1 percent of 1 pages in four print comic booklets are successfully divided into scene frames.
﹛in this research  we propose an improved detection method of scene frame division for our previous method by preprocessing comic images before detection of division line. and experimental results of scene frame division for sum total of 1 pages of 1 print comic materials are reported.
1 comics structure
1	comics scene frame definition
in this study  the scene frame of comics is defined as a quadrilateral frame composed of four straight lines including picture in its interior. then  the frame lines interrupted by a balloon or a picture are also regarded as scene frame. in addition  the scene frame that consists of imaginary quadrilateral frame line made by other scene frame or the edge of the page is also contained. though scene frames of comics are mere frame in single panel cartoons  scene frames of comics represent time and space in multiple panel cartoons takekumaand natsume  1 . in japanese comics  reading order is fundamentally from right to left and downward. reading order is uniquely decided by the arrangement of scene frames.
1	comics tree structure
the structure of a comics page can be represented by a tree  whose root is the whole comic image  see figure 1 . the tree is obtained by dividing the image recursively. an example of the structure of comics represented by a tree is shown in figure 1.
﹛in the example  firstly the comic image is divided into three frames by horizontal division lines in left part of figure 1  gray lines are these horizontal division lines   and three leaves are made under the root in right part of figure 1.
﹛secondly  the top of the frames  the left leaf which is the elder son on layer 1 in left part of figure 1  is divided into right and left frames by a vertical division line in left part of figure 1  and two leaves are made under the node of the elder son in right part of figure 1.

figure 1: the structure of a comics page  left  and the tree structure of it  right .
figures within scene frames in comics page shown reading order  and this reading order is shown by the depth first search of this tree.

figure 1: the structure of a comics page before division into scene frames  left  and the tree structure of it  right .
﹛thirdly  the right frame is divided into top and bottom scene frame  and two leaves are made under the node.
﹛finally  the bottom of three frames divided into firstly is divided into right and left frames  and two leaves are made at the node.
﹛in this way  the tree in right part of figure 1 is created. the order of scene frames is decided by ordering the leaves of this tree by means of the depth first search. thus  it is shown that the order of scene frames of the comics is decided by forming the tree structure.
1 structure of the scene frame out of scope in our proposed method
in the case where scene frames exist inside of a scene frame  the page can not form the tree structure by dividing the image recursively. figure 1 shows an example of such page.
﹛in such case  it is considered one scene frame including the scene frame which exists in the inside. if such scene frame is the whole image of a page  the scene frame is not chosen as the object of experiments. and if such scene frame appears in the stage on the way of the scene frame division  the scene frame division is not subsequently carried out.
		layer1
vertical division
horizontal division
figure 1: the structure of a comics page at first step  left  and the tree structure of it  right .

figure 1: the structure of a comics page at second step  left  and the tree structure of it  right .
1 division line detection using density gradient
1	representation of straight line
a straight line is represented by 老 which is the length of the perpendicular line from the origin to the straight line and 牟 which is the angle between the x-axis and the perpendicular line  see figure 1 . here  the origin  1  1  is the center of comics image  the x-axis is defined that the rightward direction is positive and the y-axis is defined that the downward direction is positive in a comics page image.
the straight line l 老 牟  are expressed as follows:
	老 = xcos牟 + y sin牟	 1 
1	weighted accumulation value of gradient
the density gradient g牟 x y  of the 牟 direction at the position  x y  on an image is given as follows:
﹛﹛﹛g牟 x y  = gx x y cos牟 + gy x y sin牟  1  where gx x y  is the density gradient of the x-axis direction  and gy x y  is the density gradient of the y-axis direction.
﹛the accumulation value a 老 牟  of the density gradient value of the 牟 direction is obtained along the straight line

figure 1: an example page out of scope in the proposed method  source: title ranma 1  author rumiko takahashi  publisher shogakukan inc.  volume 1 p.1 .

figure 1: representation of straight line l 老 牟 .
l 老 牟 . the set of pixel positions on the straight line l 老 牟  is defined as s 老 牟 . the density gradient value a 老 牟  of the straight line l 老 牟  on an image is given as follows:
		 1 
﹛the central part of the image is expected that there is the high possibility a division line is located. therefore  in order to raise the weight of the central part of the image  a weighted accumulation value of gradient aw 老 牟  is obtained by multiplying a 老 牟  by a gaussian function g 老  on 老 as shown in figure 1.
	aw 老 牟  = g 老 a 老 牟 	 1 
where
g 老  = exp  老1/考1   and 考 =  image height /1.
﹛we use an evaluation value based on the aw 老 牟  to search division lines.
gaussian function

figure 1: weighted accumulation value of gradient.
1	continued white pixels
since scene frames are separated by a white pixel region  white pixels continuedto some extent length exist in the original image near division lines detected by the density gradient. therefore  the constant width  the width ㊣1 pixels  of the original image is scanned at the same angle and white pixels continued to some extent length are searched after the division line was detected from the density gradient image. then  the evaluation value hw 老 牟  of segment without white pixels of some extent length is lowered by multiplying aw 老 牟  by the ratio of the length of the longest white pixel column to that of the segment. here  the threshold of the white pixel is set to 1 in 1 tones of gray scale.
1	t-type division line judgment
in our previous method  the failure showed the side effect that can be applied to the case where comic balloons or pictures overlap with scene frames. for example  when the shape of the region of interest is vertically extending and its correct division lines are t-type  the division of it by the horizontal line should be followed by the division of the lower half by the vertical line. but the vertical division line actually is firstly detected because of the superiority of the accumulated gradient value of the vertical division line over the horizontal one  the division line of layer 1 in figure 1 
﹛the figures  1  to  1  in figure 1 are the layer numbers in the tree structure. in order to correct this problem  a processing for judgment of a t-type division line is added. in vertical division lines and horizontal division lines  each division line that the evaluation value hw 老p 牟p  is the highest is chosen. then  t-type judgment is processed when the ratio between each evaluation value hw 老p 牟p  is less than 1 times.
﹛first  the intersection point of a candidate of the vertical division line and that of horizontal one is detected. next  in the neighborhood at the intersection point  1 ℅ 1pixels  the evaluation values tv and th of the vertical and hori-

figure 1: input image  source: title dragon ball  author akira toriyama  publisher shueisha inc.  volume 1 p.1   left   and the scene frame division image for input image using the convetional method  right .
zontal lines respectively are calculated. last  if tv   th  hw 老p 牟p  for the vertical division line is increased by multiplying it by the ratio of tv to th  and vice versa  so that the t-type is well divided by the following processing.
1	division line decision
the straight line judged as division line is stored in a taboo list. the straight line which is similar to the straight line stored in the taboo list is not chosen as a division line in the matter of subsequently division line detection. under the constraint  the candidate of division line is obtained as  老p 牟p  = argmaxhw 老 牟 .
老 牟
﹛whether l 老p 牟p  is division line or not is decided by whether hw 老p 牟p  ≡ hth or not. as hth is raised  division lines detected is limited more. we decided hth heuristically. when the range of 牟 of detected division lines is  1    牟p ≒ 1   the division line l 老p 牟p  is made to be a vertical division line. when  1    牟p ≒  1  or 1    牟p ≒ 1   the division line l 老p 牟p  is made to be a horizontal division line. in each divided region  the division is repeated by the same procedure until a division line is not detected.
1 implementation 牟 is changed from  1  to 1  at 1  step  and 老 is changed within the image at 1 pixel step. we used straight line generation algorithm dda in the digital image when accumulating the density gradient of each pixel along straight line.
﹛since the outside frame of a page image should not be detected as a division line  we trim input page images such that they do not include the outside frame in advance.
1	preprocessing
as a preprocessing of the division line detection  we approximate the outlines of input images with polygons. in the polygonal approximation  we use the douglas-peucker approximation  hershberger and snoeyink  1 . from the approximated polygons we choose quadrangles. then we fill the region of the quadrangles with black in order to reduce the influence of pictures within scene frames on the evaluation value for division line detection and to avoid detecting division lines within scene frames.
1 experiments
experiments were conducted for the images of pages in print comics excluding the pages composed of single scene frames such as title pages  contents pages  and particular pages in main volume. we used here 1 pages in four print comics. each image of page was scanned in the resolution of 1 by 1 pixels.
1	experimental results
experimental results for the image set of 1 pages in four print comics are shown in table 1.
﹛method a in table 1 denotes our previous method  method b indicated the proposed method without the preprocessing  and method c is the proposed method with the preprocessing.
﹛the results were classified into five groups such as  succeeded    failed    -1    +1   and  the others . the term  succeeded  means the success for the scene frame division. the term  failed  means the failure for the scene frame division. the term  -1  means that one division line is lacking for the correct scene frame division. the term  +1  means that there is one division line over the correct ones. the term  the others  means that there is an excess or deficiency of two division lines and over.
﹛for the left part of figure 1 as an input image  a result by the proposed method is shown in figure 1. in this case the proposed method judging t-type division line is succeeded while our previous method is failed.
table 1: experimental results for the comic image set of 1 pages. values separated by   /   within each cell show the number of pages and ratio %  respectively.
1	discussion
in these experimental results  proposed method have a 1% higher success rate than our previous method. by filling the region of the quadrangles with black  detecting division lines

figure 1: the scene frame division image for left part of figure 1 using the proposed method.
within scene frames was reduced. but  when scene frames that comic balloons or pictures are drawn over scene frames and the outline of comic image is part of scene frame  the scene frames are hardly detected as quadrangles. an example of the latter is shown in figure 1. in the bottom scene frames  two lines have also been detected as a division line.

figure 1: input image  source: title slam dunk  author takehiko inoue  publisher shueisha inc.  volume 1 p.1   left   and the scene frame division image for input image
 right .
﹛several t-type division lines didn't be detected without the preprocessing. but  by preprocessing  some of them are detected. these examples are shown in figure 1. the scene frame division succeeded by judging t-type division line using the proposed method.
﹛since comic drawing style  such as the arrangement of the scene frame  the picture which overlappedwith the frame line of the scene frame  and so on  is different by comic artists  the success rate of the experiments is greatly different by each comic. the experimental results for the comic image set of dragon ball volume 1 are shown in table 1. in the comic image set of dragon ball volume 1  experimen-

figure 1: input image  source: title dragon ball  author akira toriyama  publisher shueisha inc.  volume 1 p.1   upper left   and the scene frame division image for input image using the convetional method  upper right   and the scene frame division image for input image using the proposed method without preprocess  lower left   and the scene frame division image for input image using the proposed method  lower right .
tal results without preprocess have a 1% higher success rate than experimental results of our previous method.
﹛in addition  experimental results of the proposed method have a 1% higher success rate than experimental results without preprocess. the superiority of success rate was remarkable as compared with other three comics.
1 conclusion
in this paper  a method for detecting the scene frame division in comic images using the density gradient after filling the quadrangle regions in each image with black was proposed and experimental results of scene frame division for the sum total of 1 pages were reported. in these experimental results  the success rate was 1% as a whole  and these experimental results have a 1% higher success rate than experimental results of our previous method. it is thought that it is satisfactory success rate for scene frames including complicated arrangement. future works are listed as follows:
table 1: experimental results for the comic image set of dragon ball volume 1.
  we make it possible to correctly divide the failed pages in the experiments here.
  we make it possible to detect the pages with only one scene frames which need not be divided any more.
  in the scene of flashback  the region between neighboring scene frames may be colored by black. we make it possible to correctly divide such regions that the proposed method can not treat at present.
