
this paper proposes a hidden markov model  hmm -based algorithm for automatic decision of piano fingering. we represent the positions and forms of hands and fingers as hmm states and model the resulted sequence of performed notes as emissions associated with hmm transitions. optimal fingering decision is thus formulated as viterbi search to find the most likely sequence of state transitions. the proposed algorithm models the required efforts in pressing a key with a finger followed by another key with another finger  and in two-dimensionalpositioning of fingers on the piano keyboard with diatonic and chromatic keys. fundamental functionality of the algorithm was verified through experiments with real piano pieces. this framework can be extended to polyphonic music containing chords.
1 introduction
this paper proposes an algorithm for automatic decision of piano fingering based on hidden markov models  hmms  see  huang et al.  1  . the goal is to formulate the reasonable hand motion in a piano performance as well as achieving highly reliable decision of piano fingering. this algorithm is expected to be utilized for presenting a model performance to piano learners  estimating the required playing skill of piano pieces  etc. if considered as part of the motion planning of a robot piano player  the proposed approach in this paper may be widely applicable to more general robot's manipulation tasks using robot fingers.
모a number of existing papers on piano fingering decision dealt with monophonic melodies in a single hand through statistical methods  noguchi et al.  1   fingering cost functions defined in between two notes  hart et al.  1; kasimi et al.  1   or rule-based methods  hayashida and mizutani  1 . in  kasimi et al.  1   chords and polyphonic melodies in a single hand were also studied. however  the statistical method presented in  noguchi et al.  1  required score data tagged with fingering information and the rule-based approach  hayashida and mizutani  1  needed to handle conflict resolution between applicable rules.
모past research on automatic fingering decision seemed to focus on the score-to-fingering conversion. instead  we focus on another aspect of fingering-to-performanceconversion which can be easily formulated mathematically by introducing a probabilistic approach.
1 automatic decision of piano fingering
1 formulation of piano fingering
automatic decision of piano fingering can be formulated as a problem to find the most likely fingering adopted by welltrained piano players. it essentially involves probabilistic modeling of piano performance.
모the process by which a piano performer plays a sequence of notes given in a score or in midi format can be considered as consisting of the following three steps:
 1  read the input  score  
 1  decide the  fingering  
 1  and produce the music sounds   performance  .
direct score-to-fingering conversion  from  1  to  1   may face a difficulty in finding a reasonable local objective function representing the ease of playing. for example  the sum of the fingering costs in  hart et al.  1; kasimi et al.  1  lacks mathematical and well-defined meanings.
모in contrast  we focus on another natural order  i.e.  the fingering-to-performance conversion  from  1  to  1  . we will design a fingering model where we can incorporate various probabilistic factors representing physical constraints of fingering and can design a local objective function mathematically. considering an imaginary piano performance  we can determine the most likely fingering for producing that imaginary performance through the maximum a posteriori  map  approach. if the imaginary performanceperfectly corresponds to the given score  the over-all function becomes automatic fingering decision for the given score.
1 mathematical model of fingering with hmm
fingering would be no problem unless music notes were preceded and/or followed by other notes. fingering is actually a problem because one note  or more notes  should be played after another  or others  within the time of the note length assigned to the preceding notes. this implies that fingering is essentially a problem of finding an optimal sequence of smooth state transition  typically  from a state of one finger pressing a key  corresponding a note pitch  to another state of another finger pressing another key. thus  piano performance can be interpreted as the process of generating a sequence n of performed notes from a sequence s of states of the position and form of hands and fingers  where n contains various information  such as duration of key pressing  note strength and tone as well as pitch and note length.
모conversely  automatic fingering decision is considered as the problem of estimating the fingering s which an ideal performer would adopt most likely for the given sequence n of performed notes. here  for the purpose of the model approximation described later  we factorize the sequence n of performed notes into a triplet sequence  y o t   where t is the sequence of note lengths  y the sequence of pitches  and o the sequence of all other information which could include note strength and tone. then the problem to be solved is to calculate the fingering s which maximizes p s| y o t   for a given sequence n =  y o t .
모the most important is the probability whether the player can make a smooth transition from the current note to the next note under the state transition from the current state to the next state of hands and fingers. assuming that the state of hands and fingers at each note ni =  yi oi ti  depends only on the state at its previous note ni 1 and its note length ti 1  the probability of fingering s being used for the sequence n =  y o t  of performed notes is approximated by bayes' theorem as follows:

where p 몫  denotes probability.
모consequently  an arc-emission hmm  mealy machine  fit in very well as a fingering decision model where the states of the hands and the fingers are hidden states and a sequence of performed notes results from the state transition process.
모the output probability function  when transiting from a state s1 to a state s1  is represented by bs1 s1 : m 뫸  1  where m is the set of all the possible note transitions. the function bs1 s1 indicates the likelihood of a given fingering transition s1 뫸 s1 when playing the respective note transitions. for example  let s1 be a state using the 1th finger of the right hand and s1 the 1th finger  and consider the fingering transition from the 1th to the 1th. then the fact that performance of f#뫸g is natural while that of a뫸g is not is shown in figure 1.
1 model formulation through hmms
by using hmms  fingering decision can be looked as the probabilistic inverse problem of estimating the fingering hidden behind a sequence of performed notes  which is parallel to the principle of modern speech recognition. fingering decision is thus formulated as the problem of calculating s which maximizes the a posteriori probabilityp s| y o t   in formula  1  with viterbi search  see  huang et al.  1  .
모as already stated  the main purpose of our paper is to probabilistically formulate the fingering-to-performance process which fits well with hidden markov models  hmms . though often misunderstood  hmm represents a class of

figure 1: piano fingering model using an hmm.
probabilistic structures where the learning process is not always essential. we consider physical constraints in fingering and give reasonable parameter values to examine our model.
모using this formulation  it is also possible to handle with expressive performances. given an  imaginary  expressive music performance  the most likely fingering that has produced such a performance can be estimated according to the a posteriori probability maximization principle.
1 model approximation
the fingering decision model described above can typically contain a very large number of model parameters. in this paper  as a first step  we introduce the following three approximations to narrow down the parameters to a small number.
simplifying the states of hands and the note
information
we suppose that a finger  or a set of fingers  playing a note  or a set of notes  at some point in time is the hidden state and that pitch transition  e.g.  f#뫸g#  is the output. in other words  we ignore o and t. that is:
  1 
where fi is the finger  set of fingers  playing the ith note  set of notes . through this approximation  the set m introduced in section 1 is considered as the set of all the possible pitch transitions.
모this approximation is intended to recognize the fundamental functionality of the decision model by limiting input/output data to the pitches  the primary input for fingering decision  and the fingers  the primary output to be decided . one can however expect the following drawbacks:
  limiting the note information which affects fingering to the pitches might miss important factors of fingering decision  for example  the decision cannot take note lengths into account   and decision accuracy might thus decrease.
  it is impossible to decide the fingering in a broad sense  such as the position/form of the hands  elbow motion  and so on . limiting the decided information to fingers position might narrow the range of possible applications of the algorithm  e.g.  estimating the required playing skill of piano scores based on fingering information .
모the former problem is expected to be solved by including note information as parameters of m in the function bs1 s1 : m 뫸  1  . the latter is expected to be solved by defining possible fingerings  in a broad sense  at each point in time as a discrete set and defining state transitions inside this set.
ignoring octave position
we ignore the octave position of pitches when defining the set m. this means that  for example  the pitch transition d뫸g performed in the middle of the keyboard is supposed to be the same as when performed in the right side of the keyboard  although the keys are not equally easy to play.
모this approximation is intended to reduce the domain m of the output probability function bs1 s1 : m 뫸  1  . however  the difficulty of playing low/high pitch keys in the right/left hand cannot then be considered in the fingering decision model  which will have a negativeeffect when deciding which hand has to be used to play a note. a possible way to deal with this problem is to adjust the output probability functions bs1 s1 for each octave position of the pitch transitions. this adjustment should be done for each bs1 s1 because the range of keys which can be easily played will differ according to the finger used.
simplifying the output probability function
we express a pitch transition in the set m as a two-
모모모모모모모모뫸  dimensional vector d from a key position to another in order to consider two-dimensional  right/left and back/fore  finger position on the keyboard. we suppose that the output probability function bs1 s1 : m 뫸  1   defined on the continuous space m follows a two-dimensional gaussian distribution.
모figure 1 shows an example of such a distribution bs1 s1. it shows that if f#  the origin of the plane  is played with the 1rd finger  = s1  of the right hand  then the note played next with the 1th finger  = s1  of the right hand is most likely to be a  the mean of the distribution .
모this approximation is intended to decrease the number of parameters which enter into the definition of the function bs1 s1 : m 뫸  1   for a given hidden state transition s1 뫸 s1.
모however  this strongly constrains the form of the function bs1 s1  for example  bs1 s1 cannot be locally adjusted   therefore accuracy improvement by parameter learning might be limited. a possible way to solve this problem is to relax the constraint in some way  for example by replacing the gaussian distribution with a distribution in polygonal form.

figure 1: 1d distribution of the output probability function.
1 setting model parameters
it is necessary that not only the structure and the parameters of the fingering decision model but also the specific values taken by the model parameters reasonably explain the motion and the structure of hands and fingers in piano performance. therefore  it is important to choose the values of the model parameters such that they reflect the physical structure of the human hand and the conventions in the actual fingering decision. for example  concerning the physical structure  the finger lengths and the tendency that the stretch between the 1st finger  the thumb  and one of the other fingers is easier than that among two of the 1nd  1rd  1th and 1th fingers should be taken into account  while for the decision conventions one should model the fact that the distance in a finger pair usually corresponds to the distance in a key pair but that finger-crossing sometimes occurs.
모specifically  we should decide the values of the model parameters based on the following ideas:
  the horizontal-direction element of the mean of the output probability function should be close to the distance in the key pair correspondingto the distance in the finger pair. for example  the transition from the 1rd finger to the 1th finger corresponds to twice the width of a white key.
  the depth-direction element of the mean of the output probability function should be close to the difference between the distances from the wrist to the fingertips.
  the tendency of the stretch between the 1st finger and one of the other fingers to be easier should be reflected by choosing a larger value for the variance of the corresponding output probability function.
  the fact that finger-crossing likely occurs in the transition between the 1st finger and one of the other fingers should be reflected by choosing a corresponding output probability function with two distinct peaks. the two peaks will correspond to normal fingering and fingercrossing respectively.
  the fact that the fingering making a transition between the 1rd 1th  and 1th 1th  fingers is often avoided because of the limited independency of those finger pairs should be reflected by choosing a smaller value for the corresponding state transition probability.
1 experiments
this chapter describes the experiment performed to show the fundamental functionality of the proposed algorithm.
1 conditions
we used piano scores of monophonic melodies in a single hand  specifically  the right-hand monophonic melodies in bach's inventionsno. 1 and 1  which include about 1 notes in total . we made the three approximations introduced in section 1. here  larger amount of piano scores should be used in experimental evaluations and we plan to increase our sample data. our current paper  however  focuses on formulating the fingering decision problem  leaving the parameter learning issues to our future study.
모we initially set the values of the model parameters as described in section 1  and then tuned them manually so that the decided fingering becomes as likely as possible. as the manual tuning of model parameters can be regarded as a primitive learning process  we suppose there is little risk of over-fitting where only a few parameters are involved in the manual adjustment.
1 results
the decided fingering is reasonable in many places as can be seen in figure 1:
 a  the distance in the key pair corresponds to that of thefinger pair 
 b  finger-crossing is introduced in appropriate places 
 c  the difficulty of playing a black key with the 1st fingeris reflected.
however  the decided fingering is problematic in a few places as shown in figure 1:
 d  it is difficult to play the same key consecutively with thesame finger for some note lengths 
 e  the distance in the key pair corresponds to that in thefinger pair but the hand motion is awkward.
table 1: experimental values of the state transition probabilities.


figure 1: reasonable parts in the decided fingering.

figure 1: problematic parts in the decided fingering.
1 analysis
the reasonable parts  a - c  in the decided fingering are consideredto be resulted from an appropriatechoice of model parameters described in section 1. meanwhile  the problematic places  d  and  e  are considered to be due to the approximations introduced in section 1. specifically :
 d  the problem comes from the fact that note length information t is ignored in the sequence n =  y o t .
 e  the problem comes from the fact that the set of hiddenstates is lacking of model parameters representing the hand motion.
the problem  e  may be also caused by the assumption made in section 1 that the current state of hands and fingers does not depend on the states at the notes before the previous note.
모we can see that the manually-adjusted model parameters are not far from the values given by the parameter setting guidelines described in section 1  the values are reproduced in tables 1  1 and 1 . in particular  the tendencyto often avoid some fingerings because of the limited independency of the involved finger pair is achieved through corresponding state transition probabilities which are lower by approximately 1 percents than other state transition probabilities.

table 1: values for the mean of the 1d gaussian distribution output probability functions.

table 1: values for the covariance of the 1d gaussian distribution output probability functions.


figure 1: various cases of fingering decision.

1 considerations on the model
1 characteristics of the model
as mentioned in section 1  our problem is to calculate the fingering sequence s which maximizes p s|n  for a given sequence n of performed notes. in this expression we can easily see that the current fingering reflects the notes at all points in time. this can be seen from another viewpoint as follows.
모in section 1  we focused on the transition from the fingering state for one note to that for the next note  and made a minimal assumption in formula  1  that the fingering state at every note only depends on the state at its previous note and its note length. we select  by means of viterbi search  the chain of such transitions throughout the entire score with a high a posteriori probability  hence we can see that the current fingering reflects the notes at all points in time.
모consequently  we can say that the model described in this paper formulates the mechanism of fingering decision from an essential and minimal hypothesis  and that maximum effect is obtained through the tuning of the hmm function and the use of very efficient existing methods such as viterbi search and parameter learning.
1 training the model parameters
experiments still have to be performed on what values the model parameters will converge to through parameter learning. however  from the discussion in section 1 on the result of the manually-adjusted model parameters  one could expect that the convergence values are near to the ones reflecting the physical structure of the human hand and the conventions in the actual fingering decision described in section 1. moreover  besides parameter learning based on score data  it might also be possible to perform parameter learning by measuring the physical structure of a performer's hands.
1 fingering decision based on musicality
the fingering decision algorithm proposed reflects the physical structure of the human hand and the conventionsin the actual fingering  and the fingering decided is intuitive from the viewpoint of the physical motion of the human hand. however  earlier musicological discussions show that counterintuitive fingerings may be chosen to reflect phrasing or motif in music  for example   bamberger  1  .
모we should first work on the fingering decision based on the physical motion of the human hand  which will clarify the limits of such decision and help us work further on the fingering decision based on musicality.
1 estimating the required playing skill
it is possible to calculate the likelihood value per note of the fingering decided by the model  which can be thought of as an expression of the required playing skill of a given piano piece. the value calculated in this way is characteristics of piano scores and expected to be a good feature of a piano piece. this may be used as retrieval criteria for piano piece retrieval or as means for classifying piano pieces according to their required playing skill.
1 discussion on the algorithm
the advantages of the proposed algorithm include:
  the mechanism of fingering decision can be expressed qualitatively and quantitativelyby the characteristics and the values of the model parameters  for example  the stretchability of a finger pair with which two notes are played and the difficulty of moving a finger pair independently  see section 1 .
  reasonability and likelihood of the estimation process and result can be expressed as probabilities. conflicts among applicable rules do not arise as in rule-based approach.
  the algorithm can decide not only the fingers used but the position and the form of the hands and the fingers  based on which applied researches are expected such as estimation of the required playing skill.
모moreover  the proposed algorithm can be extended in the following ways:
  the algorithm can be applied not only to monophonic melodies in a single hand but also to chords and polyphonic melodies in both hands even in the case where the hand to be used is undecided. see the sample scores in figure 1.
  exceptional rules can be applied by limiting the search space  such as partial fingering instructions in scores or the rule that the 1st finger should be used for sforzando on a strong beat.
  parameter learning is possible even from scores with no fingering information by means of baum-welch algorithm  as well as from scores tagged with fingering information. moreover  parameter learning might be possible by measuring the physical structure of a performer's hands  such as their size or the stretchability and independency of finger pairs.
  multiple-solution search can be realized by n-best search.
모the proposedalgorithmis expected to be applied to various technologies. we give several examples below.
  application based on required playing skill: estimating the required playing skill and generating practice planning from given scores. piano piece retrieval using the degree of required playing skil as a retrieval key  for the estimation of the required playing skill  see 1 .
  application to composition and transcription: judging whether an automatically-composed piano piece is actually playable. basic technology for automatic composition and transcription of piano pieces which are both easy to perform and effective  such as transcribing from orchestral to piano pieces.
  application to other instruments:
applying the mathematical model proposedin this paper to other instruments such as guitar.
1 future works
we are currently working on the implementation of a more accurate version of our model and of the parameter learning.
모we also plan to extend our model to chords and polyphonic melodies in both hands including the case where the hand to be used is undecided. considering 1 = 1  states to represent all the combinations of the 1 fingers each of which is pressing a key or not  polyphonic fingering problem can be solved in a way similar to the monophonic case. in addition  we will work on comparative performance evaluations of other approaches and models  considering expressive piano performances.
1 summary
this paper proposed an algorithm for automatic decision of piano fingering based on hmms. piano performance is modeled as a process by which a sequence of respective  hidden  state transitions produces a sequence of respective note transitions and the maximum a prosteriori solution is obtained by the viterbi algorithm. the algorithm proposed has multiple advantages and can be extended and applied in many ways. the experiment based on the approximated model has shown the fundamental functionality of this algorithm.
