
personalized ranking systems and trust systems are an essential tool for collaboration in a multi-agent environment. in these systems  trust relations between many agents are aggregated to producea personalized trust rating of the agents. in this paper we introduce the first extensive axiomatic study of this setting  and explorea wide array of well-knownand new personalized ranking systems. we adapt several axioms  basic criteria  from the literature on global ranking systems to the context of personalized ranking systems  and prove strong properties implied by the combination of these axioms.
1 introduction
personalized ranking systems and trust systems are an essential tool for collaboration in a multi-agent environment. in these systems  agents report on their peers performance  and these reports are aggregated to form a ranking of the agents. this ranking may be either global  where all agents see the same ranking  or personalized  where each agent is provided with her own ranking of the agents. examples of global ranking systems include ebay's reputation system resnick and zeckhauser  1  and google's pagerank page et al.  1 . examples of personalized ranking systems include the personalized version of pagerank haveliwala et al.  1  and the moletrust ranking system avesani et al.  1 . furthermore trust systems which provideeach agent with a set of agents he or she can trust  can be viewedas personalized ranking systems which supply a two-level ranking over the agents. many of these systems can be easily adapted to provide a full ranking of the agents. examples of trust systems include openpgp pretty good privacy 's trust system callas et al.  1   the ranking system employed by advogato levien  1   and the epinions.com web of trust.
　a central challenge in the study of ranking systems  is to provide means and rigorous tools for the evaluation of these systems. this challenge equally applies to both global and personalized ranking systems. a central approach to the evaluation of such systems is the experimental approach. in the general ranking systems setting  this approach was successfully applied to hubs&authorities kleinberg  1  and to various other ranking systems borodin et al.  1 . in the trust systems setting   massa and avesani  1  suggest a similar experimental approach.
　a more analytical approach to the evaluation of ranking systems is the axiomatic approach. in this approach  one considers basic properties  or axioms  one might require a ranking system to satisfy. then  existing and new systems are classified according to the set of axioms they satisfy. examples of such study in the global ranking systems literature include  cheng and friedman  1; borodin et al.  1; tennenholtz  1; altman and tennenholtz  1b . typical results of such study are axiomatizations of particular ranking systems  or a proof that no ranking system satisfying a set of axioms exists. for example  in  altman and tennenholtz  1b we provide a set of axioms that are satisfied by the pagerank system and show that any global ranking system that satisfies these axioms must coincide with pagerank. while the axiomatic approach has been extensively applied to the global ranking systems setting  no attempt has been made to apply such an approach to the context of personalized ranking systems. in this paper  we introduce an extensive axiomatic study of the personalized ranking system setting  by adapting known axioms we have previously applied to global ranking systems altman and tennenholtz  1a; 1a . we compare several existing personalized ranking systems in the light of these axioms  and provide novel ranking systems that satisfy various sets of axioms. moreover  we prove a characterization of the personalized ranking systems satisfying all suggested axioms.
　we consider four basic axioms. the first axiom  self confidence  requires that an agent would be ranked at the top of his own personalized rank. the second axiom  transitivity  captures the idea that an agent preferred by more highly trusted agents  should be ranked higher than an agent preferred by less trusted agents. the third axiom  ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives  requires that under the perspective of any agent  the relative ranking of two other agents would depend only on the pairwise comparisons between the rank of the agents that prefer them. the last axiom  strong incentive compatibility  captures the idea that an agent cannot gain trust by any agent's perspective by manipulating its reported trust preference.
　we show a ranking system satisfying all four axioms  and ranking systems satisfying every three of the four axioms  but not the fourth . furthermore  we provide a characterization proving that any ranking system satisfying all four axioms must satisfy a strong property we call maximum-transitivity.
　this paper is organizedas follows. section 1 introduces the setting of personalized ranking systems and discusses some known system. in section 1 we present our axioms  and classify the ranking systems shown according to these axioms. in section 1 we providea characterization of the ranking systems satisfying all of our axioms  and in section 1 we study ranking systems satisfying every three of the four axioms. section 1 presents some concluding remarks and suggestions for future research.
1 personalized ranking systems
1 the setting
before describing our results regarding personalized ranking systems  we must first formally define what we mean by the words  personalized ranking system  in terms of graphs and linear orderings:
definition 1. let a be some set. a relation r   a 〜 a is called an ordering on a if it is reflexive  transitive  and complete. let l a  denote the set of orderings on a.
notation 1.  be an ordering  then  is the equality predicate ofis the strict order induced by . formally  if and only if; and a   b if and only if but not.
　given the above we can define what a personalized ranking system is:
definition 1. let gsv be the set of all directed graphs g =  v e  such that for every vertex v （ v   there exists a directed path in e from s to v. a personalized ranking system prs  f is a functional that for every finite vertex set v
and for every source s （ v maps every graph g （ gsv to an ordering.
　we require that there is a path of trust from the source to every agent  because agents that have no path from s cannot be ranked  as no agent trusted by s to any level has any connection with these agents. this assumption is satisfied when g is strongly connected. as it turns out  in most practicaltrust systems and social networks  a large portion of the agents are part of a strongly connected component. our study also applies in cases where such paths do not exist  however for the ease of exposition we elect to keep this assumption.
1 some personalized ranking systems
we shall now give examples of some known prss. a basic ranking system that is at the basis of many trust systems ranks the agents based on the minimal distance of the agents from the source.
notation 1. let g =  v e  be some directed graph and v1 v1 （ v be some vertices  we will use dg v1 v1  to denote the length of the shortest directed path in g between v1 and v1.
definition 1. the distance prs fd is defined as follows: given a graph g =  v e  and a source dg s v1  − dg s v1 
　another family of prss can be derived from the wellknown pagerank ranking system by modifying the so-called teleportation vector in the definition of pagerank haveliwala et al.  1 . these system can be defined as follows:
definition 1. let g =  v e  be a directed graph  and assume v = {v1 v1 ... vn}. the pagerank matrix ag  of dimension n 〜 n  is defined as:

where sg v  is the successor set of v in g.
　the personalized pagerank procedureranks pages according to the stationary probability distribution obtained in the limit of a random walk with a random teleportation to the source s with probability d; this is formally defined as follows:
definition 1. let g =  v e  be some graph  and assume v = {s v1 ... vn}. let r be the unique solution of the system  1 d ，ag，r+d， 1 ... 1 t = r. the personalized pagerank with damping factor d of a vertex vi （ v is defined as. the personalized pagerank ranking
system with damping factor d is a prs that for the vertex set
v and source s （ v maps  where  is defined as: for all if and only if
pprg sd	 vi  ＋ pprg sd	 vj .
　we now suggest a variant of the personalized pagerank system  which  as we will later show  has more positive properties than personalized pagerank.
definition 1. let g =  v e  be some graph and assume v = {s v1 ... vn}. let bg be the link matrix for g. that is   bg i j = 1    i j  （ e. let α = 1/n1 and let r be the unique solution of the system α，bg ，r+ 1 ... 1 t = r. the α-rank of a vertex vi （ v is defined as αrg s vi  = ri. the α-rank prs is a prs that for the vertex set v and source s （ v maps  where  is defined as:
 if and only if αrg s vi  ＋
αrg s vj .
　the α-rank system ranks the agents based on their distance from s  breaking ties by the summing of the trust values of the predecessors. by selecting α = 1/n1  it is ensured that a slight difference in rank of nodes closer to s will be more significant than a major difference in rank of nodes further from s.
　additional personalized ranking systems are presented in section 1 as part of our axiomatic study.
1 some axioms
a basic requirement of a prs is that the source - the agent under whose perspective we define the ranking system - must be ranked strictly at the top of the trust ranking  as each agent implicitly trusts herself. we refer to this property as self confidence.
definition 1. let f be a prs. we say that f satisfies self confidence if for all graphs g =  v e   for all sources s （ v and for all vertices v （ v   {s}: v  fg s s.
　we have previously defined altman and tennenholtz  1a  a basic property of  global  ranking systems called strong transitivity  which requires that if an agent a's voters are ranked higher than those of agent b  then agent a should be ranked higher than agentb. we adapt this notion to the personalized setting  and provide a new weaker notion of transitivity as follows:
definition 1. let f be a prs. we say that f satisfies quasi transitivity if for all graphs g =  v e   for all sources s （ v
and for all vertices v1 v1 （ v   {s}: assume there is a 1 mapping s.t. for all.
then further satisfies strong quasi transitivity if for all v （ p v1 : v   f v   then v1   v1. f further satisfies strong transitivity if when either f is not onto or for some v （ p v1 : v   f v   then v1   v1.
　this new notion of transitivity requires that agents with stronger matching predecessors be ranked at least as strong as agents with weaker predecessors  but requires a strict preference only when all matching predecessors are strictly stronger.
　a standard assumption in social choice settings is that an agent's relative rank should only depend on  some property of  their immediate predecessors. such axioms are usually called independenceof irrelevantalternatives iia axioms. in the ranking systems setting  we require that the relative ranking of two agents must only depend on the pairwise comparisons of the ranks of their predecessors  and not on their identity or cardinal value. our iia axiom  called ranked iia  differs from the one suggested by  arrow  1  in the fact that ranked iia does not consider the identity of the voters  but rather their relative rank. we adapt this axiom of ranked iia to the setting of prss  by requiring this independence for all vertices except the source.
　to formally define this condition  one must consider all possibilities of comparing two nodes in a graph based only on ordinal comparisons of their predecessors.  altman and tennenholtz  1a  call these possibilities comparison profiles:
definition 1.	a comparison profile is a pair 
where a =  a1 ... an   b =  b1 ... bm   a1 ... an b1 ... bm （ n  a1 ＋ a1 ＋ ，，， ＋ an  and b1 ＋ b1 ＋ ，，， ＋ bm. let p be the set of all such profiles. let pg v  denote the predecessor set of v in a graph g. a prs f  a graph g =  v e   a source s （ v   and a pair of vertices v1 v1 （ v are said to satisfy such a comparison profile if there exist 1 mappings
 such that given
 defined as:
for all  i x   j y  （  {1} 〜
　we now require that for every such profile the personalized ranking system ranks the nodes consistently:
definition 1. let f be a prs. we say that f satisfies ranked independence of irrelevant alternatives  riia  if there exists a mapping such that for every graph g =
 v e   for every source s （ v and for every pair of vertices v1 v1 （ v  {s} and for every comparison profile p （ p that v1 and v1 satisfy . we will sloppily use the notation ab to denote.
　this iia axiom intuitively means that the relative ranking of agents must be consistent across all comparisons with the same rank relations.
　personalized ranking systems do not exist in empty space. agents may wish to manipulate their reported preferences in order to improve their trustworthiness in the eyes of a specific agent. therefore  the incentives of these agents should in many cases be taken into consideration. we have previously defined the notion of strong incentive compatibility altman and tennenholtz  1a   which requires that agents will not be ranked better for stating untrue preferences  under the assumption that the agents are interested only in their own ranking  with a strong preference with regard to rank. this notion is also natural when adapted to the personalized setting  as follows:
definition 1. let f be a prs. f satisfies strong incentive compatibility if for all true preference graphs g =  v e   for all sources s （ v   for all vertices v （ v   and for all preferences vv   v reported by
 be the reported preference graph. then ; and if  then
.
1 satisfication
we will now demonstrate these axioms by showing which axioms are satisfied by the prss mentioned in section 1.
proposition 1. the distance prs fd satisfies self confidence  ranked iia  strong quasi transitivity  and strong incentive compatibility  but does not satisfy strong transitivity.
proof. self-confidence is satisfied by definition of fd. fd satisfies riia  because it ranks every comparison profile consistently according to the following rule:
.
that is  any two vertices are compared according to their strongest predecessor. fd satisfies strong quasi transitivity  because when the 1 relation of predecessors exists  then also the strongest predecessors satisfy this relation.
　to prove that fd satisfies strong incentive compatibility  note the fact that an agent x cannot modify the shortest path from s to x by changing its outgoing links since any such shortest path necessarily does not include x  except as target . moreover  x cannot change the shortest path to any agent y with d s y  ＋ d s x   because x is necessarily not on the shortest path from s to y. therefore  the amount of agents ranked above x and the amount of agents ranked equal to x cannot change due to x's manipulations.
　to prove fd does not satisfy strong transitivity  consider the graph in figure 1a. in this graph  x and y are ranked the same  even though  in contradiction to strong transitivity.	

figure 1: graphs proving prs do not satisfy axioms.
proposition 1. the personalized pagerank rankingsystems satisfy self confidence if and only if the damping factor is set to more than . moreover  personalized pagerank does not satisfy quasi transitivity  ranked iia or strong incentive compatibility for any damping factor.
proof. to prove the that ppr does not satisfy self-confidence for  consider the graph in figure 1b. for any damping factor d  the ppr will be ppr s  = d and ppr x  = 1 d. if then ppr s  ＋ ppr x  and thus  in contradiction to the self confidence axiom.
　ppr satisfies self-confidence for because then ppr s  − d   1  while for all v （ v   {s}  ppr v  ＋
1   d   1.
　to prove that ppr does not satisfy strong quasi transitivity and ranked iia  consider the graph in figure 1c. the ppr of this graph for any damping factor d is as follows: ppr s  =

. therefore  the ranking of this graph is:
s. quasi transitivity is violated because b   c even though p b  = p c  = a. this also violates ranked iia because the ranking profile must be ranked as equal due to trivial comparisons such as a and a.
　strong incentive compatibility is not satisfied  because  in the previous graph  if any of the b agents b would have voted for themselves  they would have been ranked b   b   c   a   s  which is a strict increase in b rank. 
　strong transitivity is also satisfied by a natural prs - the α-rank system:
proposition 1. the α-rank system satisfies self confidence and strong transitivity  but does not satisfy ranked iia or strong incentive compatibility
1 a characterization theorem
in order to characterize the systems satisfying the aforementioned axioms  we need to define some stronger properties that  as we will show  are implied by the combination of the axioms.
we start by defining stronger notions of transitivity:
definition 1. let f be a prs. we say that f satisfies weak maximum transitivity if for all graphs g =  v e   for all sources s （ v and for all vertices v1 v1 （ v   {s}: let m1 m1 be the maximally ranked vertices in p v1  p v1 

figure 1: example of graph from proof of theorem 1.
respectively. assume. then 
ther satisfies strong maximum transitivity if when m1   m1 then also v1   v1.
　the distance prs fd can be seen as a member in a family of prss that rank the agents first according to their distance from the source. we define this property below:
definition 1. let f be a prs. we say that f satisfies the distance property if for all graphs g =  v e   for all sources s （ v and for all vertices v1 v1 （ v   {s}  if d s v1   
.
　the distance property and distance prs are strongly linked to the new notions of strong quasi transitivity:
proposition 1. let f be a prs that satisfies weak maximum transitivity and self confidence. then  f satisfies the distance property. furthermore  a prs f satisfies strong maximum transitivity and self confidence if and only if f is the distance system fd.
　we now claim that weak maximum transitivity is implied by the combination of the axioms presented above.
theorem 1. let f be a prs that satisfies self confidence  strong quasi transitivity  riia and strong incentive compatibility. then  f satisfies weak maximum transitivity.
　the proof of theorem 1 is involved  and thus we only supply a sketch of the proof.
proof.  sketch  in order to show that f satisfies weak maximum transitivity  we will show that for every comparison profile where the ranking must be consistent with weak maximum transitivity. we do this by building a special graph for each profile. figure
1 contains such a graph for the profile.
　we shall now demonstratethe prooffor this graph. assume for contradiction that . note that by strong quasi transitivity and self confidence  
. therefore a and b satisfy this comparison profile  and from our assumption. by strong quasi transitivity  a  1  and thus from our assumption also. now consider the point of view of agent 1. she can perform a manipulation by not voting for b. this manipulation must not improve her relative rank. as the relative ranks of the numbered agents and s are unaffected by this manipulation  it cannot affect the ranks of a and b relative to 1  and thus after the edge  1 b  is removed  we still have. the same is true for agent 1 with regard to the edge  1 b   maintaining. after removing these links  b is pointed to by only agent 1 and thus is ranked  in contradiction to.
the same idea could be applied to any comparison profile
 where  thus com-
pleting the proof.	
　theorem 1 provides us with an important result where a set of simple and basic axioms lead us to the satisfication of a strong property. this theorem is especially important since this property limits our scope of prss to those that satisfy the distance property:
corollary 1. let f be a prs that satisfies self confidence  strong quasi transitivity  riia and strong incentive compatibility. then  f satisfies the distance property.
1 relaxing the axioms
we shall now prove the conditions in theorem 1 are all necessary by showing prss that satisfy each three of the four conditions  but do not satisfy weak maximum transitivity. some of these systems are quite artificial  while others are interesting and useful.
proposition 1. there exists a prs that satisfies strong quasi transitivity  riia and strong incentive compatibility  but not self confidence nor weak maximum transitivity.
proof. let be the prs that ranks strictly the opposite of the depth system fd. that is .
the proof  satisfies strong quasi transitivity  riia and strong incentive compatibility follows the proof of proposition 1  with the following rule for ranking comparison profiles:
.
 does not satisfy self confidence  because  by definition s is weaker than all other agents  and does not satisfy weak maximum transitivity because in graph from figure 1a  fd  ranks x and y equally even though the strongest predecessor of y  which is x  is stronger than the strongest predecessor of x  which is s.	
　this prs is highly unintuitive  as the most trusted agents are the ones furthest from the source  which is by itself the least trusted. relaxing strong quasi transitivity leads to a prs that is almost trivial:
proposition 1. there exists a prs that satisfies self confidence  ranked iia and strong incentive compatibility  but not strong quasi transitivity nor weak maximum transitivity.
proof. let f be the prs which ranks for every g =  v e   for every source s （ v   and for every v1 v1 （ v   {s}:
. that is  f ranks s on the top  and all of the other agents equally. f trivially satisfies self confidence  riia and strong incentive compatibility  as s is indeed stronger than all other agents and every comparison profile is ranked equally. f does not satisfy strong quasi transitivity or weak maximum transitivity  because in a chain of vertices starting from s all except s will be ranked equally  
1 relaxing ranked iia
when ranked iia is relaxed  we find a new ranking system that ranks according to the distance from s  breaking ties according to the number of paths from s. this system can be seen as a version of pgp's trust system  when manipulating certificate levels and trust ratings globally to convert the binary trust system to a prs.
notation 1. let g =  v e  be some directed graph and v1 v1 （ v be some vertices  we will use ng v1 v1  to denote the number of simple directed paths in g between v1 and v1.
definition 1. the path count prs fp is defined as follows: given a graph g =  v e  and a source s  for all v1 v1 （
v   { }
proposition 1. the path count prs fp satisfies self confidence  strong quasi transitivity and strong incentive compatibility  but not ranked iia nor weak maximum transitivity.
1 relaxing incentive compatibility
when we relax incentive compatibility we find an interesting family of prss that rank the agents according to their indegree  breaking ties by comparing the ranks of the strongest predecessors. these recursive in-degree systems work by assigning a rational number trust value for every vertex  that is based on the following idea: rank first based on the indegree. if there is a tie  rank based on the strongest predecessor's trust  and so on. loops are ranked as periodical rational numbers in base  n + 1  with a period the length of the loop  only if continuing on the loop is the maximally ranked option.
　the recursive in-degree systems differ in the way different in-degrees are compared. any monotone increasing mapping of the in-degrees could be used for the initial ranking. to show these systems are well-defined and that the trust values can be calculated we define these systems algorithmically as follows:
definition 1. letbe a monotone nondecreasing function. the recursive in-degree prs with rank function r is defined as follows: given a graph g =  v e  and a source s 
value v1 r 1  − value v1 r 1  
where value is the function defined in algorithm 1  and 1 is the functionthat maps every vertex in g to zero.
fact 1. the recursive in-degreeprs idr with rank function r  when r is constant  r 《 r1  is exactly equal to the distance prs  idr 《 fd .
　an example of the values assigned for a particular graph and source when r is the identity function is given in figure 1. as n = 1  the values are decimal. note that the loop  b d 
generates a periodical decimal value division in step 1 in algorithm 1  where 
1 .
algorithm 1 the recursive in-degree algorithm

procedure value x r h  - returns numeric trust of node x under weight function r given previously seen nodes h:
1. if x = s: return n+1n .
1. let d := r |p x | .
1. let
		otherwise.
1. if h x  = 1:
 a  return{value
1. otherwise:
 a  let.
 b  return.

figure 1: values assigned by the recursive in-degree algorithm
proposition 1. for every nondecreasing rank function r :  which is not constant  the recur-
sive in-degree prs idr satisfies self confidence  strong quasi transitivity and ranked iia  but not strong incentive compatibility nor weak maximum transitivity.
1 concluding remarks
we have presented a method for the evaluation of personalized ranking systems by using axioms adapted from the ranking systems literature  and evaluated existing and new personalized ranking systems according to these axioms. as most existing prss do not satisfy these axioms  we have presented several new and practical personalized ranking systems that satisfy subsets  or indeed all  of these axioms. we argue that these new ranking systems have a more solid theoretical basis  and thus may very well be successful in practice.
　furthermore  we have proven a characterization theorem that limits the scope of the search for ranking systems satisfying all axioms  and shows that any system which satisfies all these axioms  must have certain strong properties  and indeed must rank according to the distance rule.
　this study is far from exhaustive. further research is due in formulating new axioms  and proving representation theorems for the various prss suggested in this paper. an additional avenue for research is modifying the setting in order to accommodate for more elaborate input such as trust/distrust relations or numerical trust ratings  as seen in some existing personalized ranking systems used in practice.
