
we extend traditionaldescription logics  dl  with a simple mechanismto handle approximateconcept definitions in a qualitative way. often  for example in medical applications  concepts are not definable in a crisp way but can fairly exhaustively be constrained through a particular sub- and a particular super-concept. we introduce such lower and upper approximations based on rough-setsemantics  and show that reasoning in these languages can be reduced to standard dl satisfiability. this allows us to apply rough description logics in a study of medical trials about sepsis patients  which is a typical application for precise modeling of vague knowledge. the study shows that rough dl-based reasoning can be done in a realistic use case and that modeling vague knowledge helps to answer important questions in the design of clinical trials.
1 introduction
many existing knowledge modeling techniques are best suited for modeling crisp knowledge. in practice  however  it is not always possible to make clear-cut distinctions. a modeler frequently has to account for borderline cases. approaches that do take such uncertainty or vagueness into account often do this via some kind of weighting mechanism or an approach based on fuzzy sets. a drawback of these approaches is that uncertainty is introduced in the model  which often has the consequence that no crisp answers can be given to queries on the model. this paper introduces a complemen-
tary mechanism that allows for modelling of vague knowledge by crisp specification of approximations of a concept.
　medicine is a typical domain where concepts cannot always be described in a crisp manner. e.g.  the definition of a disease is not always clear-cut  especially if a single marker is lacking that distinguishes a patient with a disease from a patient without the disease. this is common in psychiatry and in diseases in which the underlying pathology of the disease is unclear. an example of the latter is sepsis. rough description logics  rough dl  provides us with the possibility to describe such diseases for which a crisp definition is lacking.
　rough dl extends classical description logic   baader et al.  1   by two modal-like operators  called the lower and upper approximations. in the spirit of rough set theory  pawlak  1   two concepts approximate an underspecified  vague  conceptas particularsub- and super-concepts  describing which elements are definitely  respectively possibly  elements of the concept. the following picture illustrates the general idea:

　each square denotes a set of domain elements  which cannot further be discerned by any available criterion. then  the circled line denotes the set of septic patients  i.e.  the vague concept which we are incapable to formally define. if we capture this lack of criteria to discern between two objects as a indiscernibility relation dis゛  we can formally define the upper approximation as the set of patients that are indiscernible from at least one septic patient.

septic 《 {pat1 |   pat1: dis゛ pat1 pat1  & pat1 （ septic}.
similarly  we can define the lower approximation as the set of patients containing all  and only those patients  for which it is known that all indiscernible patients must be septic.
septic 《{pat1 |   pat1: dis゛ pat1 pat1  ★ pat1 （ septic}

in our picture  the upper approximation is depicted as the union of the dark squares  the lower approximation   and the gray squares  the boundary. this semantics can be transferred to rough dl approximations in a straightforward way: the patients in the concept septic are the definitely septic pa-


tients  those that are unmistakably septic  the concept septic models the possibly septic patients  as opposed to the white squares  which model definitely not septic patients. these approximations are to be defined in a crisp way.
　technically  rough dl are very simple languages  as they can be simulated with traditional dl without added expressiveness. this means that reasoning can be performed by translation  and subsequent use of a common dl reasoner. we consider it a big advantage of our approach that we can use an optimised dl reasoner without having to develop new ad-hoc decision procedures and implementations. in other words  our rough dl's are strictly speaking not more expressive than traditional dl's  but the notions that we introduce are useful modeling devices for specific types of knowledge  namely non-crisp concepts .
　our current research was motivated by a recent study of the definitions for sepsis used in clinical trials. before a medical treatment can be used in daily clinical practice  its effect and impact on the patient have to be investigated in a clinical trial. when several trials have been performed it is interesting to compare the results of those trials. unfortunately  the nine different trials that were investigated in  peelen et al.  1  showed too much variation in their definitions of severe sepsis patients to enable a fair comparison of trial results.
　we show how to use rough dl to formalise and compare sepsis definitions used in different trials. describing sepsis through approximations enforces powerful semantic consequences. rough dl turns out to be an appropriate logical representation language to model vague concepts and provide crisp answers to queries  and can thereby assist in the validation of existing and  ultimately  the construction of new trials.
　the remainder of the paper is structured as follows. first  we introduce our use-case  the medical condition sepsis. in section 1  rough dl is defined as an extension to standard dl for modeling vague knowledge. we give some logical consequences of the semantics of the extension  and explain how reasoning can be done by reducing rough dl to standard dl reasoning. in section 1  we use rough dl to model definitions of severe sepsis used in different clinical trials. based on real patient data we evaluate the design of the trials.
1 sepsis: a condition with a vague definition
severe sepsis is our example for vague information throughout the paper. therefore  we will briefly provide some medical background. sepsis is a disease in which the immune system of the patient overreacts to an infection. due to this reaction the patient becomes severely ill  which easily results in organ failure and eventually death. the cause and underlying cellular pathways of this disease are unclear  which hinders the precise characterization of the sepsis patient. therefore  a consensus definition of sepsis was established in 1 to define several stages of sepsis  bone  r.c.  1 . this definition does not providea precise definition of sepsis  but gives the criteria for which there was a consensus that they should at least hold for a patient with severe sepsis. in this paper we focus on the patients with severe sepsis  but for brevity we will refer to these patients as septic. the consensus statement defines patients with severe sepsis as 'patients having a confirmed infection with at least two out of four systemic inflammatory response syndrome  sirs  criteria:
  temperature  1 c or temperature  1 c
  respiratory rate  1 breaths/min or paco1 mmhg
  heart rate  1 beats/minute
  leucocyte count  1 mm1 or  1 mm1 and organ dysfunction  hypoperfusion  or hypotension. from now on we refer to these criteria as the bone criteria.
　patients who have this combination of symptoms may have sepsis  however  this is not necessarily the case. we refer to these patients as being possibly septic. on the other hand  we can define a group of patients that are septic for sure  namely those who fulfill the bone criteria and have severe multiple organ failure. we will refer to these patients as the definitely septic patients and define them as fulfilling the strict criteria: the bone criteria plus at least three of the following symptoms of organ failure:
  ph ＋ 1
  thrombocyte count   1 mm1
  urine output   1 ml/kg body weight/hour  provided the patient is not on chronic dialysis  
  pao1/fio1 ＋ 1  and
  systolic blood pressure  1 mmhg or vaso-active medication.
1 rough dl for vague knowledge
we now present a conservative extension of description logics  dls   i.e. an extension which improves the modeling capacities without changing the expressive power of the language. more concretely  we will introduce two modal-like operators  ，  and  ，  for lower and upper approximations to describe elements which either belong definitively or possibly to the concepts under its scope. these operators introduce a notion of approximation without effectively increasing the expressiveness of the language. thus  we get extra modeling facilities for free  without having to develop new calculi  and without paying an extra price in computational complexity.
1 description logics
description logics  dl  are a well-studied family of setdescription languages which usually come with  some or all  boolean operators and limited quantification  and which can be extended with additional functionality in a modular way. this way properties on relations  such as symmetry  transitivity or inclusion hierarchies   number restrictions  or even some form of data-types  concrete domains  are often included. description logics have a well-defined modeltheoretic semantics  and the last two decades the computational properties of a wide variety of dls has been studied.
　formally  we introduce the dl alc  which is sufficient to model our case-study. the general definition of approximations  however  will be independent of any particular dl.
alc is a simple dl with conjunction  disjunction
  negation  c and universal  r.c and existential quantification  r.c. the semantics is given as follows:
def. 1 let i =  u ，i  be an interpretation  where u is a universe  and ，i a function mapping concept names to subsets and role names to relations over u. it extends to the boolean operators as usual and to the quantifier as follows:
    r.c i = {i （ u |  j （ u :  i j  （ ri & j （ ci}
    r.c i = {i （ u |  j （ u :  i j  （ ri ★ j （ ci}
　in a terminology t  called tbox  the interpretations of concepts can be restricted to the models of t by axioms of the form. based on this model-theoretic semantics  concepts can be checked for unsatisfiability: whether they are necessarily interpreted as the empty set. another useful semantic implication is subsumption of two concepts c and d  a subset relation of ci and di w.r.t. all models i of t   denoted by.
　a knowledge base Σ =  t  a  extends a tbox t with an assertional component  usually called abox  a  which is a set of assertions i : c and r i j  for individual names i j  a relation r and a concept c. the semantics is a straightforward extention of the previous definition: an interpretation i is a model for a assertions i : c and r i j  if  and only  ii （ ci and ri ii ji . then  a knowledge base is consistent  if there is a model for both its tbox and abox.
1 rough description logics
description logics are suitable for modeling crisp knowledge but are often too rigid for approximate information. for example  no explicit mechanism is in place when a definition is not commonly agreed upon  or when exceptions need to be captured. the sepsis use-case provides an example for such vaguely defined classes  for which no agreed upon criteria exist to determine whether a patient is indeed septic or not.
　the basic idea is rather straightforward: even though we fail to formally define the class of septic patients  we can approximateit by giving an upperand a lower bound. the upper approximationof the set of septic patients is formed by the set of patients that fulfill the bone criteria  i.e. the possibly septic patients. orthogonally  the lower approximation of the set of septic patients is the set of patients that are definitely septic  i.e. the patients that fulfill the strict criteria.
　traditionally  in dls this is modeled using primitive definitions  i.e. axioms of the form  where c is restricted by d without being fully defined. the relation between the concept septic and its approximations is in the pure dl modeling just definitely septic	septic	possiblyseptic.
rough dl: approximations 	syntax and semantics
modelling vague concepts with the traditional approach has its limits when the vague concept of septic patients needs to be defined. let us consider a special type of sepsis where the renal system fails. in dl terms  the relation between renal sepsis and sepsis would be modeled by an axiom renalseptic	septic. again  renal sepsis is not definable in a crisp way  but there could be an approximation describing patients which have possibly renal sepsis. now  the question arises whether possibly renal septic patients should be possibly septic  i.e. whether possiblyrenalseptic	possiblyseptic or not. in traditional dl it is possible to have all typical properties of the renal sepsis  but not the typical properties of a sepsis. what is missing is automatic inheritance of the approximations in a monotonic way.

in our motivating picture there should be subsumption re-
lations at the       positions  i.e. that definitelyrenalseptic 	definitelyseptic and possiblyrenalseptic	possibly septic should be a logical consequence of the knowledge base. in this sense  dl is inappropriate to model vague information  as there is a stronger semantic relations underlying the approximations of a concept. with rough description logics  rough dl   which we are about to introduce  we attempt to close this gap in a conceptually simple way.
　before providing formal semantics it is worth pointing out that approximations have very distinct properties. the upper approximation is the set of patients with a strong indication that they might be septic. formally  this means that for every patient pat1 in possibly septic  there must be at least one septic patient pat1  for which there are no criteria to explain why pat1 differs from pat1  i.e. pat1 is indiscernible from pat1.
　rough dl is not restricted to a particular dl  and will be defined for an arbitrary description logic dl.
def. 1 the language rdl of rough dl is the smallest set of concepts containing dl  and for every concept c （ rdl also the upper approximation c （ rdl and the lower approximation c （ rdl.
the notions of rough t- and abox  as well as rough knowledge base extend the usual notions in the expected way.
def. 1 let a rough interpretation be a triple i =  u r゛ ，i   where u is a universe  ，i an interpretation function  and r゛ an equivalence relation over u. the function ，i maps rdl concepts to subsets and role names to relations over the domain u. it extends to the new constructs as follows:

   c i = {i （ u |  j （ u :  i j  （ r゛ & j （ ci}
   c i = {i （ u |  j （ u :  i j  （ r゛ ★ j （ ci}
　intuitively  the upper approximation of a concept c covers the elements of a domain with the typical properties of c  whereas the lower approximation contains the prototypical elements of c.
　what did we gain  even if it is impossible to formally define a concept  such as septic  we can often specify the approximations. in our use-case  the upper approximation can be defined using the  bone criteria   the lower approximation  using the set of  strict criteria  described in section 1. in rough dl we now model vague knowledge in a precise way; with explicit formal semantics.
some logical consequences of the semantics	consider a
simplistic rough dl terminology  which models sepsis by its approximations. concretely  having an infection is a certain property of possibly septic patients   i.e. the upper ap-

proximation septic is a subconcept of inf. also  septic patients must have an organ failure  of  in at least one organ system. furthermore  definitely septic patients must have multiple organ failure. this gives the following terminology:
 bone   strict  septic	inf  septic	of  septic  with the implicit semantics of rdl

there are logical consequences  some of which we will discuss in more detail.
  possibly septic patients must be definitely infected. in logical terms  we have t |. why is this

the case  take a patient pat with all the typical properties of sepsis  including an infection. assume that he has an atypical infection  i.e.  that there is a similar patient pat1 without an infection. but pat being typically septic means that there must be a septic patient pat1 similar to pat  to which pat1 is also similar because of transitivity. then pat1 is similar to a septic patient  and must

belong to the upper approximation septic. by this he must have all the typical properties of sepsis  including an infection  which is a contradiction.
  possibly septic patients must have possible organ failure. formally  we can conclude that.
this means that if we know that organ failure is part of the proper definition of sepsis  patients that are possibly septic must at least have some condition that resembles organ failure. a similar result holds for the lower approximation septic and multiple organ failure.

the following figure shows the taxonomy of axioms based on the subsumption hierarchy w.r.t. the rough dl semantics  where the relations with the boldly printed concepts are implicitly derived.

there are more examples of the intrinsic semantics of rough dls  which do not show in the previous figure.
  there are no definitely non-typical sepsis patients. suppose that we define non-typical sepsis patients  nts  as those septic patients which are not definitely septic  i.e.  patients for which a similar patient exists which is not diagnosed as septic. formally  we add an axiom nts	septic  sepsis to t to get a new tbox t . rough dl

semantics implies that there can be no definitely nontypical septic patients  i.e. that.
  definitively septic or definitively not septic. suppose that for a new trial only patients are selected which are definitively only diagnosed as either definitively septic  or definitively not septic  i.e.    diag. septic   septic .

then  every patient who is diagnosed as possibly sep-

tic   diag.septic  must possibly have been diagnosed as definitively septic  or

  finally  it is a simple consequence of the semantics that approximations of approximations are equivalent to the approximations themselves  e.g.  that septic 《 septic.

reasoning with rough dls one of the main advantages of our newly introduced modeling mechanism is that reasoning almost comes for free. as opposed to most other mechanisms to deal with vague knowledge in dl  reasoning with approximations can be reduced to standard dl reasoning  by translating rough concepts into pure dl concepts with a special reflexive  transitive and symmetric role.
　let c be a rough concept. we define a translation function  ， t : rdl ★ dl for concepts with at = a
for atomic concepts a  and  c t =  r゛.c  and  r゛.c for c （ rdl where r゛ is a new role symbol  and where the translation function is inductively applied on subconcepts for all other constructs. this definition can be extended to axioms dt and tboxes t = {ax1 ... axn} as follows: t t =
.
　for any dl dl with universal and existential quantification  and symmetric  transitive and reflexive roles  there is no increase in expressive power  i.e. rough dl can be simulated in  almost  standard dl.
prop. 1 let rdl be the rough extension of a description logic dl  t an rdl tbox  and  ， t the above given translation. an rdl concept c is satisfiable in a rough interpre-satisfiable w.r.t. t t. formally:
	=	=	iff	|=	=	.
the proof is by contradiction: assume that t |= c = 〕 in rough dl  but that there is a dl model i =  u  ， i  of t t such that . it follows from the construction of the translation function  ， t that is a model for t   and that  which is a contradiction. the other direction is similar.
　as with usual dls  one can reduce other reasoning services  such as subsumption  to satisfiability  and finally to abox consistency  in the presence of negation. rough dl are no different. as the translation is linear  the complexity of reasoning in rough dl is the same as of reasoning in its carrier dl with quantifiers  symmetry and transitivity.
1 modeling clinical trials with rough dl
clinical trials use entry criteria to select patients for the study. the choice of these criteria is an important step in clinical trial design: to be able to compare the results of the trial with those of other trials and to assess the generalizability of the results to daily clinical practice  the entry criteria have to be compatible with definitions used in comparable trials and the agreed standard definitions of disease. this is obviously complicated when no crisp disease definition exists.
　in the case of severe sepsis  nine recent randomized clinical trials all used different entry criteria to select patients with severe sepsis  peelen et al.  1 . seven out of the nine investigated trials used a structure similar to the original consensus definition for severe sepsis: confirmed infection plus sirs criteria plus organ failure. however  the number of required sirs criteria varied between the trials and some trials used a slight modification of the original sirs criteria. furthermore  the specification of organ failure and the required number of failing organ systems differed.
　one way to investigate the differences in entry criteria is to compare the definitions used in the trials with the approximations of the medical condition. in our study  we use the concepts strict and bone as approximations of sepsis and compare them to the entry criteria used in the nine trials. there are four interesting situations. are there patients that are
1. in one of the trials but not in bone 
1. in all trials but not in strict 
1. in bone but not in one of the trials 
1. in strict but not in all trials 
the existence of such patients would signal a discrepancy between the trial definitions and the interpretation of sepsis  pointing to potential flaws in the set-up of the trials. with rdl a validation of these flaws comes for free as it allows the user to model their assumptions about the inherent vagueness of the definitions in a precise way. we will now describe how we used rdl to perform such an investigation.
　in order to use rdl for patient selection we first translated the definition for each trial into a dl formula. we did the same for the bone definition and the strict definition of sepsis  thus building a tbox with 1 definitions for septic patients. in addition we have translated a dataset from the dutch national intensive care evaluation  nice  registry containing information on 1 patients into an abox  using the terminologyfrom the tbox. with the selection criteria for the different trials and the translated data  we used a dl-reasoner  racer  haarslev and mo：ller  1   to select the patients that would be eligible for the different trials  thereby mimicking the patient selection process . the following table shows the numbers of patients of 1 of the 1 trials:
definition# patientsdefinition# patientsbone-sepsis1lexipafant-sepsis1strict1optimist-sepsis1unionoftrials1prowess-sepsis1intersectionoftrials11spla1i-sepsis1	to answer the aforementioned questions 	we define

sepsis 《 bone and sepsis 《 strict in our rdl terminol-

ogy  as those are the most widely accepted upper and lower approximations of sepsis. additionally  we can model the relation of the trials to the concept sepsis explicitly. although the 1 different trials widely cover different ways of describing possibly septic patients  it might be conceivable that there are patients outside the scope of all of these trials. however  one could assume that the 1 trials cover the most typical of all possible sepsis patients. because rdl provides formal representations for the intuitions 'most typical' and 'all possible'  we can model this assumption in a formal way. namely  the union of all trials is equivalent to the lower approximation  i.e. the typical cases  of the upper approximation i.e. all possible cases  of sepsis. similarly  we can model the assumption that the intersection of all trials covers the most typical patients that are definitively septic. this is done by defining the intersection of all trial concepts to be a lower approximation  i.e. the most typical cases  of the lower approximation  i.e. the definitively septic patients  of the concept sepsis.
　given our experimental setup it is easy to show that there are serious flaws in the trial selection. it is a consequence of the semantics of rdl that an approximation itself can not be approximated. this implies that bone 《 unionoftrials and strict 《 intersectionoftrials. this resulted in inconsistency of the definitions with respect to the trial data.
　using our infrastructure one can now perform a more detailed data-based validation to detect the source of the logical contradiction. for example  we queried for patients with queries like  bone  trial-x to look for violations of the upper approximation and queries like strict   trial-x for violations of the lower approximation. in this way  we found 1 patients in prowess-sepsisand 1 patients in lexipafantsepsis that do not fulfill the bone criteria.
　finally  we can use purely terminological reasoning to analyse the trial criteria. for example  classifying all definitions brought to light that none of the concepts describing the trials is subsumed by bone. this is an interesting result when compared to the data-based validation. although for 1 of the trial definitions we did not find any patient that violated the upper approximation  such patients can exist in principle. similarly  with respect to the lower approximation  we found that only 1 of the trial definitions subsumed strict.
advantage over standard dl trial validation using a standard dl infrastructure without the rough extension is already a significant improvement over the current situation  in which patient selection is procedurally performed as a sequence of database queries. using standard dl we can check violations  as discussed above  with a-box reasoning over the data set and the terminology  or purely terminologically  as suggested in the previous two paragraphs  which are not necessarily restricted to rdl .
　modeling the definitions in rdl gives an additional improvement: the validation against the criteria is done automatically. there is a way of achieving the same validation with pure dl  which we is much less elegant  though. here  one would sequentially check the validation criteria 1 to 1 introduced above  i.e. by checking satisfiability of the concept  bone  trial-x for all trials. however  this amounts to a procedural verification of the assumptions about the vague definitions about sepsis  which is error-prone  and tedious.
　moreover our rdl model excludes the invalid definitions automatically. for example  the set of patients in lexipafantsepsis   bone is empty per definition. to achieve the same result in a pure dl tbox one has to model the relation between trials and bone explicitly  e.g. by asserting unionoftrials 《 bone. but this is an incorrect oversimplification of the relation between the trials and the approximationof sepsis as opposed to the much more accurate rdl formalisation.
1 related and future work
the work described in this paper covers a wide variety of topics that have been studied extensively in the literature. this means that there are a plethora of similar approaches  to which we will briefly refer.
  rough dl versus modal dl. from a technical perspective  rough dl is a fusion of dl with modal s1 most attempts to introduce modal operators into dl focus on unions or produces  which usually requires more complex  mostly kripke-based  semantics  e.g.   baader and laux  1   and new decision procedures. our modalities range over the domain itself rather than over varying domains  which makes them easier to handle  e.g.  decidability and complexity results come for free  and we can apply existing reasoners.
  rough dl versus fuzzy dl. fuzzy dls have recently got increasing attention  particularly starting with the work of straccia  straccia  1 . vagueness of concepts is expressed as a degree of membership. rough dl advocate a simpler and qualitative approach  which is appropriate for some domains  such as the medical. in our case study  e.g.  there is no way of quantifying membership of the class septic  but well-defined upper and lower approximations. note  for example  that the bone criteria are define in a crisp  non-fuzzy way.
  rough dl versus rough sets. the connection between rough set theory and modal logic is well-established  du：ntsch  1   and there have been previous attempts to introduceconcept languages to model approximations  orlowska  1 . orlowska's work  which is closed to our own  is restricted to propositional logic and is  to the best of our knowledge  neither implemented nor practically applied and evaluated. an interesting orthogonal approach in  doherty et al.  1  where concepts are defined as pairs of approximations. however  their semantics is non-standard  and approximate concepts cannot as easily be integrated in standard ontology languages as with rough dl.
  rough dl versus defaults. rough dl can also be useful to model defaults as one can use lower approximations to capture exceptions in an intuitive way. simply speaking  the lower approximation then contains the typical subset of the elements of a concept. further discussion of this idea is out of the scope of this paper.
extension and alternative definitions the restriction of the semantics to equivalence relations goes back to pawlak's work  pawlak  1 . to model vague concepts  one might also study approximation operators based on tolerance relations  reflective and symmetric . also one could think of sets of equivalence classes according to different similarity relations. an interesting extension to graded rough modalities  as suggested in  yao and lin  1  is easily integrated into rough dl  as they can be translated into number restrictions.
　before extending the language  the more pressing issue of efficiency of the reasoning has to be solved. so is racer  our current dl reasoner  not optimised for reasoning with equivalence classes  which makes reasoning sometimes inefficient.
　a different path for future research is the explicit integration of equivalence relations into rough dl aboxes. often  data can be classified into indiscernible clusters. in a first step  rough dl can be a suitable query language  but it is also conceivable to learn rough dl concepts from the explicit definitions of the instances of particular concepts.
1 conclusions
rough dl  the extension to standard dls that we introduce in this paper  allows for precise modeling of vague knowledge. modeling vague knowledge is a common need in realistic domains  e.g. in medicine. an advantage of modeling concept approximations in a qualitative way is that queries to the model give crisp answers. we have shown that reasoning in rdl can be reduced to standard dl satisfiability  which gives us access to reasoning infrastructure.
　in our evaluation of medical trials about sepsis patients we have shown that modeling vague knowledge can help to answer important questions in the design of clinical trials. the validation of trials based on their formal definitions is an improvement over the usual data-based validation. when the validation declaratively is done using rough dl  the logical consequences of the semantics immediately reveals inconsistencies in the trial definitions  whereas several successive queries are necessary to do the same with standard dls. finally  we claim that rough dl can be very useful when building new trials with vaguely defined medical conditions  as they enforce better models for the selection of patients.
