
we introduce and analyze q-potential games and qcongestion games  where q is a positive integer. a 1-potential  congestion  game is a potential  congestion  game. we show that a gameis a q-potential game if and only if it is  up to an isomorphism  a q-congestion game. as a corollary  we derive the result that every game in strategic form is a qcongestion game for some q. it is further shown that every q-congestion game is isomorphic to a qnetwork game  where the network environment is defined by a directed graph with one origin and one destination. finally we discuss our main agenda: the issue of representing q-congestion games with non-negative cost functions by congestion models with non-negativeand monotonicfacility cost functions. we provide some initial results in this regard.
1	introduction
models of congestion come with many real-life stories and in various mathematical forms. they seem to originate at transportation engineering  wardrop  1   and they have been analyzed by several researchers from various additional fields  in particular computer science  communication networks  economics  and game theory.1 every congestion model gives rise to a game in strategic form  normal form .
¡¡our starting point is the model of  rosenthal  1 . a congestion form is defined by a finite set of players  each of which holding one unit of goods  a finite set of facilities  and per-unit cost functions associated with the facilities. each player must use a subset of facilities in order to make its unit of goods valuable. the non-empty set of feasible subsets of facilities is player-specific. when a player chooses a subset of facilities her per-facility cost depends on the number of other players that decide to use the facility  and her total cost is the sum of costs of the facilities in this subset.
¡¡each congestion form f defines a game in strategic form  ¦£f  which is called a congestion game. in ¦£f the strategy set of a player is her set of feasible subsets of facilities  and her cost function is as described above. the distinction between congestion forms and congestion games is important. the form  which is also a sort of game  contains more information than its associated game in strategic form. two distinct forms may induce isomorphic games. this distinction resembles the distinction between an extensive-form game and its associated strategic form game. for example  a congestion game rarely reveals the structure of the facility cost functions. indeed  one can think of various natural solution concepts for a congestionform that have no sense in its associated game. for example  the players can choose the facilities sequentially  which gives rise to a multistage game in which we can deal with subgame perfect equilibria and other solution concepts that are natural in multistage games. on the other hand  many interesting conceptual or computational concepts for congestion forms require as input only the game. for example  nash equilibrium  strong equilibrium correlated equilibrium  social surplus  and price of anarchy. two congestion forms are said to be equivalent if they generate isomorphic games.1
¡¡many applications of congestion forms/games come from networks. hence  one may wish to consider a special type of congestion forms/games  in which facilities are edges in graphs and feasible subset of facilities are routes. it is natural to call such congestion forms network forms  and their associated congestion games network games. a natural question is how much we lose when we restrict attention to network forms. there are many modeling choices to make. we have decided to take the seemingly most restrictive definition: a network form is defined by a directed graph with only one origin and one destination. nevertheless  we prove that dealing with networks does not restrict the generality. we prove that every congestion form is equivalent to a network form  or equivalently  that every congestion game is isomorphic to a network game. hence  all other potential candidates for the term network games are isomorphic to network games in our sense  because they are in particular congestion games.
¡¡much of the work on congestion games/forms has been inspired by the fact proved in  rosenthal  1  that every such game has a potential function. the theory of general games that possess potential functions  i.e.  of potential games was developed in  monderer and shapley  1   where the converse to rosenthal's theorem was proved: every potential game is isomorphic to a congestion game. however  there are two major differences between the proof that every potential game is isomorphic to a congestion game  and the proof that every congestion game is isomorphic to a network game. first  the proof that every congestion game is isomorphic to a network game is based on a transformation that transforms every congestion form to an equivalent network form. the number of facilities in the network form is twice the number of facilities in the congestion form. hence we do not lose computationalefficiency. in contrast the transformation given in  monderer and shapley  1  is not computationally effi-
cient.1
¡¡the second difference concerns the issue of preserving economics properties. the transformation given in this paper that transforms congestion forms to equivalent network forms  preserves the properties of both non-negativity and monotonicity of facility-cost functions.as we show in this manuscript the transformation in  monderer and shapley  1  does not preserve any of these properties. as all results in cs/ai on network games were proved with various types of monotonicity and non-negativity assumptions  the topic of faithful representation of potential games by congestion games is important if one wants to generalize these results to general potential games. we present here some partial results in this regard.
¡¡in this paper we actually deal with the above mentioned issues in a more general context. we discuss a generalization of congestion forms  games   in which the facility cost functions are player-specific. this assumption on the facility cost functions is natural in many applications. forms with player-specific cost functions are called ps-congestion forms  and their associated games in strategic form are called ps-congestion games.1 we also define and discuss pscongestion forms  games  of type q  or in short  q-congestion forms  games   where q is a positive integer. a ps-congestion form is of type q if the set of vectors of facility cost functions contains at most q distinct vectors  that is there exist at most q types of players. a 1-congestion form  game  is a congestion form  game .
¡¡similarly we introduce a new type of games: q-potential games. a 1-potential game is simply a potential game. roughly speaking  a game is a q-potential game if the set of players can be partitioned into q non-empty and mutually disjoint subsets nj  1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü q  in such a way that if we fix the strategies of all players outside nj  the remaining subgame is a potential game. we show that the proof of equivalence between potential games and congestion games can be extended. that is  every q-congestion game is a q-potential game  and every  finite  q-potential game is isomorphic to a q-congestion game. we notice that every game is an npotential game  where n is the number of players. therefore  we conclude that every game in strategic form is isomorphic to an n-congestion game. hence  we get the somewhat surprising result that every game in strategic form is isomorphic to a ps-congestion game.1
¡¡we further prove that for every q ¡Ý 1  every q-congestion form is equivalent to a q-network form. that is  every game in strategic form is isomorphic to a ps-network game.
1 q-potential games and q-congestion games.
1	isomorphic games
a	game	in	strategic	form	is	a	tuple	¦£	=
 n  xi i¡Ên  ci i¡Ên   where n is a finite set of players which  whenever convenient  we take to be {1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ n}; xi is a set of strategies for i; and ci : x ¡ú r is the cost function of i  where x = ¡Ái¡Ênxi. ¦£ is called a finite game if the sets of strategies are finite sets. we say that two games ¦£1 and ¦£1 are isomorphic if each of them is obtained from the other by changing the names of the players and the names of the strategies. that is  there exist bijection functions  i.e.  functions which are both one-to-one and onto  ¦Ó : n1 ¡ú n1 and ¦Ái : xi1 ¡ú x¦Ó1 i   i ¡Ê n1  such that: for every i ¡Ê n1 and for every  x1j j¡Ên1 ¡Ê x1 
c¦Ó1 i   ¦Áj x1j  j¡Ên1  = ci1  x1j j¡Ên1 .
1	potential games
let ¦£ =  n  xi i¡Ên  ci i¡Ên  be a game in strategic form. let x i denote the set of strategy profiles of all players but i. a function p : x ¡ú r is a potential function1 for i if for every xi yi ¡Ê xi  and for every x i ¡Ê x i 
ci xi x i    ci yi x i  = p xi x i    p yi x i .
following  monderer and shapley  1   ¦£ is a potential game if there exists a function p which is a potential for every player i.
1	congestion forms and congestion games
for the basic model of congestion forms and congestion games we follow  rosenthal  1  and  monderer and shapley  1 .
	a	congestion	form	is	a	tuple	f	=
 m n  ¦²i i¡Ên  ca a¡Êm   where m is a finite set consisting of m elements  which are called facilities  n is a finite set consisting of n elements  which are called players;
for every i ¡Ê n  ¦²i   1m   { } is a non empty set of subsets of facilities  which is called the feasible set of i  and for every a ¡Ê m ca :  1 ¡Þ  ¡ú r is the per-unit facility cost function associated with a ¡Ê m; if k of the users choose a  each of them pays ca k .
¡¡every congestion form f =  m n  ¦²i i¡Ên  ca a¡Êm  defines a game in strategic form ¦£f  in which the set of players is n  ¦²i is the set of strategies of i  and for every i ¡Ê n the cost function of player i is defined on ¦² = ¡Ái¡Ên¦²i as follows:
 
where na a  = |{j ¡Ê n : a ¡Ê aj}|.1 a game ¦£ in strategic form is called a congestion game if ¦£ = ¦£f for some congestion form f. two congestion forms are equivalent if they generate isomorphic congestion games.
1	player-specific facility cost functions
when the cost functions associated with the facilities are player-specific we get a congestion form with playerspecific facility cost functions or  in short a ps-congestion form. formally: a ps-congestion form is a tuple f =  m n  ¦²i i¡Ên   cia a¡Êm i¡Ên  such that all components except for the cost functions are defined as in a congestion form  and cia :  1 ¡Þ  ¡ú r is i's facility cost function associated with a ¡Ê m; if k of the users choose a  agent i pays cia k .
definition 1 a ps-congestion form is facility-symmetric if ¦²i = ¦²j for every i j ¡Ê n. a ps-congestion form is simple if ¦²i contains only singletons for every player i.
every	ps-congestion	form	f	=  uniquely defines a game in
strategic form ¦£f  in which the set of players is n  ¦²i is the set of strategies of i  and for every i ¡Ê n the cost function of player i is defined as follows:
.
a game ¦£ in strategic form is called a ps-congestion game if ¦£ = ¦£f for some ps-congestion form f. thus  every congestion form is a ps-congestion form  and every congestion game is a ps-congestion game.
1 q-congestion forms and q-congestion games
roughly speaking  a ps-congestion form is of type q if the players can be partitioned into q types  where two players are of the same type if they share the same facility cost functions.
formally  let f =  m n  ¦²i i¡Ên   cia a¡Êm i¡Ên  be a ps-congestion form. a finite set k    r 1 ¡Þ  m is a cover for f if for every player i there exists c =  ca a¡Êm ¡Ê k such that for every a ¡Ê m cia = ca.
¡¡let q be a positive integer. we say that f is a q-congestion form if it has a cover h with |h| ¡Ü q. obviously  if f is a q congestion form  f is a  q + 1 -congestion form. because k = { c1a a¡Êm ¡¤¡¤¡¤  cna a¡Êm} is a cover for f  every n person ps-congestion form is an n-congestion form. let 1 ¡Ü q f  ¡Ü n be the index of f  defined as the minimal cardinality of a cover for f. obviously  f is a congestion form if and only if q f  = 1. if f is a q-congestion form  ¦£f is called a q-congestion game.
1 q-potential games
let ¦£ =  n  xi i¡Ên  ci i¡Ên  be a game in strategic form. let h be a set of real-valued functions defined on x. we say that h is a cover of ¦£ if for every i ¡Ê n there exists p ¡Ê h  which is a potential function for i. let q be a positive integer. we say that ¦£ is a q-potential game if it has a cover h with |h| ¡Ü q. obviously if ¦£ is a q potential game  ¦£ is a  q+1 potential game. because ci itself is a potential for i  every n person game is an n-potential game. let 1 ¡Ü q ¦£  ¡Ü n be the potential index of ¦£  defined as the minimal cardinality of a cover for ¦£. obviously  ¦£ is a potential game  if and only if ¦£ is a 1-potential game if and only if q ¦£  = 1.
¡¡let ¦£ be a q-potential game . let h = {p1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ pq}  |h| = q  be a cover of ¦£  and let hs be the set of all players i such that ps is a potential function for i. a partition of the player set n to q nonempty and mutually disjoint subsets ¦Ð =  ns qs=1  is consistent with h if ps is a potential function for every i ¡Ê ns  that is  ns   hs for every 1 ¡Ü s ¡Ü q. in a potential game with a potential function p  all players behave as if there exists one player whose goal is to minimize p over x. in a q-potential game with a cover h = {p1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ pq} and an h-consistent partition
  the players behave as if there are q players  is  1 ¡Ü s ¡Ü q  playing a q-person game with the set of strategies x s  for player is  where x s  = ¡Ái¡Ênsxi. for x =  x s  1¡Üs¡Üq  the cost function of is is ps. note that every equilibrium x in the associated q-person game is also an equilibrium in the original game. similarly  every correlated equilibrium corresponds to a correlated equilibrium.1
¡¡unfortunately  as is shown in the next example  a cover with a minimal cardinalitymay have more than one consistent partition. in particular  the partition of the players' set to q subsets in a q-potential game with an index q is not uniquely determined by the game. bellow is an example for a 1-player game with a potential index 1 in which both partitions 1 and 1 are consistent with the same cover h  where |h| =
1.
example 1 we construct a game ¦£. the strategy set of every player 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü 1 is {1}. the cost functions are: c  x  = c1 x1 x1 x1  = x1  c1 x  = x1  c1 x  =
. we first show that this is not a 1-potential game. indeed  by  monderer and shapley  1  it suffices to show that there exists a closed path of strategy profiles in x  ¦Ã = x 1  x 1  x 1  x 1  x 1  with x 1  = x 1   such that x t + 1  is obtained from x t  by changing the strategy of exactly one player  it  1 ¡Ü t ¡Ü 1  and such that  where
.
=
.
observe that p x  = 1 for every x ¡Ê x is a potential function for both player 1 and player 1  and that c1 is a potential function for both player 1 and player 1. hence  h = {1 c1} is a cover for ¦£  and both partitions 1 and 1 are consistent with h. 
1	representation of q-potential games by q-congestion forms
it was proved in  rosenthal  1  that every congestion game is a potential game. it was proved in  monderer and shapley  1  that every finite potential game is isomorphic to a congestion game. the two theorems are extended in this section.
theorem 1
 1  every q-congestion game is a q-potential game.
 1  every finite q-potential game is isomorphic to a qcongestion game.
the proof of theorem 1 is given in the full version. we end with a somewhat surprising corollary:
corollary 1 every game in strategic form is isomorphic to a ps-congestion game.
proof: as we noticed above  every game in strategic form is an n-potential game. by theorem 1 every n-potential game is isomorphic to an n-congestion game. 
1	network forms and network games
much of the literature about congestion forms has been motivated by transportation systems and by digital networks. in such models  facilities are edges in a graph  and feasible sets of facilities are routes. in this paper the terms network form and network game are defined in a specific way. all other graphical models fall under the category of congestion forms  games .
   consider a loop-free directed graph gr with a finite set of vertices v = vgr  and a set of edges e = egr.1 every feasible subset of facilities for i represents a feasible route  a path with distinct vertices  in the graph. for every o d ¡Ê v    we denote by r o d  the set of all routes that connect o to d. a ps-network form is a ps-congestion form f =  m n  ¦²i i¡Ên   cia a¡Êm i¡Ên  for which there exists a directed graph  and two distinct vertices in this graph o and d  with  and ¦²i   r o d  for every agent i. a game ¦£ in strategic form is called a ps-network game if ¦£ = ¦£f for some ps-network form f. naturally  a q-network form is a ps-network form of type q  and a q-network game is a ps-network game derived from a q-network form. a 1-network form is also called a network form  and a 1-network game is also called a network game.
theorem 1 every q-congestion form is equivalent to a qnetwork form.
proof: let f =  m n  ¦²i i¡Ên   cia a¡Êm i¡Ên  be a qcongestion form. assume m = {a1 ... am}  and let k = {b1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ bm} be an arbitrary finite copy of m that does not intersect with m. we construct a graph gr as follows: the set of vertices is v = {1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ m + 1}. for every 1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü m we connect j to j + 1 with two edges  aj bj. that is  j is the tail of both aj and bj  and j + 1 is the head of both. we denote o = 1 and d = m+1. for every ai ¡Ê ¦²i we associate a route ¦Áai as follows: ¦Áai = z1 z1 ¡¤¡¤¡¤ zm  where zj = aj if aj ¡Ê ai  and. with the edges aj we associate the cost function   and with the edges bj we associate the cost functionswhich are constantly zero. it is obvious that we constructed a ps-network form of type q  and that the q-network game derived from this form is isomorphic to ¦£f. 
the following example together with its associated figure illustrates the proof of theorem 1.
example 1 consider the congestion form f in which n = {1}  m = {a1 a1 a1 a1} 
¦²1 = {{a1 a1} {a1 a1}}  and ¦²1 = {{a1 a1} {a1 a1}}. f is transformed to the network form shown in figure 1 in which   and
.	the cost functions on the
aj-links  j = 1 1 are the original cost functions  and the cost functions on the bj-links are constantly zero.
figure 1
¡¡¡¡¡¡b1 b1 b1 b1 o     d a1 a1 a1 a1
corollary 1 every finite game in strategic form is isomorphic to a ps-network game.1
proof: the proof follows from combining corollary 1 with theorem 1. 
1	faithful representations
in many real-life applications it is natural to assume that the facility cost functions of a ps-congestion form have a special structure. in particular  it is natural to assume that the facility cost functions are nonnegative and in addition are either non-decreasing or non-increasing  depending on the context. it is easy to check that the particular representation method described in the proof of theorem 1  or in the analogous proofin  mondererand shapley  1   may represent a finite q-potential game with nonnegative costs by a q-congestion form in which some of the facility cost functions take negative values. actually  the representation method depends on the choice of the potential functions. however  it can be seen that there exists a finite 1-potential game such that for every choice of a potential function the representation method yields a 1-congestion form with some facility cost functions that take negative values. this suggest three questions:
question 1: can every finite q-potential game with nonnegativecost functions be represented  up to an isomorphism  by a q-congestion form with non-negative facility cost functions 
question 1: can every finite q-potential game with nonnegativecost functions be represented  up to an isomorphism  by a q-congestion form with non-negativeand non-decreasing cost functions 
question 1: can every finite q-potential game with nonnegative costs be represented  up to an isomorphism  by a q-congestion form with non-negativeand non-increasing cost functions 
¡¡we show that the answer to question 1 is negative by the next example:
example 1 consider the following parametric game with z   1.
	x1	y1
11zz11x1
¦£z =
y1
¡¡¦£z is a congestion game because it is a potential game with a potential function pz  where

koller and milch  1; mura  1; vickrey and koller  1  . other types of representations focus on actions' dependencies- see  leyton-brown and tennenholtz  1; bhat and leyton-brown  1 .
	x1	y1
1zzzx1
pz =
y1
¡¡let n = {1}. assume in negation that ¦£z is isomorphic to ¦£f  where f =  m n  ¦²i 1i=1  ca a¡Êm  is a congestion form in which the cost functions are non-negative and nondecreasing. in particular  for every facility a 1 ¡Ü ca 1  ¡Ü ca 1 .
because ¦£f is isomorphic to ¦£z  we may assume that the feasible sets in f are parameterized as follows: ¦²1 =
{ax1 ay1}  and ¦²1 = {ax1 ay1}. also  without loss of generality we can assume that m = ax1 ¡Èay1 ¡Èax1 ¡Èay1. note that
.
therefore  ca 1  = 1 for every a ¡Ê ay1  ay1  and ca 1  = 1 for every a ¡Ê ay1 ¡É ay1. since ca 1  ¡Ü ca 1   we conclude that ca 1  = 1 for every a ¡Ê ay1. it follows that

on the other hand 
 
and therefore  contradicting      .

¡¡note  however  that ¦£z in example 1 can be represented by a simple congestion game with non-negative and nonincreasing cost functions. consider the congestion form fz with two resources a b. ca 1  = ca 1  = 1. cb 1  = z  and cb 1  = 1. it is easily verified that ¦£fz is isomorphic to ¦£z. hence  question 1 and 1 can still have positive answers.
¡¡if we are less ambitious  and we allow representing qpotential games with r-congestion games with r   q  we show in the full paper that the answer to the modified version of question 1 and 1 is positive. the proof of the following lemma is given in the full version:
lemma 1 every game in strategic form with non-negative cost functions is isomorphic to a ps-congestion game derived from a ps-congestion form with non-negative and nondecreasing facility cost functions.
¡¡we end this section with an example showing two congestion forms with the same combinatorial structure  same set of facilities and same feasible sets  and with positive cost functions that represent the same game. however  the facility cost functions in one of them are decreasing and in the other  increasing.
example 1 the two congestion forms bellow represent the following potential game:
	x1	y1
1
1
1
1
1x1
¦£ =
y1
consider the parametric congestion forms f  in which
m	=	{a b c d} 	¦²1	=	{{a b} {c d}}  ¦²1	=
{{a c} {d d}}. the cost functions are cz 1  = xz  andcz 1  = yz for every z ¡Ê {a b c d}.
hence  ¦£ can be represented by this particular congestion form if there exists a solution to the following linear system
with 1 equations and 1 variables:
	ac	bd
ya + xb
ya + xcyb + xa
yb + xdyc + xd
yc + xayd + xc
yd + xbab
¦£ =
cd
¡¡it is easy to see that this system has solutions depending on two parameters s t:
xb = xc = t  yb = yc = s 
ya = 1   t  yd = 1   t  xa = 1   s  xd = 1   s.
¡¡obviously t = 1 s = 1 gives a congestion form with positive and increasing cost functions  while t = 1 s = 1 give a congestion form with positive and decreasing cost functions.

