
we have introduced a search engine that can extract opinion sentences relevant to an open-domain query from japanese blog pages. the engine identifies opinions based not only on positive or negative measurements but also on neutral opinions  requests  advice  and thoughts. to retrieve a number of opinion sentences that a user could reasonably be expected to read  we attempted to extract only explicitly stated writer's opinions at the sentence-level and to exclude quoted or implicational opinions. in our search engine  opinion sentences are identified based on features such as opinion clue expressions  and then  the relevance to the query of each identified opinion sentence is checked. the experimental results for various topics  obtained by comparing the output of the proposed opinion search engine with that of human judgments as to whether the sentences were opinions  showed that the proposed engine has promise as a practical application. 
1 introduction 
an enormous number of blog pages are freely written and frequently updated as private articles about various topics  including very timely ones. as numbers of blog writers and readers rapidly increase  blog pages as a consumer-generated medium  cgm  become increasingly important information sources about people's personal ideas  beliefs  feelings  and sentiments  positive or negative measurement . such subjective information in blog pages can often be useful for finding out what people think about various topics in making a decision.
　studies on automatically extracting and analyzing reviews about a specific subject on the web  dave et al.  1; morinaga et al.  1; turney  1; nasukawa and yi  1  have been conducted. an attempt has also been made to develop a system to analyze sentiments about open-domain queries in blogspace  nanno et al.  1 . these efforts have focused on positive or negative measurement. 
　sentiments and different kinds of subjective information such as neutral opinions  requests  and judgments provide useful information. for instance  opinion sentences like  in my opinion this product should be priced around $1   which do not explicitly express sentiments  can also be informative for a user who wants to know others' opinions about a product.  
　the sentence-level subjectivity classification approaches  cardie et al.  1; riloff and wiebe  1; wiebe and riloff  1  try to identify subjective information that is broader than sentiments and suggest a way of searching for opinion sentences in open-domain topics. in these efforts  the subjectivity/objectivity of a current sentence is judged based on the existence of subjective/objective clues in both the sentence itself and the neighboring sentences. the subjective clues  such as adjectives  nouns  verb phrases  and other collocations  are learned from corpora  wiebe  1; wiebe et al.  1 .  
　opinion sentence searches using sentence-level subjectivity classification often collect too many sentences for a user to read. according to a previous study  wiebe et al.  1   1% of sentences in opinion-expressing articles like editorials and 1% of sentences in non-opinion expressing articles like news reports were judged to be subjective. sentence-level subjectivity can be used to analyze subjectivity in inputted documents  wilson et al.  1; wilson et al.  1 . however  in searching opinion sentences from web pages  it is necessary to limit the number of retrieved sentences so that a user can survey them without undue effort.  
　we introduce opinion clue expressions  which are more restrictive than sentence-level subjectivity in conventional methods  as a criterion for judging opinion sentences. we also propose a method for searching opinion sentences from web pages using these clue expressions. using the proposed method  we created a prototype opinion sentence search system in blogspace. the search engine extracts opinion sentences relevant to a user's query phrase about open-domain topics on products  persons  events  and social phenomena. the search engine identifies opinion sentences based on sentiments  neutral opinions  requests  advice  and thoughts. to retrieve a number of opinion sentences that is reasonable and that a user will want to read  we attempted to extract only explicitly stated writer's opinions at the sentence-level and to exclude quoted or implicational opinions. section 1 describes what sentences should be searched as opinions. section 1 gives an overview of our prototype opinion search system for japanese blog pages. sections 1 and 1 explain the two major modules  opinion search extraction and query-relevant sentence extraction  and section 1 evaluates the opinion sentence search method of our prototype system. 
1 opinion sentences to be searched 
 we judge a sentence to be an opinion if it explicitly declares the writer's idea or belief at a sentence level. we define as an  opinion clue   the part of a sentence that contributes to explicitly conveying the writer's idea or belief in the opinion sentence  hiroshima et al.  1 . for example   i am glad  in the sentence  i am glad to see you  can convey the writer's pleasure to a reader  so we regard the sentence as an  opinion sentence  and  i am glad  as an  opinion clue . another example of an opinion clue is the exclamation mark in the sentence  we got a contract!  it conveys the writer's emotion about the event to a reader. 
　the existence of word-level or phrase-level subjective parts does not assure that the sentence is an opinion. some word-level or phrase-level subjective parts can make the sentence an opinion depending on where they occur in the sentence. consider the following two sentences. 
 1  this house is beautiful. 
 1  we purchased a beautiful house. 
 both  1  and  1  contain the word-level subjective part  beautiful . our criterion would lead us to say that sentence  1  is an opinion  because  beautiful  is placed in the predicate part and  1  is considered to declare the writer's evaluation of the house to a reader. this is why  beautiful  in  1  contributes to make the sentence an opinion. by contrast  sentence  1  is not judged to be an opinion  because  beautiful  is placed in the object of the verb  purchase  and  1  is considered to report the event of the house purchase rather objectively to a reader. sentence  1  contains subjective information about the beauty of the house; however this information is unlikely to be what a writer wants to emphasize. thus   beautiful  in  1  does not contribute to making the sentence an opinion. 
　these two sentences illustrate the fact that the presence of a subjective word   beautiful   does not unconditionally assure that the sentence is an opinion. additionally  these examples do suggest that whether a sentence is an opinion can be judged depending on where such word-level or phrase-level subjective parts as evaluative adjectives are placed in the predicate part. 
　some word-level or phrase-level subjective parts such as subjective sentential adverbs contribute to making the sentence an opinion depending on where they occur in the sentence. sentence  1  is judged to be an opinion because its main clause contains a subjective sentential adverb  amazingly   which expresses the writer's feeling about the event. 
 1  amazingly  few people came to my party. 
　the presence of idiomatic collocations in the main clause also affects our judgment as to what constitutes an opinion sentence. for example  sentence  1  can be judged as an opinion because it includes  my wish is . 
 1  my wish is to go abroad. 
thus  depending on the type of opinion clue  it is necessary to consider where the expression occurs in the sentence to judge whether the sentence is an opinion. 
1 architecture of opinion sentence search  
figure 1 shows the configuration of our prototype opinion sentence search system in blogspace.  

figure 1: configuration of opinion sentence search 
the blog data server collects blog pages by periodically crawling the web. our opinion sentence search engine  which receives blog pages from the blog data server  consists of two main modules: opinion sentence extraction and query-relevant sentence extraction.  
　the opinion sentence extraction module checks whether each sentence in the crawled blog pages can be considered an opinion. opinion sentences are extracted and indexed as off-line processing  which  for a practical real-time search  should be as high a proportion of the entire processing as possible. the index table in the blog data server can accommodate more than 1 1 updated blog pages every month. 
　the query-relevant sentence extraction module retrieves opinion sentences relevant to the user's query phrases from the index table of opinion sentences in the blog page server. since users' queries cannot be predicted  query-relevant sentence extraction has to include on-line processing. 

figure 1: user interface by open-domain query 
　 figure 1 shows the user interfaces we provide now. a user inputs open-domain keyword phrases in the query box and then clicks the search button. the opinion sentences resulting from the search are presented in a blog page unit. the result pages can be ranked according to the number of opinion sentences  the ratio of opinion sentences to total sentences  or total strength of the opinion sentences.  
1 opinion sentence extraction  
　it is difficult to enumerate the opinion-judgment rules describing diversified features under some conditions in a rule-based method. to avoid the poor performance caused by data sparseness and the daunting task of writing rules  we adopted a learning method that binarily classifies sentences using opinion clues and their positions in sentences  hiroshima et al.  1  as feature parameters of a support vector machine  svm . an svm can efficiently learn the model for classifying sentences as opinion and non-opinion  based on the combinations of multiple feature parameters. following are the feature parameters of our method.  
 1 opinion clue expressions  
 1 semantic categories 
 1 frequent words 
 1 parts of speech 
　opinion clue expressions and semantic categories are crucial feature parameters. the semantic categories we adopted have a hierarchical structure and are from a japanese thesaurus  ikehara et al.  1 . 
1 clue expression collection 
　whether expressions have opinion clues is a basic criterion for judging whether a sentence expresses an opinion. to collect opinion clue expressions for an open-domain opinion sentence search  we extracted opinion sentences from the top twenty japanese web pages retrieved with forty queries on various kinds of topics. the queries correspond to possible situations in which a user wants to retrieve opinions from web pages about a particular topic. the retrieved pages were unrestricted to blog pages because we target the opinion sentence search engine applicable not only to blog pages but also to other cgm pages or all web pages  and we hypothesize that opinion clues do not differ between blog pages and other web pages. 
　out of 1 sentences in the total 1 retrieved pages  the 1 sentences judged unanimously by three evaluators to be opinions were extracted. then  of these 1 sentences considered very likely to be opinions  1 were used to extract opinion clues by the human analysts  while the remaining 1 were reserved for future assessment for other cgm pages or general web pages.  
　the total number of opinion clues obtained was 1. these clue expressions were classified into two groups  as shown in the example sentences below. the underlined expressions in example sentences are extracted as opinion clues. there were 1 clues and 1 clues in each group. the example sentences are translations of japanese opinion sentences extracted by human analysts.  
 1 clues appearing in the predicate part 
thought:   i think this book is his.  
intensifier:  they played extremely well. 
impression:  this terminology is confusing. 
emotion:  i am glad to see you. 
positive/negative judgment:   
         your audio system is terrific. 
modality about propositional attitude:  
         you should go to the movie. 
value judgment: this sentence makes no sense. 
utterance-specific sentence form: 
         however  it's literally just a dream now. 
symbol:  we got a contract! 
uncertainty:  i am wondering what i should eat for lunch. imperative:  don't do that. 
 1 clues not appearing in the predicate part 
 declarative adverb: 
           i will possibly go to europe next year. 
  interjection:   oh  wonderful. 
  idiomatic collocation:  it's hard to say. 
　the opinion clues in the japanese examples are placed in the last part of sentences in the first group. this reflects the heuristic rule that japanese predicates are in principle placed in the last part of a sentence.  
1 augmentation by semantic categories 
opinion clue expressions can be augmented by the semantic categories of the words in the expressions. the feature parameters for a semantic category have two roles: one is to compensate for the insufficient amount of opinion clue expressions  and the other is to consider the relations between clue expressions and co-occurring words in the opinion sentences. consider the following two sentence patterns: 
 1  x is beautiful. 
 1  x is pretty. 
the words  beautiful  and  pretty  are adjectives in the common semantic category   appearance   and the degree of sentence-level subjectivity of these sentences is almost the same regardless of what x is. therefore  even if  beautiful  is learned as an opinion clue but  pretty  is not  the semantic category  appearance  to which the learned word  beautiful  belongs  enables  1  to be judged an opinion as well as  1 . 
　many of the opinion clue expressions have co-occurring words in the opinion sentence. consider the following two sentences. 
 1  the sky is high. 
 1  the quality of this product is high. 
　both  1  and  1  contain the word  high  in the predicate part. sentence  1  is considered to be less of an opinion than  1  because  1  might be judged to be the objective truth  while  1  is likely to be judged an opinion. the adjective  high  in the predicate part can be validated as an opinion clue depending on co-occurring words. however  providing all possible co-occurring words with each opinion clue expression is not a realistic option. the co-occurrence information about each opinion clue expression can be generalized using semantic categories. 
1 training and test set 
　the training set was chosen from blog pages different from the web pages used for opinion clue collection. this was done in order to conduct training specific to blog searches and in order to conduct training and testing independently of opinion clue collection.  
 we used the same procedure as we did to collect opinion clues  to prepare training and test sets that are both specific to blog search. we first retrieved japanese blog pages with ninety queries covering a wide range of topics:  
culture: movies  books  music 
 	entertainment: sports  tv drama  games 
facilities: museums  zoos  amusement parks 
food: beer  noodles  ice cream 
health: medicine  syndromes 
	local information: 	restaurants  hotels  hot springs 
	person:	comedians  idols 
phenomena: lifestyle  environment 
politics  economy: elections  gasoline prices 
products:  cell phones  cars  beer  cosmetics  software 
　opinion sentences were extracted from the top ten retrieved blog pages for each query  leaving 1 pages and 1 sentences in total. three evaluators judged whether each sentence was an opinion or not. out of 1 sentences  1 were judged to be opinions by all three evaluators  1 by two evaluators  1 by one evaluator  and 1 were judged to be non-opinions by all three evaluators. 
number training set test setquery 1total sentences 11sentences all three judged opinions  1   1 sentences the  two judged opinions  1   1 sentences the one judged opinions  1   1 sentences none judged opinions 11table 1: training and test set 
　eighteen queries  one-fifth of the total  were randomly selected  and the sentences for the queries were used for testing. the sentences of the other seventy-two queries were used for training. the breakdown of training and test sets is shown in table 1.  
　we set the sentences with at least one judged opinion as a cut-off point. thus  1 were then used to learn positive examples in the svm  and 1 were used to assess the performance of the opinion sentence search system  section 1 . 1  non-opinion sentences were used to learn negative examples  and 1 were used for assessment. 
1 query-relevant sentence extraction  
the three evaluators also judged whether each opinion sentence in a training and test set in section 1 was query-relevant. of the 1 sentences that at least one evaluator judged to be an opinion  1 were judged to be relevant to the queries by at least one evaluator  and 1 were judged by all three evaluators to be unrelated to the queries. the high percent of the latter figure  1  which is 1% of the 1 opinion sentences  shows that it is inappropriate to accept as search results all opinion sentences in the pages retrieved by a user's query.  
1 permissible scope of query relevance 
not all of the retrieved opinion sentences are closely related to the query because some of the pages describe miscellaneous topics. the permissible scope between individual users for query relevance of a sentence differs. the following are opinion sentences from the retrieved pages queried with  product name of a game console . the number of evaluators who judged the sentence to be query-relevant is shown in parentheses. 
 1  i was impressed with the compactness.  all three   
 1  an adult also can enjoy this.  two of the three  
 1  the manufacturer is marvelous.  one of the three   
 1  technological advancement is very rapid.  none  
 the above sentences show that individual judgments differ when a sentence tends to be indirectly or weakly relevant to the query. we take a stand on accepting weak query relevance because it is more advantageous in a real-time search to pursue possible query relevance heuristically or eliminatively rather than to verify query relevance precisely. thus  we considered the sentences judged by at least one evaluator query-relevant to be a correct answer. 
1 strategies about query relevance 
query-relevant sentence extraction in the prototype system has the following two heuristic and simple strategy options. 
 a  a sentence is relevant to the query only when a query phrase occurs in the sentence or within some number of sentences before the sentence. 
 b  a sentence is relevant to the query only when a query phrase occurs in the sentence or within the chunk that the sentence belongs to and only opinion sentences consecutively appear in. 
　the strategy adopted affects the number of opinion sentences an index table can accommodate. from this viewpoint  strategy  b  is better because an index table needs information only about opinion sentences. in contrast  with strategy  a   an index table has to accommodate non-opinion sentences immediately before opinion sentences in addition to the opinion sentences themselves.  
1 experiments  
we conducted experiments in the prototype opinion sentence search system in blogspace to assess opinion sentence extraction  query-relevant sentence extraction  and a combination of the two. all experiments used the japanese sentences described in sections 1. the numbers of sentences used for training and testing are shown in table 1.  
1 evaluation of opinion sentence extraction 
the experiments on opinion sentence extraction were designed to ascertain the effect of feature parameters on opinion sentence learning and the effect of position information on opinion clues. answers where at least one of the three evaluators judged the sentence to be an opinion were defined as correct  and answers where no evaluator judged the sentence to be an opinion were defined as wrong. 
methodprecisionrecall accuracy baseline1%1%1%proposed  without semantic categories 1%1%1%proposed  with semantic categories  1%1%1%table 1: comparison with baseline 
　the main feature parameters for the svm learner are clue expressions and semantic categories  as explained in section 1. we prepared a baseline method that regards a sentence as an opinion if it contains a number of opinion clues that does not dip below a certain threshold. the best threshold was set through trial and error at four occurrences. the experimental results in table 1 show that our method performs better than the baseline method. precision is defined as the correctness ratio of the sentences extracted as opinions. recall is defined as the ratio of opinion sentences correctly extracted over the total number of test opinion sentences. accuracy is defined as the correct judgment ratio of all the test  both opinion and non-opinion  sentences. the two bottom rows show the results of our opinion sentence extraction method. the second bottom row concerns methods that do not use semantic categories  and the bottom row concerns those that do. the results in these two cases show that clue expressions are effective and that semantic categories improve performance.  we also evaluated the effect of position information of 1 opinion clues based on the heuristic rule that a japanese predicate part almost always appears in the last ten words in a sentence. instead of more precisely identifying predicate position from parsing information  we employed this heuristic rule as a feature parameter in the svm learner and classifier for practical reasons. 
position precision recall accuracyall words 1%1%1%quasi predicate part 1%1%1%table 1: effect of opinion-clue position restriction 
　table 1 lists the experimental results for position restriction of opinion clues.  all words  indicates that all feature parameters are permitted at any position in the sentence.  quasi predicate part  indicates that all feature parameters are permitted only if they occur within the last ten words in the sentence. although we narrowed the scope to consider the feature parameters and adopted an expedient method to locate the predicate part  feature parameters within the last ten words perform better in all evaluations than those without position restriction. the fact that the equal position restriction on all opinion clues improved performance suggests that assigning the individual position condition to each opinion clue or locating the predicate part more precisely significantly improves performance. 
　the ratios of sentences the system judged opinion were  1% to the opinion sentences three evaluators judged to be opinions  1% to those two judged to be opinions  1% to those one judged to be opinions  and 1% to those three judged to be non-opinions. even though all sentences judged by at least one evaluator to be opinions were equally trained as correct answers  the higher the number of evaluators judging a sentence to be an opinion  the more likely our method was to judge it an opinion. this result shows that our method is congruent with human judgment. 
1 evaluation of query relevance 
　we investigated the performance of the query-relevant sentence extraction strategies described in section 1  using all 1 opinion sentences in a test set in table 1. the performance values were computed based on the correct answers being the 1 sentences that at least one of the three evaluators had judged to be query-relevant and the wrong answers being 1 sentences that all three evaluators had judged to be query-irrelevant. we modified strategy  a  in section 1  as follows. 
 a ' a sentence is relevant to the query only when a query phrase exists in the sentence or in those right before the sentence. 
　strategy  b  was not modified for the evaluation. we prepared a baseline method that regards a sentence as query relevant if it contains a query phrase. 
methodprecisionrecall accuracy baseline1%1%1%strategy  a ' 1%1%1%strategy  b  1%1%1%table 1: evaluation of query relevance strategy 
　table 1 shows the experimental results of query-relevance extraction from 1 opinion sentences in the baseline  strategy  a '  and strategy  b . these results show that our strategies performed with much better recall and slightly worse precision than the baseline method. although the above results show that our strategies need improvement  strategy  a ' and strategy  b  seem to amount to a practical solution at present. strategy  b   which our system is currently using is advantageous from the viewpoint of the amount of opinion sentences in an index table but is somewhat inferior to strategy  a ' in precision. 
1 evaluation of total performance 
the total performance of the opinion sentence search is obtained by multiplying performance of the two modules  opinion sentence extraction  and query-relevant sentence extraction. the performance values were computed based on the correct answers being the 1 sentences that were judged by at least one of the three evaluators to be query-relevant opinions out of all 1 test sentences in table 1. the ratio of opinion query-relevant sentences in test sentences  1%  which is 1 out of 1  suggests that the number of sentences for which the system pursues retrieval is a reasonable amount for a user to read. 
　table 1 shows the experimental results for total performance obtained by combining the two modules. for opinion sentence extraction  all feature parameters described in section 1 and the opinion-clue position restriction described in section 1 were used. in query-relevant sentence extraction  two trials  one using strategy  a '  and the other using strategy  b  were attempted.  
query-relevance precision recall accuracystrategy  a ' 1%1%1%strategy  b  1%1%1%table 1: evaluation of total performance 
　the results show that although total performance must be improved  the precision values  which were not low  suggest that system's output is reasonably reliable. the precision of total performance was higher than the multiplication products of the two modules. this is thought to be because opinion sentences tend to be more query-relevant than non-opinion sentences. 
1 conclusion and future work 
　we proposed an opinion sentence search method for japanese open-domain blog pages. the experiments suggested that the performance of the prototype system has promise as a practical application. while the performance of opinion sentence extraction was good  it is necessary to improve the query-relevant sentence extraction strategy while storing as many opinion sentences as possible in the space available in the index table in the blog data server. another avenue of future work is to develop a richer user interface where extracted opinion sentences can be classified in terms of emotion  sentiment  requirement  and suggestion  so that a user can retrieve relevant opinions on demand  and where extracted sentences are summarized so that the user can quickly learn what the writer wanted to say. 
