 
in the development of disciplines addressing dynamics  a major role was played by the assumption that processes can be modelled by introducing state properties  called potentialities  anticipating in which respect a next state will be different. a second assumption often made is that these state properties can be related to other state properties  called reducers. the current paper proposes a philosophical framework in terms of potentialities and their reducers to obtain a common philosophical foundation for methods in ai and cognitive science to model dynamics. this framework provides a unified philosophical foundation for numerical  symbolic  and hybrid approaches. 
1. introduction  
dynamics of the world shows itself by the occurrence of different world states  i.e.  states at different points in time that differ in some of their state properties. in recent years  within cognitive science  dynamics has been recognised and emphasised as a central issue in describing cognitive processes  port and gelder  1 . van gelder and port  propose the dynamical systems theory  dst  as a new paradigm that is better suited to the dynamic aspects of cognition than symbolic modelling approaches. however  as dst  which subsumes neural networks and many other quantitative approaches to adaptive and control systems   commits to the use of quantitative methods  differential and difference equations   it is often considered less suitable to model higher cognitive processes such as reasoning and language processing. dst is based on the state-determined system assumption: properties of a given state fully determine the properties of future states; cf.  ashby  1   p. 1;  gelder and port  1   p. 1. this means that for state properties that are different in a future state  state properties in the given state can be found that somehow indicate or anticipate these differing  changed  properties. this idea closely relates to the concept of potentiality that goes back to zeno and aristotle  1 bc' : if a potentiality p for a state property a occurs in a given state  then in a next state  property a will occur. a potentiality is a kind of anticipatory state property: a state property anticipating the different state property  in the changed state .  
모in the current paper the notion of potentiality is used as a basis for a philosophical framework to analyse modelling methods that address dynamics. this framework is applicable to obtain philosophical foundations for both quantitative approaches  such as dst and neural networks  and qualitative or symbolic approaches  such as bdimodelling and production systems  to modelling of dynamics. given that the framework is applicable to dst  which since long has proved its value for quantifiable areas within a wide variety of disciplines  also the scope of applicability of the proposed philosophical framework covers disciplines such as physics  chemistry  biology  and economics. for the cognitive and knowledge engineering area  it is shown how the framework can be applied to provide a foundation for symbolic modelling methods such as production systems and bdi-models. the framework easily describes both mental aspects and physical aspects of embodied cognitive agents and their relationship. 
모below  first the notion of potentiality is briefly introduced  section 1 . next  in section 1 the notion of higher-order potentiality is discussed and illustrated by examples from mathematics  higher-order derivatives and taylor series . in section 1 it is shown how higher-order potentialities play a role as a philosophical foundation of basic concepts in physics  momentum  kinetic energy  force . section 1 discusses the assumption that  potentialities of some higher order can be reduced to lower level state properties. sections 1 and 1 show how the framework can be applied to symbolic modelling methods: bdi-models and production systems. section 1 shows how it can be applied to modelling of adaptive agents. in section 1 the philosophical framework is related to the dynamical systems theory  including neural networks and many other  quantitative  approaches to dynamic systems. section 1 is a discussion. 
1. potentialities  
given a particular state that just changed with respect to some of its state properties  it is natural to ask for an explanation of why these new state properties occurred. in a state-based approach  as a source for such an explanation  state properties found in the previous state form a primary 
candidate. a main question becomes how to determine for a certain state that it is going to change to a different state  and  more specifically  how to determine  on the basis of some of the state properties in the given state  those state properties for which the new state will differ from the given one. this poses the challenge to identify state properties occurring in a given state that anticipate the next state: anticipatory state properties. if such state properties  historically sometimes called potentialities  are given  anticipation to change is somehow encoded in a state. the assumption on the existence of such properties is the crucial factor for the validity of the assumptions underlying dynamic modelling methods such as the dynamical systems theory.1  aristotle did introduce such a type of concept; he called it potentiality  to move   or movable.1 for example  following zeno  the difference between an arrow at rest and the snapshot of a moving arrow at time t at position p is that the former has no potentiality to be at p'  whereas the latter has. this explains why at a next instant t' the former arrow is still where it was  at p  while the latter arrow is  assuming no obstruction  at a different position p': aristotle did not only consider changes of positions  due to locomotion   but also  for example  a young man becoming an old man  and a cold object becoming hot. for each of these types of changes a specific type of potentiality is considered; e.g.  the potentiality to be at position p'  the potentiality  of a cold object  to be hot. in general  if the potentiality p  occurring in a state s  to have state property a has led to a state s' where indeed a holds  then this state property a of state s' is called the fulfilment or actualisation of the potentiality p for a  occurring in state s. notice that aristotle considered both absolute potentialities  indicating a state property for the future state independent of this state property in the present state  and relative potentialities  indicating a difference  increase or decrease  in a future state property compared to the present state. 
1. higher-order potentialities 
the effect of a potentiality on a future state can be described by relating its occurrence in the present state to the occurrence of a certain state property in the future state  usually under an additional opportunity condition  e.g.  assuming no obstruction by influences otherwise . this indicates what it is a potentiality for. a more complicated question is how to specify when  under which past and present circumstances  a potentiality itself will occur. for the case of empty space  where an object is assumed to have no interaction with other objects  a potentiality to change position is present because it was present at an earlier point in time and persisted until t  inertia of motion . however  if the potentiality in a new state is different from the earlier one  a question becomes why this is so. this leads to the question addressed in this section of how a changed potentiality can be explained. 
모the use of higher-order potentialities is an answer to this question. the idea behind higher-order potentialities is simple. to obtain an explanation of changed state properties over time  potentialities were introduced. potentialities are also state properties that change over time. therefore it would be reasonable to treat them just like any other state property that changes over time. this means that for a potentiality p 1  a socalled second-order potentiality p 1  is introduced to explain why p 1  may become changed over time. and of course this process can be repeated for p 1   and so on. this leads to an infinite sequence of higher-order potentialities  p 1   p 1   p 1   p 1   ...  where for each natural number n the potentiality p n  is called an n-th-order potentiality. using such higher-order potentialities  the idea is the following: 
  for a certain point in time t1 the occurrence of a state property a is determined by the state at a previous time point t1   t1  in particular  by the occurrence of the first-order potentiality p 1  for a at that time point t1   
  the occurrence of the first-order potentiality p 1  at t1 is determined by the state at a time t1   t1  in particular by the occurrence of its own potentiality which is the second-order potentiality p 1  for a at t1  et cetera. 
this process can be visualised as depicted in figure 1. 
 

 	time points 
 
figure 1.  dynamics based on higher-order potentialities 
모this shows how the concept of potentiality to explain change of a certain basic state property a can take the form of a large number of  higher-order  entities. strange as the idea of an infinite number of higher-order potentialities may seem at first sight  in mathematical context  in particular in calculus  this has been worked out well  using infinite summations . higher-order potentialities have been formalised in the form of higher-order  derivatives of a function. the  first-order  derivative of a function at a time point t gives an estimated measure of how the function will change its value in a next time point. the well-known 
taylor series  taylor  1  for sufficiently smooth functions  at least infinitely often differentiable to guantee the existence of the derivatives  shows how changes of the function value from t to t'  within some given neighbourhood of t  depend on all  higher-order  derivatives:   
	  	f t'  = f t  + 쑒  f k  t  t' - t k / k!.  
this shows how the  relative  potentiality at t  defined by the combination of all higher-order potentialities  determines the changed state at the future time points t'.  
1. potentialities underlying physics 
in later times  successors of aristotle  such as ren뺝 descartes  1   christiaan huygens  1   isaac newton  1  and gottfried wilhelm leibniz  1   among others  have addressed the question how to further develop the phenomenon of dynamics  or change   in particular within physics. they developed classical mechanics based on concepts that can be philosophically founded as certain types of potentialities.  
 descartes  took the product of mass and velocity of an object for its potentiality to be in a changed position  or 'quantity of motion'. notice that this anticipatory state property 'quantity of motion' is a relative potentiality: the actualisation of a given quantity of motion entails being at another position as specified by this quantity relative to the current position. descartes also expresses a law of conservation for this quantity of motion. 
모in modern physics this 'quantity of motion' concept is called linear momentum  or just momentum  and the conservation  for example  during elastic collisions  is called the 'law of momentum conservation'. newton incorporated this notion in his approach to motion. this is one way in which a concept 'potentiality'  for change of position  was used as a philosophical basis to introduce formalised concepts in physics  thus providing one of the cornerstones of classical mechanics. also the concept of 'quantity of motion'  describing change of position  can change itself; this leads to a second-order potentiality. in his second law newton  uses the term 'impressed motive force' to express the change of motion.1 this law expresses that the concept of force used by newton directly relates to change of motion. for  quantity of  motion he gives the same definition as descartes  i.e.  momentum. for an impressed force a definition is given that refers to 'exerted action'  and to the corresponding change of the object's state of motion.1 he shows how this notion applies in the particular case of centripetal  i.e.  directed to one point  force.1 this shows that the concept 'force' used by newton as an addition to state ontology can be given a definitional relationship to 'motion generated in a given time'. this 'motion generated in a given time' can be philosophical founded as a secondorder potentiality for the first-order potentiality 'motion'. so  within classical mechanics  after the concepts 'momentum' and 'kinetic energy' which were added to the state ontology as specific types of concepts based on a  firstorder  potentiality  the concept 'force' can be considered a third anticipatory state property added to the state ontology  this time based on a second-order potentiality. newton and also leibniz developed mathematical techniques of calculus  such as differentiation and integration. using these techniques  newton's second law is formulated as f = dp/dt or f = d mv /dt. for a mass which is constant over time this is equivalent with f = ma with a the acceleration dv/dt; in this - most known form - the law was formulated by euler 1 years after the principia appeared. in 1th century text books such as  mach  1  the concept 'moving force' is defined in terms of acceleration  which is based on a secondorder potentiality for change of position.1 
모as illustrated by the examples in sections 1 and 1  the idea of use potentialities to analyse the change of states has successfully contributed to the development of wellrespected disciplines such as mathematics and physics.  
1. reducers limiting a potentiality chain 
apparently  the use of potentialities may lead to an infinitedimensional vector of higher-order potentialities. as this can be difficult to handle  it makes sense to look for ways to break off this chain of higher-order potentialities. one possible option is to consider only changes that involve a finite number of higher-order potentialities. for example  for a falling object within a constant gravitation field  the second-order potentiality  the second-order derivative of the function measuring the distance  is constant  1 m/sec1   and hence no third- or higher-order potentiality is needed. however  further away in the universe  if an object is approaching the earth  gravitation will increase over time  so this assumption of constancy will not always be fulfilled. however  as is also shown by the taylor series  often an adequate approximation can be obtained by taking into account only the terms up to some n-th order  as the terms substantially decrease in absolute size; for example  assuming all derivatives bounded by some constant m  the effect of the n-th term is less then m/n!  so  as an approximation its contribution can be counted as zero. 
 in the same perspective  a more general way to get rid of the infinite vector of higher-order potentialities is when for some n the n-th-order potentiality is equivalent to a combination of lower level potentialities and/or basic state properties  this is called a reducer of the higher-order potentiality  and by means of this relation can be reduced to them. this is what happens in classical mechanics  and  in a more general context  in other cases where a differential 
equation can be found that relates a higher-order derivative to lower order derivatives and/or basic state properties.  
모the domain of physics illustrates this. analysing the motion of planets around the sun  newton found out that they can only follow their orbit if a second-order potentiality is assumed  in the direction of the sun. newton calculated  using his calculus under development  in detail that this motive force was proportional to 1 divided by the square of the distance. for example  for an object in space with mass m approaching earth  with mass m   newton's law of gravitation for the motive force on the object is as follows  here x is the distance between the object and the earth  and c is a constant : f = c mm/x1. such a relation between the second-order potentiality force and basic state properties mass and distance shows how a higher-order potentiality can be reduced: in this case  c mm/x1 is a reducer for f. 
모as the example from physics shows  a differential equation is a manner to reduce higher-order potentialities. this reveals another assumption underlying dst  in addition to the state-based system assumption  namely that for some n the n-th order potentiality can be reduced to lower level potentialities and/or basic state properties. without this assumption no differential equations can be found  and without them dst will not work. 
1. potentialities and bdi-models 
although traditionally only used within disciplines such as mathematics and physics  a natural question is whether the idea of higher-order potentialities is also suitable to obtain philosophical foundations for domains such as ai  cognitive science and agent systems. to describe the internal dynamics of agents  the concepts beliefs  desires and intentions have been introduced; e.g.   aristotle  1 bc' . from a historical perspective  the reason for introducing these concepts was not unlike the reason for introducing the concepts momentum and force within classical mechanics: they were needed as abstract notions to explain the change of states  in this case of living creatures. aristotle describes how desire plays a role similar to that of the potentiality for an action. here 'desire' is indicated as the source of motion of a living being. he shows how the occurrence of certain internal  mental  state properties  desires  'the good'  within the living being entail or cause the occurrence of an action in the external world  given an opportunity  'the possible'  to actualise the potentiality for the action indicated by the desire.  
모in this section it is discussed how to philosophically found concepts such as desire and intention by potentialities. to start  the notion of intention is addressed. an intention can be founded by a potentiality for an action in the world  i.e.  for a changed world state . where do intentions come from  a common view is that  given some beliefs  intentions come from desires  by some form of selection process. in this interpretation a desire can founded by a potentiality as well  but not a potentiality for some state of the world  but a potentiality for an intention  which itself is also considered a potentiality  for an action  i.e.  for a changed world state . therefore this view identifies a desire as a second-order potentiality  for a changed world state . to the question where desires come from there seems to be no general answer. in some cases there may be reducers for it in terms of physical states  in other cases  e.g.  norms or personality aspects may provide a third-order potentiality. 
1. potentialities and production systems 
an often used method in ai and cognitive science is to specify how a state in a system may change is production systems. these are collections of production rules  denoted as   뫸 뷍 with antecedent   and consequent 뷍 ; here: 
     indicates a  combined  state property for the current state 
  뷍  indicates one or more state properties for the next state the idea is that if the combination of properties specified in the first description holds in a  current  state  then in a next state the properties specified by the second description will hold. this is illustrated by a simple model of agent behaviour based on beliefs desires and intentions. consider an agent walking down a street and observing an ice cream sign across the street he believes the supermarket sells ice cream. based on this belief  b1  the agent generates a desire  d  for ice cream. given this desire  and the belief  b1  that the supermarket is reachable  by crossing the street  the agent generates the intention  i  of having ice cream. given this intention and the belief  b1  that no traffic is on the street he actually crosses the street and obtains the ice cream  e . in this case the state ontology is described by six basic state properties: b1  b1  b1  d  i  e. the production system is:   b1 뫸 d      b1 뫇 d 뫸 i        b1 뫇 i 뫸 e 
based on this a trace of subsequent states is made:  
  given a current state s  take the production rules for which the antecedent holds in the current state. this is the set of applicable rules. 
  collect the consequents of all applicable rules and obtain the next state s' by modifying s so that all these consequents hold in s'  and the rest of s is persisting . 
so  for example  the subsequent states for a given initial state for which the three beliefs hold are as follows: 
1  b1  b1  b1  
1  b1  b1  b1  d  
1  b1  b1  b1  d  i  
1  b1  b1  b1  d  i  e  
how can this be interpreted in terms of potentialities  for example  consider state 1. as in the next state  state 1  state property i holds  in state 1 the potentiality for i to hold has to be present. on the other hand  i occurs in state 1 because of the second production rule. taken together this means that this production rule can be interpreted for state 1 as indicating that  due to the occurrence of both b1 and d in this state  also the potentiality p i  for i occurs in state 1. similarly the other production rules can be interpreted as indications of which potentialities occur in a given state. in general  according to this interpretation  a production system specifies for each state which potentialities occur: for each production rule   뫸 뷍  if in a state s its antecedent   holds  then in this state s also the potentialities p 뷍  for 뷍 occur. thus a production rule   뫸 뷍 can be interpreted as an implication   뫸 p 뷍   describing a logical relationship 
between state properties in a given state  e.g.    is a reducer for p 뷍 . since the idea of production rules is used in various other modelling approaches  e.g.  knowledge-based systems  and cognitive architectures such as act-r  anderson and lebiere  1  and soar  laird et al.  1    in principle it is possible to interpret such approaches in terms of potentialities as well. 
1. potentialities and adaptive agents 
adaptive agents are often modelled in numerical and algorithmic manners. in this sense modelling approaches for adaptive agents are in general closer to the dst modelling approach than to symbolic modelling approaches as often applied for other types of cognitive agents such as bdi agents. the potentiality-based analysis framework is applicable to obtain a philosophical foundation for both types of modelling approaches. as in section 1 and 1 it was shown how symbolic models can be founded by potentialities  in this section adaptive agents are addressed  illustrated by a case study of aplysia. aplysia is a sea hare that is often used to do experiments. it is able to learn; for example  it performs classical conditioning in the following manner. this  a bit simplified  description is mainly based on  gleitman  1   pp. 1. initially the following behaviour is shown: a tail shock leads to a response  contraction   and a light touch on its siphon is insufficient to trigger such a response. now suppose the following experimental protocol is undertaken. in each trial the subject is touched lightly on its siphon and then  shocked on its tail  as a consequence it responds . it turns out that after a number of trials  assumed three in the current example  the behaviour has changed: the animal also responds  contracts  on a siphon touch. the cause of this change in behaviour is  in short  that the learning trials strengthen the internal connection between sensory nand motor neurons. to obtain a potentiality-based analysis of this adaptive agent the following steps can be made. 
  introduce the basic world state properties: siphon touch  tail shock  contraction  weak connection between sensory neuron and motor neuron. 
  introduce a potentiality p for the contraction  based on the opportunity that a siphon touch occurs . 
  introduce a potentiality p' for p  based on the opportunity that both a tail shock and siphon touch occur . 
  introduce a potentiality p  for p'  based on the opportunity that both a tail shock and siphon touch occur . 
  introduce a potentiality p ' for p   based on the opportunity that both a tail shock and siphon touch occur . 
  specify a reducer for p ' based on the untrained state of the connection between the relevant sensory and motor neurons. 
notice that in the analysis of the example the intermediate states during the adaptation process were founded by first-  second- and third-order potentialities p  p'  p  that were not reduced  similar to the not reduced first-order potentiality momentum in classical mechanics as an intermediate state between the second order potentiality force  which is reduced  and position. however  if more detailed information from the neurological area is incorporated  i.e.  about the physiological states of the synapses between certain neurons  e.g.  sensory neuron sn1 and motor neuron mn  during the adaptation process   then all of the potentialities can be reduced; e.g.   gleitman  1   pp. 1  see also figure 1. within a potentiality-based analysis this is incorporated as follows. suppose s1  s1 and s1 are reducers of p  p'  p  respectively  then the  higherorder  potentialities p'  p   p '  become  first-order  potentialities for the world state properties s1  s1 and s1 respectively. 
 
 	sn 
figure 1.  aplysia from neurological perspective 
모this shows how potentialities cover the foundation of both internal agent states that are used as functional states without  direct physical grounding  and internal agent states that are considered as embodied and embedded in the physical world. moreover  the relationship between these functionalist and physicalist perspectives can easily be analysed within the potentiality-based philosophical framework. for reasons of presentation  the example of an adaptive agent discussed in this section was kept relatively simple. however  the case can be extended easily to include  for example  numerical aspects  or more precise timing aspects such as in trace conditioning.  
1. potentialities and dst 
within dynamical systems theory  dst; cf.  ashby  1; port and gelder  1    techniques used are difference and differential equations. the analysis based on potentialities covers the dst approach in the following manner.  
  for the basic state properties  take value assignments to the basic variables used to describe a phenomenon in dst.  
  for any n  for the nth-order potentiality for a basic state property  take the value assignment to the nth-order derivative of the variable.  
  for the reduction relation of an nth-order potentiality  take the nth-order differential equation relating the value of the nthorder derivative to the values of lower-order derivatives and basic variables. 
as an example  the gravitation case is covered as follows: 
  basic state properties: value assignments to x the position of the object  m mass of the object  m mass of the earth. 
  first-order potentiality for basic state property mx: value assignment to first-order derivative p of mx  momentum p of the object : p = dmx/dt. 
  second-order potentiality for state property mx: value assignment to first-order derivative f of p  or  equivalently  second-order derivative f of mx  force f : f = dp/dt = d1mx/dt1. 
  reduction relation of the second-order potentiality f:   	            f = c*mm/x1        or d1mx/dt1 = c*mm/x1  . 
as neural networks can be considered as a specific use of dst  the relationship of the potentiality-based view to dst also covers the relationship to neural networks and many other quantitative modelling methods. 
1. discussion 
dynamical systems theory  dst  has recently been put forward within cognitive science to model dynamics of cognitive processes  and proposed as an alternative for the symbolic/computational approach; for example   gelder and port  1; port and gelder  1 . dst subsumes many quantitative approaches such as neural networks and other adaptive system modelling approaches. the notion of a state-determined system  ashby  1  is central for dst; such a system is based on the assumption that properties of a given state fully determine the properties of future states.  within dst the notion of dynamical system that is assumed is based on world states at different points in time that are conceptualised by  real number  value assignments to continuous variables. the way in which properties of a present state determine properties of a future state is expressed by difference or differential equations. this is one specific way to achieve the state-determined system assumption  where derivatives play the role of potentialities: 
state properties that indicate how the state will change.  
모in other literature  such as  giunti  1   the notion of dynamical system is more general  not  only  based on real number value assignments. also in such systems a statedetermined system assumption can be incorporated by introducing potentialities to the state ontology that indicate in which respect the state is going to change. the notion of potentiality goes back to zeno and aristotle and was exploited by descartes  newton  huygens and leibniz  among others  to develop fundamental areas within physics and mathematics  classical mechanics and calculus .  
모in this paper  a philosophical framework has been introduced to analyse modelling methods for dynamics by  first- and higher-order  potentialities and reducers for them. it was shown how this framework provides unified philosophical foundations for both symbolic and mathematical approaches  approaches that are often seen as mutually exclusive. as a result  hybrid modelling approaches can be philosophically founded  in which both symbolic and mathematical aspects are covered. examples of such approaches that make some first steps in that direction are cognitive modelling frameworks such as actr  anderson and lebiere  1   soar  laird et al.  1   and  recently  leadsto  bosse et al.  1 . 
모within mathematics the same philosophical concept has been worked out in the nth-order derivatives of a function for all n  and the taylor series to calculate changes of the function value. in many cases  after a few steps a reduction can be made in the sense that a higher-order potentiality is equivalent to a combination of basic state properties and/or lower level potentialities. within dst this is where a differential equation comes in  reducing an n-th-order derivative to lower level properties: the assumption of reduction is another crucial assumption underlying dst. 
모the presented philosophical framework unifies the modelling of a wide variety of dynamic phenomena in the natural and artificial world  from cognitive phenomena to biological  chemical and physical phenomena. for example  in the aplysia case study it was shown how modelling from a functionalist/mental perspective can easily be integrated at the underlying philosophical level with a perspective from the physical/neurological level. thus it was shown how philosophical foundations of agents embodied in their physical environment are addressed in a unified manner. 
