
for two integral histograms r =  r1 ... rd  and c =  c1 ... cd  of equal sum n  the mongekantorovich distance dmk r c  between r and c parameterized by a d ℅ d distance matrix t is the minimum of all costs   f t   taken over matrices f of the transportationpolytopeu r c . recent results suggest that this distance is not negative definite  and hence  through schoenberg's well-known result  exp  1t dmk  may not be a positive definite kernel for all t   1. rather than using directly dmk to define a similarity between r and c  we propose in this paper to investigate kernels on r and c based on the whole transportation polytope u r c . we prove that when r and c have binary counts  which is equivalent to stating that r and c represent clouds of points of equal size  the permanent of an adequate gram matrix induced by the distance matrix t is a positive definite kernel under favorable conditions on t. we also show that the volume of the polytope u r c   that is the number of integral transportationplans  is a positive definite quantity in r and c through the robinson-schenstedknuth correspondence between transportation matrices and young tableaux. we follow by proposing a family of positive definite kernels related to the generating function of the polytope through recent results obtained separately by a. barvinok on the one hand  and c.berg and a.j. duran on the other hand. we finally present preliminary results led on a subset of the mnist database to compare clouds of points through the permanent kernel.
1 introduction
defining meaningful kernels on histograms and clouds of points - and more generally positive measures on an arbitrary space x - is an important topic in the field of kernel methods  as it is directly related to the definition of kernels for structured objects seen as bags-of-components. since the latter representations are frequently used by practitioners in applications  notably images seen as histograms of colors  texts as bags-of-words or sequences as groups of subsequences  research has been active in this field recently.
﹛in the early applications of kernel methods to complex data structures  histograms were often treated as vectors  and used as such with the standard gaussian or polynomial kernels  joachims  1 . more adequate positive definite kernels which exploit their specificity have been proposed since. namely  kernels which take into account the fact that histograms are vectors with nonnegative coordinates  hein and bousquet  1   and whose sum may be normalized to one  that is cast as discrete probability measures and treated under the light of information geometry  lafferty and lebanon  1; lebanon  1 . since such histograms are usually defined on bins which are not equally dissimilar  as is for instance the case with color or amino-acid histograms  further kernels which may take into account an a priori inter-bin similarity where subsequently proposed  kondor and jebara  1; cuturi et al.  1; hein and bousquet  1 .
﹛in this context  a well-known distance for probability measures on a space x which takes explicitly into account the geometry of x is the optimal transportation distance  villani  1   which is usually known as the monge-kantorovich  mk  or wasserstein distance. this distance is also popular in the computer vision community  rubner et al.  1  under the name of the earth movers' distance. however  preliminary findings  naor and schechtman  1  suggest that the mk distance is not negative definite  and cannot thus be used directly to define positive definite kernels  through the schoenberg theorem1 and negative exponentiation for instance. although some approximations of the distance have been used so far to define positive definite kernels in vision applications  grauman and darrell  1   we propose in this paper to consider not only the optimal transport plan  but the whole of the transportation polytope to characterize the similarity of two histograms r and c.
﹛this idea is rooted in the approach of  vert et al.  1  to define a positive definite kernel for strings derived from a set of string manipulations which may map a string m1 to another string m1  namely sequences of deletions  substitutions and insertions of tokens  known as alignments. vert et al.  consider all possible alignments 羽 between m1 and m1 and associate to each of these alignments 羽 a score s 羽  which quantifies how efficiently the sequence 羽 aligns successive tokens of m1 and m1. rather than considering the score of the optimal alignment 羽  known as the smith-waterman score in the context of biological sequences  vert et al.  propose to define a positive definite kernel between m1 and m1 through the sum  汕   1  which in their experimental setting provides a much better performance. intuitively  the latter sum can be interpreted as the generating function of the set of all alignments 羽  which may give it more discriminative power than the simple use of the extremum.
﹛in the context of this paper  the set of all alignments 羽 is played by the set of all d ℅ d transportation matrices f ﹋ u r c  between two discrete histograms r =  r1 ... rd  and c =  c1 ... cd  of equal sum n; the analog of the blosum distance matrices between amino-acids used in vert et al.  is an arbitrary d ℅ d negative definite distance matrix t between the bins of the histograms  and finally  the cost 羽 考  becomes simply the frobenius dot-product   f t  . as is also the case in  vert et al.  1   the family of convolution kernels introduced by haussler  plays an important role in our proofs  notably for the permanent kernel for clouds of points introduced in section 1. we then propose in section 1 a kernel between histograms by only taking into account the volume of u r c   and we show that this result is a natural consequence of the robinson-schensted-knuthcorrespondence between transportation matrices and generalized young tableaux. finally  inspired by a recent constructionobtained by barvinok  and through a lemma by berg and duran   we show in section 1 that a weighted version of the generating function of u r c  can be used to define positive definite kernels. we close the paper with section 1 by discussing implementation and computational issues brought forward by these kernels  as well as preliminary experimental results led on a subset of the mnist database of handwritten digits.
1 permanent kernel for clouds of points
we define in this section a kernel for two clouds of points x = {x1 ... xn} and y = {y1 ... yn} in a space x endowed with a kernel 百  througha kernel on arbitrary sequence representations x =  x1 ... xn  and y =  y1 ... yn   which is by definition invariant under reordering of these terms. recall that for a n ℅ n matrix m =  mij   the permanent of m  perm is defined as the quantity per
where 考 spans the symmetric group sn  that is the set of all permutations of {1 ... n}. note that the definition of the permanent of a matrix differs from that of its determinant in that the signatures of the permutations are not taken into account. the permanent of a matrix is also invariant under any permutation of columns or rows of this matrix  a fact that we use in the proof of proposition 1 below.
proposition 1 let x be a set endowed with a kernel 百 and xn the set of clouds of points of x of cardinal n  that is {x = {x1 ... xn} xi ﹋ x}. let x = {x1 ... xn} and y =
{y1 ... yn} ﹋ xn. then
	 per  百 xi yj  1≒i j≒n 	 1 
is a positive definite kernel on xn ℅ xn.
proof. we first prove the result for two sequences x =  x1 ... xn  y =  y1 ... yn . given a permutation 考 we write x考 for the sequence  x考 1  ... x考 n  . the proof now follows from the work of haussler  on convolutionkernels. namely  we consider the equivalence relation r between two sequences x y where xry if and only if there exists a permutation 考 ﹋ sn such that x考 = y. consider now the kernel k for two sequences
.
which we use to define the convolution kernel k  which is positive definite by definition 

u﹋r 1xv﹋r 1y

 per 百 xi yj   = n!per 百 xi yj   
hence the positive definiteness of kper used on clouds of points x y represented through any arbitrary pair of sequences x y.
﹛suppose for interpretation purposes that the kernel k can be written as k x y  = e d x y  where d is an hilbertian metric  hein and bousquet  1  on x  that is there exists a mapping 耳 from x to an arbitrary hilbert space h such that . in that case the permanent can be interpreted as the sum over all possible matchings 考 of the weight of each total transport scheme e d考 where
.	the quantity d考 stands for the to-
tal transport cost between the two clouds-of-points given the transport plan 考 is selected  taken in a feature space h  as illustrated in figure 1.
﹛note finally that a possible way to define kernels for two clouds x and y of sizes n and m respectively is to consider the sum of the pairwise kernels of all their respective subsets of size d ≒ min n m   that is
.
xd1﹋x y1d﹋y
1 the volume of the transport polytope as a kernel for marginals
we write n = {1 ...} for the set of nonnegative integers  and consider now integral histograms  or margins as in the

figure 1: by considering the permanent of the matrix e tij where tij = d xi yj   the pairwise distances between white and dark points  the permanent kernel explicitly considers the costs of all possible matchings between the points of x and y  and not only the optimal permutation 考.
corresponding statistical literature  diaconis and gangolli  1   with identical overall sum and dimension  that is elements of the simplex lattice
.
﹛we consider the polytope of transport matrices between r and c  restricted to integral matrices  that is
 
where 1d is the d-dimensional vector of ones. we recall that the optimal transportation cost from r to c is a symmetric function in r and c which is defined as the result of the optimization

where t ﹋ rd d is an arbitrary distance matrix between bins  and for two square matrices u and v we use the frobenius dot-product. note that the optimal
plan
= argminf﹋u r c    f t  
can be computed throughstandard linear-programmingmethods in polynomial time in d and it is known that f is a vertex of the polytope. we will reconsider the cost parameter t in the next section  and focus for the rest of this section on the volume |u r c | of the polytope u r c   that is the total number of integral transportation plans. we introduce first the concept of semi-standard young tableaux.
﹛for two partitions u v of an integer n  a semi-standard young tableau of shape u and weight v is a diagram of shape u containing v1 ones  v1 twos  etc.  arranged to be weakly right increasingin rows and strictly increasingdowncolumns. consider for instance for n = 1  the semi-standard tableau
1	1	1
1	1
1	1
1
of shape u =  1 1  and weights v =  1 1 1 1 . given two partitions u and v  the kostka number ku v is equal to the number of semi-standard young tableaux of shape u and weight v.
proposition 1 the kernel kvol on 曳d n defined as
kvol r c  = |u r c |
is symmetric positive definite.
proof. the proof can be derived either from the theory of symmetric functions or from the robinson-schensted-knuth  rsk  correspondence  knuth  1   with both approaches mentionned in  diaconis and gangolli  1 . we recall briefly the second proof. the rsk bijective correspondence states that to every matrix m ﹋ u r c  corresponds one and only pair of semi-standard young tableaux of identical shape and weights r and c respectively. we hence have that  summing over all possible partitions 灰 of n used as shapes for the young tableaux 
  
which is sufficient to prove that the volume |u r c | satisfies mercer's condition.
1 weighted generating functions
the volume of the transportation polytope is a special case of the evaluation of the generating function f of u r c   barvinok  1  on a given cost matrix t  in that case the null matrix  where f is more generally defined as
.
the computation of f for general polytopes  notably the transportationone  is a subject of extensiveresearch  with significative developments carried out in recent years and summarized in  loera et al.  1 . the generating function can also be expressed as the total weight of u r c  if we use the terminology of  barvinok  1  by setting wij = e tij. note that for binary histograms  that is marginals which may either take 1 or 1 values  u r c  is known as the birkhoff polytope and f t  corresponds in this case to the permanent kernel defined in proposition 1 with 百 set to e t. in the general case where r and c may not have binary counts  the volume |u r c | can thus be regarded as a similarity between r and c based exclusively on combinatorial properties  regardless of any prior knowledge t on the distance between the d

figure 1: rather than only consider the minimal value for   f t   reached on the vertex f  we propose to use the same cost criterion evaluated on the whole polytope u r c .
bins. on the other hand  the optimal plan f corresponding to the monge-kantorovich distance takes into account such an information but does not reflect the information carried out by the distribution of the costs found in the whole polytope. hence  having in mind figure 1 we propose to define valid kernels k  which consider both criterions  that is we consider the distribution of the cost   f t   over the whole polytope u r c . we do so by introducing weighted versions of the generating function through a function   : u r c  ↙ r  defining
.
note that the generating functionis recovered when   = 1. although the generating function might be a good candidate for a kernel between r and c  we do not know at this moment whether its evaluations on arbitrary matrices t are positive definite functions of r and c. we provide instead a family of functions   which ensures this condition:
proposition 1 given that t is such that  e tij  is positive semidefinite  and having defined for 1 ≒ a   1 the weight function  a : nd℅d ↙ r as
 
we have that k a is a positive definite kernel on 曳d n.
﹛the symmetry of k a is ensured by the symmetry of t and  a since and we have that
.
we prove the positive-definiteness of k a using the following 1 lemmas  which are motivated by a recent characterization carried out by barvinok  of the generating function of the transport polytope in terms of random permanents.
lemma 1 let t	be a d ℅ d cost matrix such that
 e tij 1≒i j≒d is positive semidefinite and 污 =  污1 ... 污d  a sequence of nonnegative real numbers. for r c ﹋ 曳d n define the n ℅ n block matrix a as
a =  ai j 1≒i j≒d
where each block ai j is the ri ℅ cj rectangular matrix with all coefficients set to the constant 污i污je ti j. then
is a positive definite kernel on 曳d n ℅ 曳d n.
proof. we first map each marginal r and c to the corresponding sequences

and c   and define the positive definite kernel
百 i j  = 污i污je ti j 
for the kernel indexed on {1 ... d} ℅ {1 ... d}. we then have using proposition 1 that:
.
﹛since  is trivially positive definite  so is k污 t as the product of two positive definite kernels.
﹛we use the following lemma to turn the randomized setting proposed in  barvinok  1  into a sum of positive definite kernels:
lemma 1  berg  duran  for each 1   汐 ≒ 1  the sequence  n! 汐 n ﹋ n is a determinate stieltjes moment sequence  that is there exists a unique nonnegative measure 米汐 on  1 ﹢  such that.
we refer to  berg and duran  1  for a proof of this result  and more generally to the reference  berg et al.  1  for the exposition of the moment problems and their relationship with harmonic analysis on semigroups. note that in the case where 汐 = 1  米1 is the standard exponential density  and for 汐 = 1 the measure 米1 can be simply defined as the dirac mass on 1.
lemma 1  barvinok  let 1 ≒ a   1 and suppose 污 =
 污1 ... 污d  is distributed as a sequence of independent random variables with identical law 米a. through the identity
k a = e k污 t r c  
we have that k a is positive definite.
proof. e k污 t r c   is trivially positive definite as a sum of positive definite kernels. we follow barvinok's proofto prove the equality  with a slight modification: barvinok considers standard exponential variable 污ij arranged in a d ℅ d matrix  while we consider here a sequence of independent random variables 污 =  污1 ... 污d  which all follow law 米a.
﹛let us consider matrix a defined in lemma 1. for every permutation 考 of sn let

be the corresponding term in pera. hence
.
following barvinok  with every permutation 考 we associate a transport plan d = d 考  of u r c  called the pattern of 考  as follows. namely d =  dij 1≒i j≒d where
 
that is dij is the number of indices k ﹋ {1 ... n} such that  k 考 k   is in the  i j  block of
d 考  ﹋ u r c  is surjective  but not bijective as we see below. for h考  we thus have  through lemma 1 that

at this point we follow exactly barvinok's proof. barvinok proves that the number of permutations 考 of sn which admit d as a pattern is
 
yielding
 
and hence
 
which concludes the proof.
﹛note that when a = 1 we obtain the fisher-yates distribution on transportation matrices  diaconis and gangolli  1   that is
 
whereas the case yields a weight which only depends on the diagonal elements of the transport plan 
.
1 discussion and experiments
we discuss in this section complexity issues which may arise when trying to compute the kernels presented above  and we present preliminary results on a pattern recognition task which involves comparing clouds of points.
1 computational issues
to handle clouds of points through proposition 1 requires the computation of the permanent of a n ℅ n matrix  which is a notoriously difficult problem in combinatorics. millions of computations of such kernel evaluations  which are usually required to fill in gram matrices  may not be tractable at the moment when the number n of points exceeds twenty to thirty points. however  and in the case where the kernel 百 is bounded between 1 and 1  recent advances1 in the computation of approximations of the permanent through sequential monte carlo  smc  techniques  jerrum et al.  1  yield a complexity of the order of n1 log1 n. this is still problematic for large n  but we believe that for clouds of points of small size the permanent might be a useful kernel  with the ability of quantifying complex relationships through the power of combinatorics. we propose below in our experiments to compare 1 images of handwritten digits by sampling artificially 1 black pixels among each image  and compare these clouds of points through the permanent of the pairwise kernels for the points in each cloud. another issue in that case arises from the numerical stability of the computation of the permanent when the values for 百 might be too small  and we do not have an adequate answer to this problem other than simple cross-validation to obtain reasonable entries.
﹛in the more general case of histograms  both the computation of the volume |u r c | and the integration of k 1  which corresponds to the fisher-yates distribution  as well as that of k 1  may be computed through smc sampling methodologies presented in recent works  chen et al.  1 . for the volume only  exact calculations through toolboxes such as latte  loera et al.  1  are possible  but only tractable for very low dimensions. diaconis and gangolli  propose ad-hoc numerical approximations when d is small and n is large 

where
.
although these expressions might be symmetrized by averaging   their positive definiteness may not be guaranteed and has yet to be tested on datasets.
1 experiments
following the previous work of kondor and jebara   we have conducted experiments on the first 1 images  1 ℅ 1 pixels  of the mnist database of handwritten digits  with approximately 1 images for each digit. for each image xi  we randomly sample a set  of 1 distinct black points in the image  that is pixels with an intensity superior to 1 represented as points of the square  1  ℅  1   and perform a multiclass classification to classify any new image as one of the 1 digits. we do so by applying a simple one-vs-all strategy on 1 classifiers  namely support vector machines  using the spider toolbox. this setting makes it particularly difficult for most common kernels to compare the images and we consider here two different approaches: first the permanent kernel of equation  1   second a gaussian kernel taken between the two images seen as 1℅1 dimensional vectors  preliminarily smoothed through a smoothing-kernel 百 on the pixels  which yields actually a simple summation over gram matrices as described for instance in  borgwardt et al.  1 . the kernel 百 used to compute both the permanent as in equation  1   and to smooth the image in the second case was set to be the gaussian kernel between pixels with a width 考 spanning values 1 1 and 1. the considered kernels are thus
 
kgaussian 
and we use their normalized counterpart  that is using  instead of k in our ex-
periments. we report the cross-validation errors for these settings for 考 taken over 1-fold cross validations in table 1  which show that the permanent kernels appear as a robust although costly alternative to the smoothed kernel in this preliminary experiment.
考gaussianpermanent.1.1  ㊣ 1 1  ㊣ 1 .1.1  ㊣ 1 1  ㊣ 1 .1.1  ㊣ 1 1  ㊣ 1 table 1: misclassification rate expressed in percents for the 1 considered kernels along with their standard errors averaged over cross-validation folds.
