
modularity is a key requirement for collaborative ontology engineering and for distributed ontology reuse on the web. modern ontology languages  such as owl  are logic-based  and thus a useful notion of modularity needs to take the semantics of ontologies and their implications into account. we propose a logic-based notion of modularity that allows the modeler to specify the external signature of their ontology  whose symbols are assumed to be defined in some other ontology. we define two restrictions on the usage of the external signature  a syntactic and a slightly less restrictive  semantic one  each of which is decidable and guarantees a certain kind of  black-box  behavior  which enables the controlled merging of ontologies. analysis of real-world ontologies suggests that these restrictions are not too onerous.
1 motivation
modularity is a key requirement for many tasks concerning ontology design  maintenance and integration  such as the collaborative development of ontologies and the merging of independently developed ontologies into a single  reconciled ontology. modular representations are easier to understand  reason with  extend and reuse. unfortunately  in contrast to other disciplines such as software engineering-in which modularity is a well established notion-ontology engineering is still lacking a useful  well-defined notion of modularity.
	modern	ontology	languages 	such	as	owl	 patel-
schneider et al.  1   are logic-based; consequently  a notion of modularity needs to take into account the semantics of the ontologies and their implications.
¡¡in this paper  we propose a logic-based framework for modularity of ontologies in which we distinguish between external and local symbols of ontologies. intuitively  the external symbols of an ontology are those that are assumed to be defined somewhere externally in other ontologies; the remaining  local symbols  are assumed to be defined within the ontology itself by possibly reusing the meaning of external symbols. hence by merging an ontology with external ontologies we import the meaning of its external symbols to define the meaning of its local symbols.
¡¡to make this idea work  we need to impose certain constraints on the usage of the external signature: in particular  merging ontologies should be  safe  in the sense that they do not produce unexpected results such as new inconsistencies or subsumptions between imported symbols. to achieve this kind of safety  we use the notion of conservative extensions to define modularity of ontologies  and then prove that a property of some ontologies  called locality  can be used to achieve modularity. more precisely  we define two notions of locality for shiq tboxes:  i  a tractable syntactic one which can be used to provide guidance in ontology editing tools  and  ii  a more general semantic one which can be checked using a dl-reasoner. additionally  we present an extension of locality to the more expressive logic shoiq  horrocks and sattler  1 . finally  we analyse existing ontologies and conclude that our restrictions to local tboxes are quite natural.
¡¡when integrating independently developed ontologies  we often have to identify different symbols in the ontologies having the same intended meaning. this is a problem known as ontology matching or mapping 1 which we are not concerned with here: we consider ontologies sharing some part of their signature  and how we can make sure that that their merge  i.e. the union of their axioms  is  well-behaved .
1 preliminaries
we introduce the description logic shoiq  which provides the foundation for owl.
¡¡a shoiq-signature is the disjoint union si of sets of role names  denoted by r s ¡¤¡¤¡¤   concept names  denoted by a b ¡¤¡¤¡¤  and nominals  denoted by i j k ¡¤¡¤¡¤ . a shoiq-role is either r ¡Ê r or an inverse role r  with r ¡Ê r. we denote by rol s  the set of shoiq-roles for the signature s. the set con s  of shoiq-concepts for the signature s is defined by the grammar
con where a ¡Ê c  j ¡Ê i  c i  ¡Ê con s   r s ¡Ê rol s   with s a simple role 1 and n a positive integer. we use the following abbreviations:stands for
for  respectively;  r.c and ns.c
  respectively.
a shoiq-tbox t   or ontology  is a finite set of role in-
  transitivity
axioms trans r  with r ¡Ê r and general concept inclusion axioms  gcis  with ci ¡Ê con s . we use a ¡Ô c as an abbreviation for the two gcis and .
the signature sig ¦Á   respectively sig t    of an axiom ¦Á  respectively of a tbox t   is the set of symbols occurring in ¦Á  respectively in t  . a shiq-tbox is a shoiq-tbox that does not contain nominals.
¡¡given a signature s i  an s-interpretation i is a pair i =  ¦¤i .i   where ¦¤i is a non-empty set  called the domain of the interpretation  and .i is the interpretation function that assigns to each r ¡Ê r a binary relation ri   ¦¤i ¡Á ¦¤i  to each a ¡Ê c a set ai   ¦¤i  and to every j ¡Ê i a singleton set ji   ¦¤i. the interpretation function is extended to complex roles and concepts as follows:

¡¡the satisfaction relation i |= ¦Á between an interpretation i and a shoiq-axiom ¦Á  read as i satisfies ¦Á  is defined as follows:  trans r  iff ri is transitive;. an interpretation i is a model of a tbox t if i satisfies all axioms in t . a tbox t implies an axiom ¦Á  written t |= ¦Á  if i |= ¦Á for every model i of t . an axiom ¦Á is a tautology if it is satisfied in every interpretation.
an s-interpretation is an expansion of an
s-interpretation if s  and  for every. the trivial expansion of i to
s is an expansion such that xi =   for every.
1 modularity of ontologies
in this section  we propose a logical formalization for the notion of modularity for ontologies. in analogy to software engineering  we should be able to compose complex ontologies from simpler  modular  ontologies in a consistent and welldefined way  in particular without unintended interactions between the component ontologies. this notion of modularity would be useful for both the collaborative development of a single ontology by different domain experts  and the integration of independently developed ontologies  including the reuse of existing third-party ontologies.
¡¡in order to formulate our notion of modularity  we will distinguish between the local and external symbols of an ontology. we assume that the signature sig t   of a tbox t is partitioned into two parts: the local signature loc t   of t and the external signature ext t   of t . to distinguish between the elements of these signatures  we will underline the external signature elements whenever used within the context of t . intuitively  ext t   specifies the concept and role names that are  or can be  imported from other ontologies  while loc t   specifies those that are defined in t .
¡¡as a motivating example  imagine a set of bio-medical ontologies that is being developed collaboratively by a team of experts. suppose that one group of experts designs an ontology g about genes and another group designs an ontology d about diseases. now certain genes are defined in terms of the diseases they cause. for example  the gene erbb1 is described in g as an oncogene that is found in humans and is associated with a disease called adrenocarcinoma1
	erbb1	¡Ô	oncogene   foundin.human
  associatedwith.adrenocarcinoma
the conceptadrenocarcinoma is described in d  which is under the control of a different group of modelers. so  this concept is external for g  whereas the remaining concept and role names are local for g. now one consequence of these ontologies being modularly  well-behaved  would be that the gene experts building g should not change the knowledge about diseases  even if they are using them in their axioms.
¡¡another example is the integration of a foundational  or  upper   ontology u and a domain ontology o. foundational ontologies  such as cyc  sumo 1 and dolce  provide a structure upon which ontologies for specific subject matters can be constructed and are assumed to be the result of an agreement between experts. suppose that an ontology developer wants to reuse the generic concept of a substance from u in their ontology o about chemicals. for such a purpose  they state that the concept organicchemical in their chemical ontology o is more specific than substance in u by using the axiom: organic chemical   where substance ¡Ê ext o . since foundational ontologies are well-established ontologies that one does not control and  typically  does not have complete knowledge about  it is especially important that the merge o ¡È u does not produce new logical consequences w.r.t. u-even if u changes.
¡¡in both examples  we have argued that ontology integration should be carried out in such a way that consequences of a tbox t  are not changed when elements of t  are reused in another tbox t . this property can be formalized using the notion of a conservative extension  ghilardi et al.  1 .
definition 1  conservative extension . let  be tboxes. then conservative extension of t  if  for every axiom ¦Á with sig we have
iff.	 
¡¡thus  given and   their union does not yield new consequences in the language ofis a conser-

1
example from the national cancer institute ontology http:
//www.mindswap.org/1/cancerontology. 1
see http://ontology.teknowledge.com.
vative extension of t . a useful notion of modularity  however  should abstract from the particular t  under consideration. in fact  the external signature should be the core notion in a modular representation as opposed to its particular definition in a particular ontology t . this is especially important when t  may evolve  and where this evolution is beyond our control-which  for example  could well be the case when using the  imports  construct provided by owl. consequently  in order for t to use ext t   in a modular way should be a conservative extension of any t  over ext t  .
¡¡furthermore  it is important to ensure that  whenever two independent parts t1 and t1 of an ontology t under the control of different modelers are developed in a modular way  then t remains modular as well.
these requirements can be formalized as follows:
definition 1  modularity . a set m of tboxes t with sig t   = loc is a modularity class if the following conditions hold:
m1. if t ¡Ê m  then is a conservative extension of such that   =  ;
m1. if t1 t1 ¡Ê m  then t = t1¡Èt1 ¡Ê m with loc t   =
	loc t1  ¡È loc t1 .	 
¡¡please note that our framework is independent of the dl under consideration. also  definition 1 does not define a modularity class uniquely  but just states conditions for being one. when the modularity class is clear from the context  we will call its elements modular ontologies.
¡¡in the next section  we focus our attention on the logic shiq  and show that it is possible to define a reasonable modularity class such that  1  checking its membership can be done using standard reasoning tools   1  it has an inexpensive syntactic approximation that can be used to guide the modeling of ontologies in a modular way  and  1  our analysis of existing ontologies shows that they seem to conform  naturally  with its restrictions.
1 modularity of shiq ontologies
in this section we define a particular modularity class  the class of local ontologies  which captures many practical examples of modularly developed ontologies. we first give a syntactic definition of local ontologies and then generalize it to a semantic one. finally  we prove that our semantic definition leads to a maximal class of modular tboxes.
¡¡definition 1 excludes already many shiq-tboxes. property m1  in particular  implies that no modular tbox t can contain the two axioms below at the same time:
		 local 	 1 
		 non-local 	 1 
where a is a local concept name and are constructed using ext t  . these axioms imply  which indeed changes the meaning of the external concepts . at this point  we are faced with a fundamentalchoice as to the type of axioms to disallow. each choice leads to a different modularity class. we argue that  analogously to software engineering  where refinement is the main application of modularity  axioms of type  1  fit better with ontology integration scenarios  such as those sketched in section 1  than axioms of type  1 .
¡¡as discussed in section 1  the external names are  imported  in order to reuse them in the definition of other concepts  and not to further constrain their meaning. intuitively  axioms of type  1  are consistent with this idea  whereas axioms of type  1  are not.
¡¡the principal difference between these two axioms is that  1  forces the external concept to contain only instances of the local concept name a  thus bounding the size of possible interpretations of once the meaning of a is established. in contrast   1  still  in principle  allows for interpretations of of unbounded size. note that this argument does not prohibit all inclusion axioms between external concepts and local ones. for example  in contrast to  1   the axiom
		 local 	 1 
still leaves sufficient  freedom  for the interpretation of  even if the interpretation for a is fixed. in fact  this axiom is equivalent to  and thus is of type  1 .
¡¡our choice of the types of simple axioms to disallow can be generalized to more complex axioms; for example  all axioms below should be forbidden for the reasons given above:
	and		 non-local   1 
the last axiom is disallowed because it implies  1 .
¡¡even if an axiom does not explicitly involve the external symbols  it may still constrain their meaning. in fact  certain gcis have a global effect and impose constraints on all elements of the models of an ontology  and thereby on the interpretation of external concepts. for example  it is easy to see that the axioms
		and		 non-local 	 1 
imply  1  and the first axiom in  1  respectively.1 these observations lead to the following definition:
definition 1  locality . let s be a shiq-signature and let e   s be the external signature. the following grammar defines the two sets and ce  of positively and negatively local concepts w.r.t. e:
.
where a is a concept name from s   e  r ¡Ê rol s   c ¡Ê
con  and
¡¡a role inclusion axiom  or a transitivity axiom trans r+  is local w.r.t. e. a gci is local w.r.t. e if it is either of the form  where 
c  ¡Ê ce  and c ¡Ê con s . a shiq-tbox t is local if every axiom from t is local w.r.t. ext t  .  
¡¡intuitively  the positively local concepts are those whose interpretation is bounded  i.e. its size is limited  when the interpretation of the local symbols is fixed. in this respect 

  which implies. 1
¡¡¡¡recall thatare expressed using the other constructors  so they can be used in local concepts as well.
they behave similarly to local concept names. negatively local concepts are essentially negations of positively local concepts. please  note that  given e   s  a concept written over s may be neither in  nor in.
¡¡definition 1 can be used to formulate guidelines for constructing modular ontologies  as illustrated by the following example. moreover  definition 1 can be used in ontology editors to detect and warn the user of an a priori  dangerous  usage of the external signature-without the need to perform any kind of reasoning.
example1 suppose we are developingw  an ontology about wines  and we want to reuse some concepts and roles from f  an independently developed ontology about food.
f:	vealparmesan  meatdish   hasingredient.veal
deliciousproduct   hasingredient.deliciousproduct
trans hasingredient 
w:	chardonnay  wine   servedwith.vealparmesan
rioja  wine   hasingredient.tempranillo
¡¡redwine  wine tempranillo
here	ext w 	=	{hasingredient 	deliciousproduct 
vealparmesan  meatdish} and w is local.	 
¡¡the following lemma shows that our notion of locality satisfies the desired properties from definition 1.
lemma 1  locality implies modularity 
thesetoflocalshiq tboxesisamodularityclass.
to prove lemma 1  we use the following property:
lemma 1 lett bealocalshiq tboxwithe = ext t    andleti beane-interpretation.thenthetrivialexpansion tosig t   isamodeloft .
proof. we need to show that i |= ¦Á for every ¦Á ¡Ê t . according to definition 1  every ¦Á ¡Ê t has one of the forms:   where  and. to prove i |= ¦Á
it is then suffices to show that  r+ i =     c+ i =   and  c  i = ¦¤i for each such axiom. the first property holds since i is the trivial expansion of an e-interpretation i. the remaining two properties can be easily shown by induction over the definitions of e from definition 1. 
proof of lemma 1. let m be a set of tboxes ti  each of which is local w.r.t. ext ti . property m1 from definition 1 follows from definition 1 since every axiom ¦Á that is local
w.r.t. e is also local w.r.t. every e.
in order to prove property m1  let t be a local shiq-
tbox. assume   for some tbox
axiom ¦Á with sig and sig.
we have to show that.
¡¡assume to the contrary that t. then  there exists a model such that  be the trivial expansion of. then since sig. additionally  by lemma 1  i |= t . so
  which contradicts our assumption .	
¡¡lemma 1 tells us that  in example 1  w ¡È f does not entail new information about food only. even if f evolves  say by adding the axiom vealparmesan.italy using a third ontology c of countries  fere with f. on the other hand  using the imported concepts from f allows us to derive some non-trivial properties involving the local and mixed signature of w  such as chardonnay  redwine and rioja  deliciousproduct.
¡¡as we have seen  our notion of locality from definition 1 yields a modularity class. this class  however  is not the most general one we can achieve. in particular  there are axioms that are not local  but obviously unproblematic. for example  the axiom is a tautology  but is disallowed by
definition 1 since it involves external symbols only; another example is the gciwhich is implied by the  syntactically  local axiom . the limitation of our syntactic notion of locality is its inability to  compare  concepts from the external signature.
¡¡a natural question is whether we can generalize definition 1 to overcome this limitation. obviously  such generalization cannot be given in terms of syntax only since checking for tautologies in the external signature necessarily involves reasoning. since our proof of lemma 1 relies mainly on lemma 1  we generalize our notion of locality as follows:
definition 1  semantic locality . let e   s. a shiqaxiom ¦Á with sig ¦Á    s is semantically local w.r.t. e if the trivial expansion i of every e-interpretation i to s is a model of ¦Á. a shiq-tbox t is semantically local if every axiom in t is semantically local w.r.t. ext t  .  
¡¡lemma 1 essentially implies that every syntactically local tbox is semantically local. interestingly  both notions coincide when e =   or when ¦Á is a non-trivial role inclusion axiom  not of the form  or a transitivity axiom. it is easy to check that the conditions for a modularity class in definition 1 hold for semantic locality as well. the following proposition provides an effective way of checking whether a gci satisfies definition 1:
proposition 1 let¦Ábeagciande   s.let¦Á beobtained from ¦Á byreplacingeverysubconceptoftheform  r.c  nr.c  andeveryconceptname a in ¦Á with ¡Í  where r /¡Ê rol e  anda /¡Ê e.then¦Á issemanticallylocalw.r.t. eiff¦Á isatautology.
proof. the subconcepts of the form   and
a are interpreted by   in every trivial expansion of every e-interpretation  hence they are indistinguishable from ¡Í in the context of definition 1. replacing all these subconcepts in ¦Á with ¡Í yields ¦Á with sig e  and thus definition 1 implies that ¦Á is semantically local iff every shiqinterpretation satisfies ¦Á.	
¡¡as mentioned above  deciding semantic locality involves reasoning; in fact  this problem is pspace-complete in the size of the axiom 1 as opposed to checking syntactic locality  which can be done in polynomial time. we expect the test from proposition 1 to perform well in practice since the size of axioms in a tbox is typically small w.r.t. the size of the tbox  and would like to point out that it can be performed using any existing dl reasoner.
¡¡it is worth noting that both notions of locality provide the  black-box  behavior we are aiming at  and both involve only the ontology t and its external signature. finally  a natural question arising is whether semantic locality can be further generalized while preserving modularity. the following lemma answers this question negatively.
lemma 1  semantic locality is maximal 
ifashiq-tboxt1isnotsemanticallylocal thenthereexist
shiq-tboxest1 andt  suchthatt1 islocal  loc t1   
loc t1  loc andisnota conservativeextensionoft .
proof. let t1 be not semantically local  and define as follows: t1 consists of the axioms of the formand consists of axioms  for every
ext t1 . note that  i  t1 is local   ii  for every model i of t1  we have ai =   and ri =   for every a r ¡Ê loc t1  and  iii  every ext t1 -interpretation is a model of  uses all symbols from ext t1 .
¡¡in order to show that is not a conservative extension of t   we construct an axiom ¦Á over the signature  such that 
t1 is not semantically local  there exists an axiom ¦Á ¡Ê t1 which is not semantically local w.r.t. ext t1   and which we use to defineis a role axiom of the form
r   we set
 trans  we set; and if ¦Á is a
gci  we define ¦Á from ¦Á as in proposition 1. as a result  ¦Á uses ext only  and since ¦Á is not a tautology  for the last case this follows from proposition 1 . since t1 contains ¦Á and because of the property  ii  above for t1  we have t1 ¡Èt  and so. 
¡¡lemma 1 shows that semantic locality cannot be generalized without violating the properties in definition 1. indeed  condition m1 implies that the uniont of two local tboxes t1
and t1 is a local tbox  and condition m1 implies that is conservative over every t  with sig. the results in lemma 1 and lemma 1 are summarized in the following theorem:
theorem 1 asetofsemanticallylocalshiq tboxesisa maximalclassofmodulartboxes.
1 modularity of shoiq ontologies
when trying to extend the results in the previous section to the more expressive logic shoiq  we soon encounter difficulties. nominals are interpreted as singleton sets and  thus  a straightforward extension of definition 1 fails since nominals cannot be interpreted by the empty set.
¡¡a notion of modularity  however  can still be achieved if all nominals in a tbox t are treated as external concepts; the intuitive reason for this is that the interpretation of nominals is already very constrained  and hence we have little control over it. under this assumption  definitions 1 and 1 can be reused for shoiq. such notions of locality still allow for non-trivial uses of nominals in t . for example  the following axiom is semantically local w.r.t. e = {elvis}  even if elvis is used as a nominal:
elvislover ¡Ô musicfan.elvis
indeed  the trivial expansion of every e-interpretation to s = {elvislover  musicfan  likes} is a model of this axiom.
definition 1  locality for shoiq . a shoiq-tbox t with sigi is syntactically  semantically  local w.r.t. e if t is syntactically  semantically  local w.r.t. e ¡È i as in definition 1  definition 1 .  
lemma 1  semantic locality implies modularity  the setofsemanticallylocal shoiq tboxesisamodularity classfore.
¡¡the proof is analogous to the one of lemma 1. unfortunately  an important use of nominals in dls  namely abox assertions  is non-local according to our definition. for example  the assertion elvis  singer  typically written as elvis:singer  is not local since elvis is treated as an external element. in fact  it is not possible to extend the definition of locality to capture assertions and retain modularity:
proposition 1  assertions cannot be local 
 foreveryassertionthereexistsasyntactically localtboxt suchthatt ¡È {¦Á} isinconsistent.
proof. take.	
¡¡proposition 1 implies that no tbox t1 containing an assertion ¦Á can be declared as local without braking either property m1 or m1 of modularity from definition 1. indeed  by taking t as in the proof of proposition 1  we obtain an inconsistent merge t1 ¡È t which should be local according to m1 if t1 is local. however  no inconsistent tbox can be local since it implies all axioms and hence violates condition m1.
¡¡even if the merge of a tbox and a set of assertions is consistent  new subsumptions over the external signature may still be entailed. for example  consider the tbox t consisting of the axiom:
frog  hascolor.green   hascolor.dark

which is local w.r.t. e = {green  dark}. if we add the assertion kermit  frog to t   then we obtain that green is a dark color  green  dark   as a new logical consequence.
¡¡to sum up  we have shown that locality can be extended to shoiq  but not in the presence of assertions. an open question is whether semantic locality for shoiq is maximal in the sense of lemma 1.
1 field study
in order to test the adequacy of our conditions in practice  we have implemented a  syntactic  locality checker and run it over ontologies from a library of 1 ontologies of various sizes and complexity some of which import each other  gardiner et al.  1 .1 since owl does not allow to declare symbols as local or external  we have used the following  informed guess work : for an ontology t   we define the set loc t   as the set of symbols in t that do not occur in the signature of the ontologies imported  directly or indirectly  using the owl:imports construct by t   and defining ext t   to be the complement of loc t   in sig t  . the owl:imports construct allows to include  in an ontology t   the axioms of another ontology t  published on the web by reference. the  owl:imports produces the  logical  union
¡¡it turned out that 1 of the 1 ontologies used the owl:imports construct  and that all but 1 of these 1 ontologies are syntactically local  and hence also semantically local . from the 1 non-local ontologies  1 are written in the owl-full species of owl to which our framework does not yet apply. the remaining 1 non-localities are due to the presence of so-called mapping axioms of the form  where a ¡Ê loc t   and  which are not even semantically local. we were able to fix these non-localities as follows: we replace every occurrence of a in t with b and then remove this axiom from t . after this transformation  all 1 non-local ontologies turned out to be local.
1 discussion and related work
in the last few years  a rapidly growing body of work has been developed under the names of ontology mapping and alignment  ontology merging and ontology integration; see  kalfoglou and m.schorlemmer  1; noy  1  for surveys. this field is rather diverse  has originated from different communities  and is concerned with two different problems:  i  how to  semi-automatically  detect correspondences between terms in the signatures of the ontologies to be integrated  e.g. instructor corresponds to professor   and   ii  how to assess and predict the  logical  consequences of the merging. typically  when integrating ontologies  one first solves  i  and then  ii .
¡¡although  i  has been the focus of intensive research in the last few years  kalfoglou and m.schorlemmer  1   and tools for ontology mapping are available  to the best of our knowledge  the problem of predicting and controlling the consequences of ontology integration has been addressed only very recently in  ghilardi et al.  1  and  grau et al.  1 . in  ghilardi et al.  1   the authors point out the importance of the notion of a conservative extension for ontology evolution and merging  and provide decidability and complexity results for the problem of deciding conservative extensions in the basic dl alc. in  grau et al.  1   the authors identify two basic ontology integration scenarios. for each of them  the authors established a set of semantic properties  including being conservative extensions  to be satisfied by the integrated ontology  and presented a set of syntactic constraints on the component ontologies to ensure the preservation of the desired semantic properties.
¡¡the results in this paper generalize those from  grau et al.  1   since the integration scenarios presented there are particular cases of definition 1. also  in contrast to both  ghilardi et al.  1   and  grau et al.  1   our notion of modularity implies a  black box  behavior with respect to the external signature: instead of considering a pair of ontologies  our approach takes an ontology t with specified sets of local and external symbols  and provides guarantees for the merge of t with any ontology t  which does not use local symbols. in contrast  the approach described in  ghilardi et al.  1  considers the problem of whether  for two given  their merge is conservative over t . it turns out that this problem is decidable in 1exptime in the size of  and thus it is significantly harder than standard reasoning tasks  such as deciding ontology consistency . a solution to the latter problem can be used to decide whether can be safely merged- which can be the case without any of them being local. if are changed  however  then this test would need to be repeated-which is not the case in the approach presented here  see the above discussion of its black box behavior . as a consequence  these two approaches can be used in different scenarios: ours can be used to provideguidelines for ontology engineers who want to design modular ontologies that show black box behavior  whereas the one described in  ghilardi et al.  1  can be used to check safe integrability for a given  fixed set of tboxes.
¡¡summing up  we have proposed a logic-based framework for modularity  which we have instantiated in a plausible and practically applicable way for shiq  and in a preliminary way for shoiq. we believe that our results will be useful as the foundations of tools that support both the collaborative development of complex ontologies and the integration of independently developed ontologies on the semantic web.
