
a general framework for minimisation-based belief changeis presented. a probleminstance is made up of an undirected graph  where a formula is associated with each vertex. for example  vertices may represent spatial locations  points in time  or some other notion of locality. information is shared between vertices via a process of minimisation over the graph. we give equivalent semantic and syntactic characterisations of this minimisation. we also show that this approach is general enough to capture existing minimisation-based approaches to belief merging  belief revision  and  temporal  extrapolation operators. while we focus on a set-theoretic notion of minimisation  we also consider other approaches  such as cardinality-based and prioritybased minimisation.
1 introduction and motivation
minimisation of change is a crucial element in many approaches to knowledge representation and reasoning  including reasoning about action and time  belief revision  and belief merging. generally speaking  these approaches take as input a collection of formulas  or sets of formulas  and have as output another set of formulas  or sets of formulas . for instance  in standard approaches to belief revision  we start from an initial belief state represented by a formula ¦Õ 1 a formula ¦Á  and come up with a new belief state ¦Õ ¦Á that satisfies ¦Á while retaining as much as possible from ¦Õ. in belief merging  we start from a collection of belief states
 again  single formulas   possibly with integrity constraints  and end up with a single belief state  computed by retaining as much as possible from the initial information. in a number of approaches to reasoning about time and change  the input consists of a series of observations and/or actions over a discrete time scale  and the output is series of belief states  one for each time point  obtained by minimising change over
torsten cs.uni-potsdam.de
time.  note that  for each of these areas  there is obviously not a single nor a best way of minimising change. 
¡¡two questions come to mind. first  can we see  some of  these change-minimising approaches as instances of a more general framework  second  are there other specific cases of this more general setting that are worth considering  this paper answers both questions. the general setting we consider starts with a set of points structured in a graph  and with a formula attached to each point. following a minimisation step  a formula is determined at each point  representing the original information associated with the point along with information gleaned from connected points. this minimisation step is driven by disagreements among the formulas attached to connected points. we show that a number of approaches to belief merging fit within this general setting  as do a number of approaches to reasoning about time and change  as well as an approach to revision.
¡¡the approach is intended to model any domain that can be modelled by a set of connected points  with data associated with each point. here are some typical examples:
multisource merging the graph is a network of interconnected agents  or knowledge bases   where each agent consistently incorporates information from other agents.
temporal minimisation of change the graph is a set of time points  and we minimise the set of changes between successive time points.
spatial minimisation of change the points are places or regions in space  vertices express adjacency or proximity between places/regions  and the principle of minimising change is justified by the assumption of spatial persistence between connected places or points.
thus for the last example  if it is raining in some place  e.g. amsterdam  and we don't know whether it is raining in a neighbouring place  e.g. brussels  we might want to infer by default that it is also raining there. however  if we also know that it is not raining in luxembourg  we might want to conclude that we don't know whether it is raining in brussels.
¡¡the next section introduces basic notation and reviews related work. section 1 presents the general approach  while section 1 discusses specific instances of the approach. this is followed by a section on extensions to the approach  including adding weights to edges. the final section gives concluding remarks and directions for future work.
1 related work
the approach described herein falls into a broad category of approachesto belief changebased on minimisation of change.
in our approach  we employ a graph to model various phenomena. some earlier work can be regarded as a specific case of this general approach  and in section 1 we show that this is indeed the case . thus belief extrapolation  dupin de saint-cyr and lang  1  involveminimisation of change in a chain  with intended interpretation of the chain being a series of time points . similarly  the approaches to merging of  delgrande and schaub  1  can be regarded as minimisation over complete graph or star graphs. chronological minimisation corresponds to a version of the approach on a chain with priorities on edges. the approach of  zhang et al.  1  to negotiation essentially reduces negotiation to a form of mutual belief revision.
¡¡on the other hand  the general approach is distinct from belief merging as usually understood  in that most merging operators begin with a set of belief states but yield a single belief state  see for example  liberatore and schaerf  1; konieczny and pino pe¡ärez  1  . the conciliation operators of  gauwin et al.  1  however are closer to the approach at hand: in this case there is a global merging of the agent's knowledge after which each agent revises its beliefs by the  consensual  knowledge. similar remarks apply to  booth  1  which  for our purposes  can be regarded as employing multi-agent contraction.  liberatore and schaerf  1  describes a specific approach combining merging of multiple sources  revision and update; there the process of propagating information temporally is somewhat similar to extrapolation. one approach that conforms very well to our underlying intuitions is the rev!gis project  wu¡§rbel et al.  1  which addresses revision in geographical information systems: flooding information  for example  is encoded for different regions  and persistence of water levels can be used for revising information in adjacent regions.
1 global minimisation of change
let lp be a propositional language over alphabet p = {p q ...}  using the logical constantsand connectives    ¡Å  ¡Ä    and  . formulas are denoted by greek letters ¦Á     ...the set of interpretations of lp is denoted by ¦¸p.  whenever clear from the context  we omit the underlying alphabet p.  we denote interpretations explicitly as lists of literals  the falsity of an atom p being indicated by p¡¥. for instance  for p = {p q r}  the interpretation where only q is true is denoted by pq¡¥ r¡¥. mod ¦Á  is the set of models of ¦Á; cn ¦Á  is the deductive closure of ¦Á.
¡¡for each i   1  define alphabet pi = {pi | p ¡Ê p}; that is  pi is a copy of p where atomic symbols carry the superscript i. we rely on the fact that pi and pj are disjoint for. similarly  li is a shorthand for lpi. we associate p1 with p and l1 with lp. for ¦Á ¡Ê li  the function ren is defined so that ren ¦Á j  is the formula ¦Á where every occurrence of pi ¡Ê pi is replaced by the corresponding proposition pj ¡Ê pj. we can thus write ¦Áj for ¦Á ¡Ê l as an abbreviation for ren ¦Á j . for instance  if ¦Á =   p¡Ä q¡År   then ren ¦Á 1  =   p1 ¡Ä  q1 ¡Å r1   = ¦Á1.
1 completion and consensus
in this paper we make use of finite undirected graphs only.
thus for graph where e is a set of unordered pairs of elements of v . for the sake of simplicity we associate the set of vertices v with an initial sequence of the natural numbers; thus for |v | = n we have v = {1 ... n}. conventionally we write an edge as  x y  rather than {x y}.
¡¡in the entire paper  let be a graph where |v | = n  and p an alphabet.
definition 1  scenarios and interpretations 
  a g-scenario ¦²g is a list   where ¦Õi ¡Ê lp for each i ¡Ê v .
¦²g is consistent iff ¦Õi is consistent for all i ¡Ê v . ¦²g i  denotes ¦Õi  the ith component of ¦²g.
  a g-interpretation mg is a list  where each mi is an interpretation from ¦¸p. mg is said to satisfy ¦²g  denotedmg |= ¦²g  iff mi |= ¦Õi holds for all i ¡Ê v .
¦¸v is the set of all g-interpretations and mod ¦²g  = {mg | mg |= ¦²g} is the set of all g-models of ¦²g.
  the shared or invariant knowledge of a g-scenario ¦²g 
sk ¦²g   is the formula.
when clear from the context we drop the subscript g  and simply write ¦² and m rather than ¦²g and mg. sometimes  to make notation more readable  we make use of this notation for scenarios: .
similarly  a g-interpretationis sometimes denoted as. slightly abusing notation  we denote by mi p  the truth value of p ¡Ê p given by the interpretation mi.
definition 1  change sets 
  a change set for p and g is a subset ¦¤ of e ¡Á p.
  let m be a g-interpretation. the change set associated with m  ¦¤ m   is defined as
.
  a change set ¦¤ is a change set for a g-scenario ¦² iff there exists a g-interpretation m such that m |= ¦² and ¦¤ = ¦¤ m .
  ¦¤ is a minimal change set for ¦² if ¦¤ is a change set for
¦² and there is no change set  such that .
¡¡minimal change sets pick out those g-interpretations that in a certain  viz. set-containment  sense maximise  closeness  between individual interpretations of members of ¦². to be sure  there are other measures of  closeness  that can be used  a point that we return to later.
definition 1  preferred g-interpretations  given two ginterpretations   define
  and.
¡¡given a g-scenario ¦² and a g-interpretation m  we say that m is a preferred g-interpretation of ¦² iff
1. m |= ¦²;
1. there is no m such that.
the set of preferred g-interpretations of ¦² is denoted
pref.
thus m is preferred to m iff the change set of m is included in the change set of m. definition 1 let ¦² be a g-scenario.
  a completion ¦¨ ¦²  of 
 such that for every i ¡Ê {1 ... n} 
pref.
  the consensus of ¦² is the invariant of its completion  that is  consensus
we note that a completion is unique up to logical equivalence. consequently we henceforth refer to the completion  understanding some canonical representative for a set of formulas; see also proposition 1.
example 1 let  be the graph with v	=
{1 1} and e = { 1   1   1   1 }. let ¦² =
  the preferred models of  

       	1 :  	1 :  	  	  .
¡¡although vertices 1 and 1 disagree about r  the completion of ¦² contains r at vertex 1  because 1 is connected to 1 only  and so r being true at 1  blocks  the potential propagation of  r at 1 to vertex 1 . in contrast  the completion contains neither r nor  r at 1. the consensus of ¦² is consensus ¦²  ¡Ô  p ¡Å  q as can be verified  this is equivalent to the disjunction of the constituent formulas  viz
  p ¡Ä r  ¡Å   p    q  ¡Ä r  ¡Å  q ¡Å   r ¡Ä   p ¡Å  q  .
1 syntactic characterisation
definition 1  equivalence sets  fits  maximal fits 
  an equivalence set is a subset of
.
  the equivalence set induced by a change set ¦¤ is
eq.
  an equivalence set eq is a fit for a g-scenario ¦² =  iff eq is consistent.
a fit eq for ¦² is maximal iff for every eq   eq we have eq is inconsistent.
proposition 1 ¦¤ is a minimal change set for ¦² iff eq ¦¤  is a maximal fit for ¦².
hence  maximising fit between propositionalsymbols or minimising change between models is equivalent. this in turn leads to a syntactic characterisation of completion:
proposition 1 let  be a g-scenario  and let f be the set of maximal fits of ¦².
¡¡then  is the completion of ¦² iff for every i ¡Ê {1 ... n} 
cn here is an equivalent formulation of proposition 1:
corollary 1 let  be a g-scenario and
let . then  for any iff for every  -maximal set eq 
e ¡Á p} consistent with we have
eq.
this result shows that determining whether some formula holds at some vertex of the completion of ¦² can be expressed as skeptical inference in normal default theories without prerequisites  reiter  1 . an immediate consequence of this is that inference from the completion of a scenario is in ¦°p1.  we will see shortly that it is also a lower bound. 
¡¡next we describe a syntactic characterisation that determines a specific formula for the completion at each vertex. we begin by adapting the standard notion of a substitution to our requirements: given alphabets pi  pj a substitution is a set {pi/l pj  | pi ¡Ê pi pj ¡Ê pj} where l pj  is pj or  pj. that is  a substitution is simply a set of pairs  where each pair is made up of an atom in one language and that atom or its negation in the other language. for binary relation r  let r  be its transitive closure.
definition 1 let eq be an equivalence set. for i j ¡Ê v define ¦Òi jeq =  ¦Òi jeq + ¡È  ¦Òi jeq   where

a substitution instance of ¦Ái ¡Ê pi with respect to ¦Òi jeq  written ¦Ái¦Òi jeq  is as expected: every atom in ¦Ái is replaced by its unique counterpart according to ¦Òi jeq.
we obtain the following finite characterisation:
proposition 1 let a scenario of g. let  be the completion of ¦²  and let f be the set of maximal fits of ¦². then for 1 ¡Ü j ¡Ü n we have that

thus the above proposition gives a recipe whereby one can compute a formula for each vertex that gives the completion.
example 1 consider example 1 again  and vertex j = 1. for preferred model m1 and vertex i = 1 we have that ¦Õ1 is  p ¡Å q  ¡Ä r; thus ¦Õ1 is  p1 ¡Å q1  ¡Ä r1. the relevant part of eq is p1 ¡Ô p1 and r1 ¡Ô r1. consequently ¦Õ1¦Ò1eq 1 is  p1 ¡Å  q1  ¡Ä r1. continuing in this fashion  for the maximal fit based on m1 we obtain:
¦Õ1¦Ò1eq 1 =  p1  ¦Õ1¦Ò1eq 1 =  p1 ¡Å  q1  ¡Ä r1  ¦Õ1¦Ò1eq 1 =  q1  ¦Õ1¦Ò1eq 1 = r1.
the conjunctionof these terms is equivalentto  p1¡Ä q1¡Är1; re-expressed in our original language this is  p¡Ä q¡Är. the other five preferred models similarly yield formulas for vertex j = 1  in this example  each being a conjunction of literals. it can be confirmed that their disjunction is equivalent to  q.
1 properties of completion and consensus
here are some properties of completion and consensus.
proposition 1  be a g-scenario  and let ¦¨ ¦²  =
.
1. if g is connected and  is consistent then
 for every j ¡Ê {1 ... n}.
1. ¦² is consistent iff ¦¨ ¦²  is consistent.
1. for every ¦Õi ¡Ê ¦².
1. consensus ¦²  |= sk ¦² .
note that property 1 above refers to the structure of the graph. clearly  the information at a given vertex i can propagate to vertex j only if there is a path from i to j. this brings us to the following  easy but useful  decomposability result:
proposition 1 let g1 ... gq be the connected components of g and let {v1 ... vq} be the corresponding partition of v . for each i ¡Ê {1 ...n}  let k i  be the unique integer such that i ¡Ê vk i . given a g-scenario ¦²  ¦¨ ¦²  =
 
. then:
 for each i ¡Ê {1 ... n};
  consensusconsensus ¦²k .
this result is a bit tedious to state but is very intuitive: if the graph g is not connected  then it is sufficient to consider its connected components separately  and to compute the completion of ¦² for each one of these.
example 1 let { 1   1 }. let 
a  . the connected components of g are g1 =
  hence 

¦¨ ¦²  = 1 :	 	1 :	 	1 :	1 :  	.
thus  without loss of generality  we may now assume that g is connected.
¡¡another decomposition result concerns the propositional symbols the logical theories at different vertices are about. we say that ¦Õi is irrelevant to q   p iff ¦Õi is logically equivalent to some formula ¦×i in which no symbol in q appears  lang et al.  1 .
proposition 1 let ¦² be a g-scenario. suppose there exist a partition {v1 v1} of v and a partition {q1 q1} of p such that for each i ¡Ê v1  resp. i ¡Ê v1   ¦Õi is irrelevant to q1  resp. to q1 . let ¦²1 and ¦²1 be the restrictions of ¦² to v1 and v1  defined by ¦²1 i  = ¦² i  if i ¡Ê v1 and otherwise  and similarly for ¦²1 . let .
then  for every i ¡Ê v  

  consensus ¦²  = consensus ¦²1  ¡Ä consensus ¦²1 .
example 1 let v	= {1 1 1}  e = { 1    1  
 1    1    1 } and 
. taking q1 = {a b}  q1 = {p q} 
                 1 = {1 1} a 1 : a 1 : a ¡Ä 1 : a 1 : a ¡Ä   and ¦¨ ¦²1  = 1 :
.
¡¡let us now consider conjunctive formulas: a formula ¦Õi is conjunctive iff it is a consistent conjunction of literals.
proposition 1 let  be a g-scenario such that each ¦Õi is a conjunctive formula. let ¦¨ ¦²  = . then iff the two following holds:
1. ¦Õj |= p for some j ¡Ê {1 ... n};
1. if ¦Õl |=  p  then for every path ¦Ð from l to i  there is a m in ¦Ð such that ¦Õm |= p.
¡¡proposition 1 gives a simple method for computing ¦¨ ¦²  when ¦² consists of conjunctive belief bases. for any p ¡Ê p:
1. let gp  resp. g p  be the graph obtained from g by deleting all vertices i such that ¦Õi |=  p  resp. ¦Õi |= p  and all edges to or from i;
1. let xp  resp. x p  be the set of all i such that there is a path in gp  resp. in g p  from a vertex j such that ¦Õj |= p  resp. ¦Õj |=  p .
proposition 1 let  be a g-scenario such that each ¦Õi is a conjunctive formula and let ¦¨ ¦²  = . then for every i ¡Ê {1 ... n} 

¡¡as a corollary  the completion and the consensus of a conjunctive scenario can be computed in polynomial time.
 1   1   1   1   1   1  and ¦² = 1 : is the graph p = { 1   1   1   1 } 
therefore xp = {1 1 1}. g p is the graph whose set of edges is e p = { 1   1 }  therefore x p = {1}.
 
q =  1   1   1   1   	q =  1 1 1 and
x q = {1 1 1}. therefore 	p ¡Ä q 
 q 1 :  p 1 : p 1 : p 1 : p .
1 particular instances of the approach
our approach falls into the broad category of approaches to belief change based on minimisation. we consider initial formulas believed at vertices of g  and select those models that minimise differences between models of the individual formulas. so far  we haven't said much about specific interpretations of g. in this section  we give several examples of such interpretations  sometimes corresponding to particular classes of graphs; and we show that our setting generalises frameworks that have been explored previously.
¡¡we first consider three specific types of graphs: chain graphs  star graphs and complete graphs  and show that each of these three cases leads to a specific belief change operator studied previously.
definition 1  extrapolation   be a chain graph  where e = { i i + 1  | i ¡Ê v 1 ¡Ü i   n}  and let ¦² be a g-scenario. the extrapolation operator ext ¦²  induced by  is unchanged from definition 1: ext ¦²  = ¦¨ ¦² .
ext is an extrapolation operator in the sense of  dupin de saint-cyr and lang  1   in which v is considered as a set of time points: if   then is the completed scenario at time t  obtained from the initial observations and a principle of minimal change. other extrapolation operators can be obtained by varying the preference relation  see section 1 . as to consensus ¦²   it simply expresses the information that remains invariant over time in the scenario.
definition 1  projection   be a star graph  where v = {1 ... n} and e = { 1 i  | i ¡Ê v  {1}}  and let ¦² be a g-scenario. the projection operator proj induced by  is the function proj ¦²  = ¦¨ ¦² 
consensus ¦²  here coincides with the projection operator given in  delgrande and schaub  1 : {1 ... n} are the labels of the knowledge bases to be merged; ¦Õi represents the beliefs of source/agenti; and 1 is the label for the result of the merging  with ¦Õ1 = is for set of integrity constraints is .
definition 1  consensus  let g be a complete graph and let ¦² be a g-scenario. the consensus operator of g is con ¦²  = consensus ¦² .
that is  the consensus operator contains the common knowledge implicit in the minimal models of ¦². this operator corresponds to the consensus merging operator of  delgrande and schaub  1 .
¡¡a crucial difference between the preceding two operators is illustrated in the following example. let g be the complete graph on 1 vertices  and assume we have ¦Õ1 = p ¡Ä q ¡Ä r 
. the projection on ¦Õ1 is r while
the consensus is  p   q  ¡Ä r. see  delgrande and schaub  1  for a detailed examination of these operators.
definition 1  revision  letand let  be a g-scenario. the revision operator +¨b is the
function ¦Õ1+¨b ¦Õ1 = ¦¨ ¦² 
this notion of revision corresponds to the basic notion of revision given in  satoh  1; delgrande and schaub  1 .
¡¡deciding whether ¦Â ¡Ê ¦Õ1+¨b ¦Õ1 is ¦°p1-complete  delgrande et al.  1 . thus  given the remark in section 1  the general problem of deciding  given a g-scenario ¦²  a formula ¦Â  and i ¡Ê v   whether-complete  and so no more complex than all the particular cases considered above . a similar result holds for consensus.
¡¡there are of course other graph structures that could be investigated  for example trees or cycles. further  one can consider other interpretations. thus a graph may be considered under a spatial interpretation  in which nodes correspond to regions of space and edges correspond to connections between adjacent regions. completion is then based on the principle that  normally  what holds in a region also holds in the adjacent region. another possible interpretation of the graph would be a mixture of merging and extrapolation  in the same vein as  liberatore and schaerf  1   where we have several time points  and possibly several independent information sources at each time point.
1 alternative definitions of completion and consensus
so far  we have focussed on a very simple criterion for selecting preferred interpretations  namely  m being preferred to
. clearly  this notion of preference
between change sets  and between interpretations  frequently gives many incomparable interpretations  hence a large number of preferred interpretations  and then completion and consensus may be rather weak. here we give a more general definition without changing much of our notions and results.
¡¡a preference relation on change sets  is a reflexive and transitive relation over e ¡Á p. any such preference relation induces a preference relation  on interpretations  by
. we recover the prefer-
ence relation considered previously if we define iff
. another intuitive preference relation is cardinality:
. the definition of a preferred g-
interpretation  w.r.t.   as well as those of completion and consensus are straightforward generalisations of definitions 1 and 1. note that for a star graph and c one obtains majority merging as in  konieczny and pino pe¡ärez  1 .
¡¡a second generalisation of the approach begins from the observation that edges  representing connected points  may have differing strengths or reliability. hence  more sophisticated preference relations may incorporate ranking functions  or numerical weights  on edges. for graph  a priority assignment p is a mapping from e to the natural numbers in  any totally ordered set serves equally well .
definition 1  p-preferred g-interpretations  let ¦² be a scenario of graph  and let p be a priority assignment tobe interpretations of ¦²  and let ¦¤ m e   resp.   be the change set associated

;
  there is i ¡Ê in such that:
- for every e ¡Ê e such that p e  = i we have
  and
-we have
¦¤ 
example 1 consider example 1 where p  1   = 1 and other edges are assigned value 1. the preferred models are now m1  m1  m1  and m1. consequently  p is true at each point in ¦¨ ¦² .
the completion of ¦² under p  ¦¨ ¦² p   is defined in an obvious extension to definition 1  over the p-preferred interpretations; we omit details given space constraints.
proposition 1 let ¦² be a scenario of graph and let p be a priority assignment to e. let ¦¨ ¦²  =  be the completion of ¦² and let ¦¨ ¦² p  =
be the completion of ¦² under
.
¡¡the notion of p-preferred g-interpretations captures the notion of chronological minimisation: let g be a chain graph  with v = {1 ... n}  e = { t t + 1  | t = 1 ... n   1}  and priority assignment p t t+ 1  = t. then the completion of ¦² corresponds to chronological ignorance  shoham  1  in which later changes are preferred to earlier changes. further  when g is star graph  for merging   the priority of the edge connecting a source i to the centre point 1 can encode the reliability of i. of course other alternatives are possible.
¡¡in a further direction  and generalising cardinality-based preference  one can assign weights to propositions  reflecting that some propositions are more likely to persist than others. for instance  when crossing the border between two countries in europe  the official language is more likely to change than the main religion. these weights would then be aggregated to assign an overall weight to a change set.
1 discussion
we have described a general approach to belief change based on minimisation of change. in the approach  an undirected graph has associated with each vertex some information represented in a formula. the graph structure can model variousphenomenaincludingspatially adjacent points  temporally adjacent points in time  connected agents  etc. consequently it is quite expressive  and generalises similar frameworks that have been explored previously. the intuition is that change between neighbours is exceptional; this assumption justifies global minimisation of change. following the minimisation process  the completion of the graph provides new information at each vertex  representing that information that may be consistently gleaned from other connected vertices. the approach generalises previous frameworks involving change minimisation  including extrapolation and related belief change operators  and some merging and revision operators. however  the general approach is of independent interest. in particular  it proves to be suitable to spatial mininisation of change. along this line  an interesting practical issue would be to apply the approach to a domain such as is addressed in  wu¡§rbel et al.  1 . lastly  the general approach is computationally no more complex than each of these particular cases.
¡¡an interpretationof the graphthat warrants more investigation is when it represents a network of agents. global minimisation of change with respect to a network of agents can be understood as follows: agents have some initial beliefs that they don't want to give up  and after some communication process  the agents come to an equilibrium where changes between the belief bases of neighbouring agents are globally minimal.  hence  our approach  based on global minimisation  can also be characterised as consistent expansion in a network of agents.  one interesting issue for future research is that of local minimisation of change  wherein minimisation at a vertex is with respect to that vertex's adjacent neighbours only. clearly in this case the process admits nontrivial iteration. our approach also departs from approaches such as  gauwin et al.  1   where agents iteratively revise or merge their current beliefs by/with the beliefs of other agents. another promising issue for further research is to allow information to be similarly revised  and not just strengthened  at a vertex  and so where theorem 1  part 1 does not necessarily hold . in this case  an agent may in fact give up beliefs  perhaps as a result of contradicting beliefs at an adjacent vertex with higher reliability.
acknowledgements
we wish to thank florencedupin de saint-cyr for manyhelpful discussions.
