
importance of contraction for belief change notwithstanding literature on iterated belief change has by and large centered around the issue of iterated belief revision  ignoring the problem of iterated belief contraction. in this paper we examine iterated belief contraction in a principled way  starting with qualified insertion  a proposal by hans rott. we show that a judicious combination of qualified insertion with a well-known factoring principle leads to what is arguably a pivotal principle of iterated belief contraction. we show that this principle is satisfied by the account of iterated belief contraction modelled by lexicographic state contraction  and outline its connection with lexicographic revision  darwiche-pearl's account of revision as well as spohn's ordinal ranking theory.
keywords: belief change  information state change  iterated belief contraction.
literature on belief change deals with the problem of how new evidence impinges upon the current knowledge of a rational agent. the pioneering works in the area such as  alchourro¡än et al.  1  provide the formal framework  and the solution for  one-shot belief change . follow up work in the area  e.g.  williams  1; nayak  1; boutilier  1  have explored the related issue of iterated belief change that deals with sequential changes in belief. this latter research has by and large been confined to iterated belief revision: given belief corpus k  two sequential pieces of evidence x y and revision operator    how do we construct the resultant corpus  kx   y  however  the accompanying problem of iterated belief contraction  namely  given belief corpus k  two beliefs x y that are to be sequentially removed from k  and contraction operator    how do we construct the resultant corpus  kx   y   has  for no obvious reason  been rather neglected. very few reseach works  e.g.   bochman  1; chopra et al.  1; rott  1; 1  and  nayak et al. 
1   have addressed this problem. the primary aim of this paper is to examine this problem from what we may call the  first principles  of belief change.
¡¡in section 1  we introduce the problem of iterated belief contraction  and as a starting point  take up a proposal by hans rott  rott  1  called qualified insertion. in the next section  we examine this principle and its variations  and show that when combined with factoring  a well-known result in belief change  qualified insertion can lead to a good account of iterated belief contraction. in section 1 we study some interesting properties of this contraction  followed by its semantic modelling via lexicographic state contraction in section 1. we conclude with a short summary.
1 background
the theory of belief change purports to model how a current theory or body of beliefs  k  can be rationally modified in order to accommodate a new observation x. an observation  such as x  is represented as a sentence in a propositional language l  and a theory  such as k  is assumed to be a set of sentences in l  closed under a supra-classical consequence operation  cn. since the new piece of information x may contravene some current beliefs in k  chances are  some beliefs in k will be discarded before x is eased into it. accordingly  three forms of belief change are recognised in the belief change framework:
1. contraction: kx  is the result of discarding some unwanted information x from the theory k
1. expansion: kx+ is the result of simple-mindedly incorporating some information x into the theory k  and
1. revision: kx  is the result of incorporating some information x into the theory k in a manner so as to avoid internal contradiction in kx .
the intuitive connectionamong these operatorsis capturedby the following two identities named  respectively  after isaac levi and william harper:
levi identity:   and
harper identity: .
¡¡a belief change  revision  contraction and expansion  operation is agm-rational if it satisfies the corre-
sponding set of agm rationality postulates. the three sets of postulates  along with motivation and interpretation for them  may be found in  ga¡§rdenfors  1 . it is well known that a revision operator constructed from an agm-rational contraction operation via the levi identity is agm rational; and conversely agm-rational revision operations can be used to construct agm-rational contraction operations via the harper identity. for convenience we reproduce the agm postulates for contraction below. is closed under cn closure
 1  	x 	inclusion
 1  	if  then kx  = k	vacuity
 1  	if	success
 1  	    x  +x	recovery
 1  	if	preservation
 1  	kx  ¡É k    kx ¡Ä	intersection
 1  	if	conjunction
¡¡the expansion operation is very easily constructed: kx+ = cn k ¡È {x} . contraction and revision operations are relatively more sophisticated operations since they deal with choice.
¡¡it is easily noticed that the agm postulates of contraction deal with  one-shot  belief contraction. the only constraint of interest on iterated contraction that they impose is:
vacuity specialised if  then  kx   y = kx 
which is not really much of a constraint.1 in particular  postulates  1   and  1   impose very little. consider the following example to see how ineffective the agm postulates are in dealing with sequential contraction.
example 1 suppose i believe on independent grounds that both a: argentina will qualify for the fifa world-cup final and b: brazil will qualify for the fifa world-cup final.1 thus my knowledge corpus is k = cn a b   whereby a ¡Å b ¡Ê k.
¡¡since i believe a and b on independent grounds  arguably ka  = cn b  and kb  = cn a . moreover  since my belief in a¡Åb is assumed to have no independentstanding  we would expect a  correct  belief contraction operation to behave in a way such that both and.
¡¡this however is not mandated by the agm postulates. we can plausibly argue that ka ¡Äb = cn b  given brazil's past record.this will satisfy all the eight postulates of contraction.1 however  since b ¡Ê ka   the postulates do not constrain the content of  ka   b in any interesting way at all. in particular  the postulates cannot insist on the absence of a¡Åb in the resultant belief corpus  contrary to our intuition.
¡¡not many researchers have examined iterated belief contraction in a principled way  an exception being hans rott who has advocated the following principle  rott  1  p.1 :

     then by recovery  kx  y  = kx . we assume throughout the paper that y is a removable belief  i.e. . 1
¡¡¡¡both argentina and brazil had qualified to play in the quartersfinals by the time this paper was being written. italy played france in the final and won the 1-world-cup. 1
   readers acquainted with the semantics involved can verify it by considering the following plausibility rank-order over the worlds: where ab is the most preferred world.
qualified insertion
if
	  x  y =	kx  ¡É ky 	otherwise.
this is indeed an appealing suggestion. its first part is simply vacuity specialised  justified by the agm rationality postulates. as to the second part of this principle  since both x and y are individually removed from k sequentially  it stands to reason that when the second contraction is non-vacuous  the result should consist of the beliefs that resist removal in individual contractions of k by x and y.
¡¡despite the intuitive plausibility of qualified insertion  its inadequacy is established by the example 1 below.
 example 1 consider again the scenario in example 1. we know that b ¡Ê ka . in accordance with qualified insertion  then   ka   b = ka  ¡É kb . moreover  a ¡Å b ¡Ê ka  and  whereby. hence. however  since a and b are the only reasons for a¡Åb to be in the knowledge corpus  a ¡Å b should not be in .
we find that qualified insertion  though intuitive  fails to offer an acceptable account of iterated belief contraction. we take this to be the starting point of this paper. in the next section we analyse this principle to arrive at what we consider to be a pivotal principle of iterated belief contraction.
1 qualified insertion - qualified
we break qualified insertion into two sub-principles for convenience in referring to them as follows:1vacuity specialised if  then  kx   y = kx .
insertion if y ¡Ê kx   then  kx   y = kx  ¡É ky .
clearly  vacuity specialised is not controversial  and our examination in example 1 indicates that insertion is the culprit. before we claim what is wrong with insertion  we digress to another well known result  ga¡§rdenfors  1  p.1 : factoring either
1. kx ¡Äy = kx   or 1. kx ¡Äy = ky   or
1. kx ¡Äy = kx  ¡É ky .
given the naming of this principle  it is only appropriate that we refer to the three  values  of kx ¡Äy as the three factors  here as well as in other variants of this principle below. noting the logical equivalence between y and  x¡Åy ¡Ä x ¡ú y   and making appropriate substitutions in factoring we get: factoring 1 either
1. ky  = kx ¡Åy  or
1. ky  = kx ¡úy  or
1. ky  = kx ¡Åy ¡É kx ¡úy.
from insertion and factoring1  in turn  follows the following principle:
factored insertion if y ¡Ê kx   then either
1.  kx   y = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy  or
1.  or
1.  kx   y = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy ¡É kx ¡úy.
it is our view that factored insertion together with
vacuity specialised jointly constitute a central principle for iterated belief contraction. before arguing our case  we make the following observation:
observation 1 insertion implies  but is not implied by  factored insertion  in presence of factoring1. the import of this observation may not be immediately obvious. how is it that factored insertion fails to imply insertion in presence of factoring1  the important point here is which  factor  kicks in when. let's continue with our fifa example.
example 1 let us model the scenario in example 1 as follows. let the truth vectors 1 1 represent the four worlds over the atoms {a b}  thus 1 is the interpretation that assigns 1 to a and 1 to b   and 1  1 where ¦Á  ¦Â means ¦Á is strictly preferred to ¦Â. under this modelling  min   a   = min 1  = 1 whereby  ka   = {1}; thus ka  = cn b . similarly  kb  =
cn a .	more importantly   whereby
  and  ka ¡Åb  = {1} whereby
ka ¡Åb = cn a   b . note that since  fac-
toring1 is satisfied.1 similarly  our intuitive expectation  that  ka   b = cn true  is in accordance with factored insertion since
b  ¡É cn a  = cn true .1 however  since a ¡Å b is in  but not in cn true   insertion is not satisfied. insertion is not satisfied because  while the  third factor  kicked in to satisfy factored insertion  the  second factor  kicked in to satisfy factoring1.
this example highlights an important point  namely  apart from factorising iterated contraction as in factored insertion  we should also examine the  trigger conditions  for these factors. towards this end  we start with factoring  and provide the following result.
theorem 1 given belief set k  sentences x and y and an agm-rational belief contraction operation   
1. if y ¡Ê kx ¡Äy then kx ¡Äy = kx 
1. if x ¡Ê kx ¡Äy then kx ¡Äy = ky 
 then kx ¡Äy = kx  ¡É ky .
proof sketch: the third claim easily follows from the agm postulates  1   and  1  . the first two claims are symmetric; so it is sufficient to show only claim  1 . we use the

1
   that's a bit too quick. we need also to verify for other values of x and y. but that's not the point we are trying to make here. 1
this intuition is  of course  debatable. one might say that since
brazil has a better track record than argentina  we should still have . that is fine.
b  = cn a¡úb   again is in accord with factored insertion. 1
   note that the first two items are equivalent. we nonetheless treat them separately since they eventually lead to distinct principles in principled factored insertion below.
standard properties of the epistemic entrenchment relation ¡Ü  and the well known construction of contraction via it  namely  y ¡Ê kx  iff both y ¡Ê k and either that. we use x   y and x ¡« y as short-hand for  and
 x ¡Ü y  ¡Ä  y ¡Ü x  respectively. we will use ¡Ô for logical equivalence. from the assumption y ¡Ê kx ¡Äy  in the principal case it follows that x ¡Ä y    x ¡Ä y  ¡Å y ¡Ô y. from this it follows that  x ¡Ä y  ¡« x   y. now consider some arbitrary sentence z. it will be in kx  just in case  in the principal case  x   x ¡Å z. similarly  it will be in kx ¡Äy just in case  in the principal case  x ¡Ä y    x ¡Ä y  ¡Å z. it is sufficient to show that these two conditions are equivalent.  i  suppose x   x ¡Å z. we know x   y where by x   y ¡Å z. since  x ¡Ä y  ¡Å z ¡Ô  x ¡Å z  ¡Ä  y ¡Å z  and x ¡« x ¡Ä y it follows x ¡Ä y    x ¡Ä y  ¡Å z.  ii  suppose x ¡Ä y    x ¡Ä y  ¡Å z ¡Ô  x ¡Å z  ¡Ä  y ¡Å z . it trivially follows that x   x ¡Å z. 
theorem 1 tells us how to reduce contraction by a conjunction to known contractions by the individual conjuncts. an immediate corollary of it is applicable to the principle factoring1.
corollary 1 given belief set k  sentences x and y and an agm-rational belief contraction operation   
1. if x ¡ú y ¡Ê ky  then ky  = kx ¡Åy
1. if x ¡Å y ¡Ê ky  then
1. if both	and then
	  =	 
	y	x¡Åy ¡É	x ¡úy .
now  our goal was to examine the conditions that trigger different factors of factored insertion. if we qualify each item in factored insertion by the corresponding condition in corollary 1 as is:
naive factored insertion given y ¡Ê kx  
1. if x ¡ú y ¡Ê ky   then  kx   y = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy
1. if x ¡Å y ¡Ê ky   then 
1. if both  then
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ kx   y = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy ¡É kx ¡úy . then  we will be no better off  since it will lead us to all the problems associated with insertion:
observation 1 naive factored insertion is logically equivalent to insertion.
however  we notice that in theorem 1  in reducing contraction by a conjunction to contraction by individual conjuncts  the conditions in question perform a  check  on the result of the contraction by the conjunction. in factored insertion  the intention is to reduce iterated contraction to oneshot contractions. accordingly we would expect the appropriate conditions to perform checks on the result of the sequential contraction  not on the result of the one-shot contractions. accordingly we suggest the following principle instead.
principled factored insertion given y ¡Ê kx  
1. if x ¡ú y ¡Ê  kx   y   then  kx  y  = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy
1. if x ¡Å y ¡Ê  kx   y   then  kx  y  = kx  ¡É kx ¡úy
1. if both  then
 kx   y = kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy ¡É kx ¡úy
let us revisit our favourite fifa example again.
example 1 let the scenario be as in previous examples. we are trying to construct  ka   b . we know from example 1 that both b ¡Ê ka  and . since b ¡Ê ka   we consider principled factored insertion. since we already know that  the second case does not apply. so the result of this iterated contraction will crucially depend on whether or not. if a ¡ú b ¡Ê  ka   b   then the first case will apply  and we will get  ka   b = ka  ¡É ka ¡Åb = cn b  ¡É cn a   b  = cn a ¡ú b . else  the third case will apply  and we will get
k	k	k	cn b	cn	b	cn
cn true .
note that it is the  slight  difference in the conditions attached to different factors that made the difference. we assumed that  hence. if we used naive
factored insertion  then the the second factor would have kicked in. but since  by assumption   in case of principled factored insertion  it will be a factor other than the second one that kicks in  making all the difference.
1 some properties of principled iterated contraction
we have noticed that principled factored insertion performs reasonably well in our toy example. in this  short  section we examinesome propertiesthat this principleentails.
by a principled iterated contraction opera-
tion we understand any agm-rational contraction operation that also satisfies principled factored insertion. it is understood that such contraction operations will automatically satisfy vacuity specialised since  being agmrational  they satisfy vacuity. we assume in the following observations that the contraction operation   is a principled iterated contraction operation. observation 1 given that then  kx   y =
kx  ¡É ky .
¡¡the following immediate corollary to observation 1 indicates that things are as they should be. corollary 1 
observation 1 given that y	¡Ê	kx   if  then
 kx   y = kx  ¡É ky .
¡¡from observation 1 we straightforwardly get the following corollary that lends principled iterated contraction further credence:
corollary 1 if  x ¡Ê kx  then  kx    x = k  x.
observations 1 and 1 are simple  yet quite interesting.
on the first count  they identify conditions under which in-
sertion holds in general  i.e.   kx   y is identified with kx  ¡É ky . on the second count  these two properties appear to be the analogues of the first two of the four well known postulates advocated by darwiche and pearl  darwiche and pearl  1  for iterated belief revision:
	dp1	if then  kx   y = ky 
	dp1	ifthen 
¡¡postulates dp1 and dp1 indicate what happens in the case of iterated revision when the two pieces of evidence x and y are logically related. the result is given purely in terms of ky . similarly  observations 1 and 1 tell us what happens when the two beliefs to be removed  x and y are logically related. the result is provided purely in terms of kx  and
ky .
¡¡another interesting fact about these two simple observations is that they record properties of lexicographic state contraction introduced in  nayak et al.  1 .
this suggests a deeper connection between principled it-
erated contraction and lexicographic state contraction. we take up this issue in the next section.
1 lexicographic contraction
lexicographic contraction is the contractioncounterpart of of lexicographic revision introduced in  nayak  1; nayak et al.  1 . like most approaches to iterated belief change  this approach has been semantically motivated. in this section we revisit lexicographic revision and lexicographic contraction as a prelude to showing that the iterated belief contraction operation generated by lexicographic contraction must be a principled iterated contraction operation.
1 lexicographic state revision
the lexicographic approach to iterated belief revision is captured by a particular account of state revision  nayak et al.  1 . the semantics of lexicographic revision is given in terms of an evolving belief state  where a belief state is represented as a plausibility ordering over the interpretations generated by the background language.
definition 1 let ¦¸ be the set of possible worlds  interpretations  of the background language l  and  a total preorder  a connected  transitive and reflexive relation  over ¦¸. for any set ¦²   ¦¸ and world ¦Ø ¡Ê ¦¸ we will say ¦Ø is a minimal member of ¦² if and only if both ¦Ø ¡Ê ¦² and
for all  and denote it as. we will often drop the parentheses for readability.
¡¡by we will understand that ¦Ø1 is not more plausible than ¦Ø1. the expression ¦Ø1 ¡Ô ¦Ø1 will be used as a shorthand for   . the symbol  will denote the strict part of . for any set s   l we will denote by  s  the set {¦Ø ¡Ê ¦¸ | ¦Ø |= s for every s ¡Ê s }. for readability  we will abbreviate  {s}  to  s . intuitively  the preorder  will be the semantic analogue of the revision operation    and will represent the belief state of an agent. we will say that k is the belief set associated with the preorder . it is defined as the set of sentences satisfied by the -minimal worlds  i.e.  for all.
an inconsistent belief state is represented by an empty relation ¡Í: for every pair. note that this violates connectedness  and hence the plausibility relation  is  strictly speaking  no longer a total preorder. however  this is a special case  and merits special treatment.
¡¡a modified grove-construction  grove  1  is used to construct the revision from a given plausibility relation:
definition 1   to * 
¡¡if 	otherwise.
the plausibility ordering  belief state    in light of new evidence e  is stipulated to evolve to the new ordering via the use of a state revision operator  as follows.
1. special cases:
 a  if  e  =   then  and only then 
 b  else  if  then iff either ¦Ø1 |= e or ¦Ø1 |=  e.
1. general case: given nonempty prior    and satisfiable evidence   
 a  ifthen
 b  if then
 c  ifthen
1 lexicographic contraction
as in the case of lexicographic revision  we take it that the pre-contraction plausibility ordering  belief state    after suspension of belief x  evolves to the new ordering  via the use of a state contraction operator  as follows. definition 1  lexicographic state contraction  
1. special cases:
 for all x.  for all x.
1. general case:	given non-trivial pre-contraction state 
 a  if
 b  if
 c  let ¦Ö ¡Ê {x   x} and ¦Ö be its complement. if ¦Ø |=
  then iff for every chain  of length n  there exists a chain of length n in  ¦Ö .
corresponding conditions 1 a  and 1 b  in lexicographic
revision and lexicographic contraction are more or less identical: irrespective of whether x is a piece of evidence to be incorporated into the current knowledge corpus  or a belief to be suspended  the prior ordering between any two worlds  ¦Ø and ¦Ø that both satisfy x  or both invalidate x   should not be disturbed in the process. these conditions are also accepted in the darwiche-pearl approach to belief revision. condition 1 c  in lexicographic contraction states the effect of a contraction by x on two worlds  one of which satisfies x and the other does not: the ranking of all worlds in   x  are simultaneously shifted so that the best  minimal  worlds in   x  attain the same rank as the -minimal worlds  i.e.  the worlds in  k  . this is reminiscent of spohn's account of belief contraction via ordinal conditional functions  spohn  1   and we take it that this is the relational analogue of spohn's account of iterated belief contraction. this definition of  captures in a simple way a generalised version of the harper identity provided in  nayak et al.  1 . figure 1 provides a simple illustra-
 ~x 

figure 1: state before and after a contraction by x
tion of lexicographic state contraction. the  state space  ¦¸ is partitioned by the pre-contraction plausibility preorder  into eight  cells   1 ...1  the worlds in i being preferable to those in i + 1  for 1 ¡Ü i ¡Ü 1  while the worlds in the same cell are equally preferable. these cells are further partitioned by  x  and   x : the cells x1 ... x1 constituting  x   and the cells y1 ... y1 constituting   x . after the contraction by x  the  best  worlds in  x  as well as the  best  worlds in  x  are accorded the most preferred status in the post-contraction state; the second most preferred worlds consisting of the precontraction  next best  worlds from  x  and   x   and so on.
¡¡earlier we indicated that there is a close connection between lexicographic contraction and principled iterated contraction. for this purpose we need to generate a contraction operation from a given plausibility preorder in order to make this connection. we use a slight variation of the standard transformation.
definition 1   to   
¡¡if 	otherwise.
 our last result  theorem 1  below shows that if the two sequential contractions in  kx   y are constructed from the belief states  and respectively  where k is the belief set  associated with the belief state   then principled factored insertion is satisfied.
theorem 1 be the original belief state  k its associated belief set  and  the lexicographic state contraction operation. if we define  for every sentence ¦Á and ¦Â 
1. k¦Á  using the contraction operation   generated from  via definition 1  and
1.   the result of removing ¦Â from k¦Á   using the contraction operation  generated from  via
¡¡¡¡definition 1 then the  dynamic  contraction operation   thus defined is a principled iterated contraction operation.
proof sketch: note that  given a preorder  and sentence x  we have  denoted  below for readability  is a total preorder. hence the operation   defined as required  is an agm-rational belief contraction operation. a point to be noted is that the two contraction operations in an expression of the form  kx   y are technically different operations  the first correspondingto  and the second to   and so it should more accurately be represented as  kx   y .1
¡¡we need to show that the operation pair  satisfies the property principled factored insertion. it is easily shown that in presence of the condition y ¡Ê kx   the con-
ditions
1.  amounts to
1. amounts to  and
1. the two conditions and
jointly amount to ¡Ê
.
note that these three cases are mutually exclusive  and it suffices in these cases to show respectively that
a b 
c 
the information contained in  1    1  and  1   together with the definition of the operation  in particular  that the relative ordering of worlds inside  x   respectively   x   is not disturbed  help to carry out the proofs of  a    b  and  c   correspondingly. for instance  the fact from  1   that  
  x  and the condition that for ¦Ø drive the proof of  a .
¡¡a point to note that the condition  1c  in definition 1 is not used in the proof. 
a natural question to raise at this point is whether the property principled factored insertion  together with the agm postulates of contraction  fully characterises lexicographic contraction. it is easily verified that it does not.
given y ¡Ê kx   if we equate  kx   y with kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy when
  and with kx  ¡É kx ¡Åy whenotherwise  it will satisfy principled factored insertion  and yet a non-lexicographic state contraction operation  priority 1will lead to such contraction behaviour.
1 conclusion
our aim was to examine iterated belief contraction in a principled way. we started with rott's qualified insertion that  upon examination  was found to be wanting. we then showed that a judicious combination of qualified insertion with factoring leads to what we consider to be a pivotal principle of iterated belief change. we have argued that while lexicographic state contraction satisfies it  this principle is too weak to completely characterise a lexicographic contraction. we hope to completely characterise lexicographic contraction in our future work. 