
this paper presents a novel approach for providing automated trading agents to a population  focusing on bilateral negotiation with unenforceable agreements. a new type of agents  called semicooperative  sc  agents is proposed for this environment. when these agents negotiate with each other they reach a pareto-optimal solution that is mutually beneficial. through extensive experiments we demonstrate the superiority of providing such agents for humans over supplying equilibrium agents or letting people design their own agents. these results are based on our observation that most people do not modify sc agents even though they are not in equilibrium. our findings introduce a new factor -human response to provided agents - that should be taken into consideration when developing agents that are provided to a population.
1 introduction
designing automated trading agents has received increasing attention  as trading in many markets  e.g. nasdaq  has now become fully electronic  da-jun and liang-xian  1 . in many domains  such as nasdaq and e-bay  there is an entity which provides a generic agent for a considerable number of traders in the market. this entity might offer the agent for a fee or even for free  as a recommended agent. the goal of this entity is to provide an agent that maximizes the overall traders' utility when it is delivered to a population  for two reasons: first  one of the entity's goals is to provide good service to its users. therefore  the entity should aim to maximize the average payoff of all the traders' agents in the environment. second  web-marketplaces  such as e-bay  which host commercial transactions for a certain percentage of the transaction amount  are interested in increasing the total profits of all the traders  since they will receive higher fees as a result. nevertheless  in these domainseach client who obtains an agent has his own interests.
　in this paper we discuss the question of which agent should be recommended to a population. we consider environments in which the fulfillment of the agreements reached by traders are unenforceableby the system  similar to many real-life domains. the game theory approach uses equilibrium agents  da-jun and liang-xian  1 . these agents' strategies are in equilibrium namely no agent will be better off by deviating from its equilibrium strategy. however  although the equilibrium agent guarantees stability of the environment there is no motivation for any trader to use any other agent   its outcome is not always pareto-optimal  i.e. a solution may exist where some agents obtain higher utilities than they would have obtained by using the equilibrium strategy  while others do not attain lower utilities. consider  for example  a seller and a buyer who have reached a sales agreement in a market-place which does not compel the traders to fulfill the agreement  e.g.  ebay . if the traders follow the equilibrium strategy  both sides will not fulfill the agreement they reached   i.e. the seller will not send the goods and the buyer will not send the money . however  this solution is not pareto-optimal  since it would be more beneficial  if the agreement would be fulfilled as agreed upon.
　different from the game theory approach  we present a new family of agents called semi-cooperative  sc . these sc agents are designed to reach mutually beneficial agreements and to keep their commitments  unless the other side has broken its agreements in prior transactions . in addition when trading with identical sc agents  they achieve a pareto-optimal outcome that is beneficial for both sides. consider the trading environment in the previous example. if we would provide an sc agent and traders would adopt it without change  both sides would receive the money or the goods  as agreed. consequently  traders would achieve better results than when using the equilibrium agent. however  in this example adopting an sc agent may not be beneficial  if many traders modify their sc agents to equilibrium agents that do not send money or goods. in such cases the traders that adopt an sc agent without changes will send money  or goods  without receiving goods  or money  in return.
　conversely  we claim that if a recommended agent is provided to a population  most people will not modify their agents  even if their strategies are not compatible with the equilibrium strategy. we restrict our argument to low-cost environments  so that if one of the traders breaks the agreement  the loss for the one that keeps it  e.g. sending the goods without receiving consideration  is relatively small. such situations  where the traded costs of the goods are not very high  such as books  flowers and cinema tickets  are very common on the internet. there are several reasons for our claim that people do not tend to modify their agents. first  it is well known that people do not necessarily play according to the equilibrium  grosz et al.  1 . social factors such as equality  social welfare and risk taking play very important roles in people's decisions  gal et al.  1 . second  modifying an agent's code is time consumingand requires an understanding of the given code. for most users in low-cost environments it is simply not worth the effort  especially when the agent's code is complex and seems to be reasonable. moreover  most traders are not programmers and modifying the code would require hiring a programmer thus incurring additional costs. another factor is the credibility of an agent which is recommended by an authoritative and experienced entity. it is important to note that despite the above reasons  we believe that some people will change the recommended agent. however  we claim that the percentage of people who would change their agent is small  and thus it is still worthwhile to supply an sc agent which is more cooperative with others  rather than the non-cooperative equilibrium agent.
　in order to examine our assumption we conducted extensive experiments which included 1 participants. in the first experiment  we provided three groups of human subjects with recommended agents for a resource allocation game. this game extends the well known prisoner's dilemma to simulate a common real-life bilateral negotiation environment. one group received an equilibrium agent  while the other two groups received sc agents; one with a simple negotiation method and the other with a more complex one. all subjects from the same group received the same initial code. subjects were free to make any changes in their recommended agent. note that the participants could change their agents not only to the equilibrium agent  but even to an agent which specifically exploits the recommended agent. the results show that most subjects did not change their agents. moreover  in groups which were given an sc agent as a recommended agent  the overall utility of all the subjects was significantly higher than in the group that was given the equilibrium agent. furthermore  even when giving subjects the opportunity to change their agents  after observing the results of playing with other agents in their group  subjects did not tend to change their agents and the superiority of the sc agents remained.
　in addition  we compared the overall utility of recommending an sc agent to the overall utility when there is no recommended agent at all. for this purpose  we asked another group of subjects to design their own agents without proffering a recommended agent. we named these agents peer designed agents  pdas . the results show that the group that received a recommended sc agent yielded higher overall payoffs compared to the group which was not provided a recommended agent. thus  we propose that entities wishing to maximize the overall utility in the environment offer the traders a recommended agent  rather than leave it totally open to the users' development.
　the innovative contribution of this paper is in presenting a new approach for designing recommended agents that takes human behavior into consideration. to our knowledge we are the first to examine how human populations react to the existence of recommended computerized agents. moreover  our approach saves the need of designing and implementing a mechanism for the trading environment. mechanism design requires many resources  and it is not always applicable. consider  for example  what it would take for e-bay to enforce all the agreements reached on the site. our approach  on the other hand  induces cooperation and fairness without spending any additional resources.
　the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 1 we discuss related work. in sections 1 and 1 we describe our negotiation environment and broadly present the semi cooperative agents  sc . then we discuss the experiments we conducted in order to evaluate the sc agents' performance. finally  in section 1 we conclude and suggest directions for future research.
1 related work
developing automated agents for a population has received extensive attention in recent years. in addition to equilibrium agents there are approaches which propose designing cooperative agent systems  e.g.   zhang et al.  1  . in these systems the agents cooperate in order to achieve a common goal  or to maximize the overall system's utility. however  the agents in such systems are indifferent toward their own utilities. therefore  these agent systems are inapplicable in our environment  where each agent attempts to increase its client's utility. furthermore  there have been efforts to design a mechanism which induces cooperativebehavioramong selfish agents  e.g.   mui et al.  1 . however  these mechanisms require resources and are based on assumptions such as repeated interactions and the ability to detect an agent's identity  which are not appropriate for our environment.
　some researchers have explored the behavior of evolutional agents that dynamically adapt to their environment  e.g.   fatima et al.  1 . these agents are designated for environments in which learning and adaptation can be done during long periods. these agents are also used for modeling human behavior. however  the evolutionary model requires repeated interactions  while we consider negotiation environments where agents may interact only once. other researchers have considered socially rational agents  whose utility depends on the overall utility of the society  e.g.   hogg and jennings  1 . in our environment however as in other e-commerce applications  traders do not take into consideration the overall benefit of the society. other researchers have developed non-equilibrium agents for competing against a population of bounded rational agents such as humans  e.g.   gal et al.  1 . in contrast  we have designed agents designated for the entire population. moreover  none of the previous studies have considered human behavior when providing a recommended agent.
　the concept which is most similar to the recommended agents considered here is a recommended play  in which subjects are presented recommendations of how to play a game  e.g.   croson and marks  1  . some of the studies that explore recommended play  present mixed results concerning the influence of the recommended play on people's behavior. however  recommended play is fundamentally different from a recommended agent. first  most studies which examine recommended play induce playing the equilibrium strategy and are explored in games with simple strategies. in contrast  we suggest providing non-equilibrium agents and using more complex settings which reflect real-life negotiations. in addition  in order to use the recommended play people must actively choose it. however  in our case the recommended agent can be passively adopted without any additional activity required. moreover  modifying the recommended agent does actually require effort and time.
1 environment description
in order to simulate a general trading framework  we have designed a resource allocation game. the advantage of this basic game is that it makes very few assumptions  and thus it can represent many situations in real economical markets. moreover  such environments are very common and easy to manage via the web. in the beginning of our 1-player game  each player i  i （ {1}  is allocated an initial pool of resources riinit  which are attributed to several types. the goal of the game for each player i is to possess a specified set of resources gi  which includes a certain quantity  zero or more  of each resource type. there are enough resources for both players to satisfy their goals  i.e..
however  some of the resources needed by one player may be in the possession of the other. thus  in order to obtain the goal set of resources  a player might need to exchange resources with the other party  according to a certain negotiation protocol. the protocol consists of a finite number of rounds n. each round l is comprised of two phases: a negotiation phase and an exchange phase. in the negotiation phase one of the players makes an offer to exchange resources with the other player. in his offer the proposer i promises to send ogiveli resources to the other player and in return requests that playerj send ogivelj to him. the receiver should inform the proposer whether he accepts or rejects the offer. afterwards  there is an exchange phase  in which each player i sends a set of resources sil to the other player. in this game  agreements are not enforced by the game controller  allowing players to break agreements. therefore sil can be different from ogiveli. the exchange is executed simultaneously  so that no player knows how many resources  if any  the other party has actually sent till he has already sent his resources. the next round is identical to the first one except for the role of the proposer  which is alternated between the two players. the performance of each player is determined by its score at the end of the game. the score of player i  scorei  possessing the set of resources riend at the end of the game is scoregoal if the player holds the whole target set. in addition  each resource the player possesses imparts him with scoreres points. formally

the resource allocation game  supplies a general negotiation platform which is more similar to real-life negotiations than typical economic games.1 this game is a simplified version of the colored-trails framework  which is a paradigm for examining negotiation environments which involve automated agents  grosz et al.  1 .
　in our experiment the configuration of the parameters is: n = 1  scoregoal = 1 and scoreresources = 1. thus  obtaining the target set becomes the most important component of the scoring function. we set the initial state in such a manner that one player possesses all the resources that comprise a target set  which means he is not dependent on the resources of the other. the other player  on the other hand  is dependent on the other player's resources. more specifically  he needs two resources from the other player in order to complete the target set. both players have extra available resources for which they can negotiate. our game setting enables an examination of situations in which the equilibrium strategy is not pareto-optimal  and cooperation between the players yields better results for both parties: the dependent player can obtain the resources he needs to complete the target set  and the independent player can increase the number of resources he obtains by reaching agreements in which the number of resources he sends is lower than the number of resources he receives in return. moreover  our game setting enables the examination of two different situations: the dependent player gains fromthe exchangeof resourcessignificantly more than he is required to pay  while the independent player only slightly improves his profit from the exchange. both situations are common in real life. consider for instance  a researcher who crucially needs to buy some books for an important research she is conducting. the seller will gain some money from the transaction. the researcher  however  is going to gain much more from the deal.
1 recommending semi-cooperative agents
a recommended agent for this game can be described by its strategies  i.e. the agent's decisions in each possible phase of the game: the offers the agent makes  its responses to the offers it receives and the resources it sends. to describe the agents  when agent a plays the role of player 1 and agent b is player 1  we denote the set of resources that player i possesses at the end of the game and its score as riend a b  and scorei a b   respectively. we use nil to denote the set of resources that player i needs in roundl in orderto complete its goal set. finally  me signifies the index of the player the agent plays and other indicates the index of the other player.
　in our resource allocation game the combination of unenforceable agreements and a finite horizon of the game leads to a theoretical equilibrium result that no resources will be exchanged. therefore  an equilibrium agent  ea  in the context of this game is any agent that never sends any resources  i.e.  i   l sil =  . as a result  at the end of the game each player will possess only its initial set of resources   i  riend ea ea  = riinit.
　in contrast to the equilibrium agent  we define a semi cooperative agent  sc  as an agent which
1. when the agent plays against an identical agent  bothagents obtain higher scores than the scores they have at the beginning of the game.
1. when the agent negotiates with an identical agent  bothagents reach a pareto-optimal solution.
1. it fulfills its agreements as long as the other side doesnot deceive it.
1. in each stage of the game  it commits to activities that arebeneficial for both sides  for itself and for its opponent .
in particular in our game properties 1 and 1 imply that when an sc agent plays against an identical agent  both agents satisfy their goals  i.e.  i  gi   riend sc sc . according to property 1  for each round l the sc agent proposes and accepts agreements that are beneficial to both sides. in this game  an agreement is beneficial for player i if it increases the number of resources it possesses  or if it increases the number of resources it needs in order to satisfy its goal  i.e. .
note that unlike a cooperative agent which agrees to send resources to the other agent for free if it maximizes the joint utility  the sc agent does not accept such an offer. when providing an sc agent as a recommended agent  if players adopt it without change  the dependent players will satisfy their goals  and the independent players will obtain additional resources. therefore both players will benefit more by using semi-cooperative agents than when both of them use the equilibrium agents  in case we provide equilibrium agents . consequently  providing semi-cooperative agents is superior over providing equilibrium agents if the users do not modify their agents   i scorei sc sc    scorei ea ea . however  semi-cooperative agents can obtain a lower score than equilibrium agents  if one of the users modifies his recommended agent. for example  consider a scenario in which user us1 adopts the sc recommended agent without change while user us1 modifies its agent to an equilibrium agent that does not send any resources. in this scenario  the agent of us1 will send resources to the agent of us1 but will not receive resources in return. as a result  us1's score in this game will be lower than if us1 would have used an equilibrium agent  which would have let him at least reserve all his initial resources. nevertheless  if most users do not modify their agents  the revenue of an sc agent in games where both sides use sc agents will compensate for the loss from games where the sc agent plays against a modified agent.
1 experiment
in order to investigate which agent should be provided to a population  an sc or an equilibrium agent  we conducted the following experiment. in this experiment we examined the behavior of three groups of programmers who received recommended agents' codes for the resources allocation game. for this purpose  in addition to the equilibrium agent  ea  we designed two sc agents1  distinguished by their level of complexity  as described below.
description of sc agents the simple semi-cooperative agent  sca 
in general  this agent is a simple agent in the sense that it agrees to any beneficial offers   it doesn't try to increase its score by being greedier at the beginning of the game  or try to learn the opponent type  see ssc's strategy for detecting liars . more specifically:
sending strategy: this agent is honest and fulfills its agreements  unless the other agent deceives it. once this player has been deceived  it stops sending resources.
negotiation strategy: this agent's logic is quite simple. for round l of the game; if the agent has already satisfied its goal  nmel =    it accepts any offer that:  1  gives the other agent resources it needs to satisfy its goal  notherl  1  increases the number of resources it possesses
 |ogivelother|   |ogivelme| . if the agent hasn't satisfied its    it accepts any offer which:  1  promotes it to satisfy its goal 	 1  it needs to send only the resources not necessary for it to reach its goal  ogivelme   avmel   where avil denotes the agent's set of available resources.
the complex semi-cooperative agent  cca 
in general  this agent has a complex logic as it tries to increase its score by being greedier at the beginning of the game. in addition  it tries to minimize the damage in case it plays against a deceiving player. more specifically: sending strategy: cca is honest and usually fulfills its agreements. however  unlike the sca  this agent is also cautious and protects itself from agents that do not fulfill their agreements. cca identifies situations in which there is a high probability that it will be deceived by the other agent which will not send the resources agreed upon: 1  in situations in which the other agent has already satisfied its goal and if it will keep the agreement  the cca agent will satisfy its goal  i.e.  nme   ogivelother. in these situations there is a higher probability that the other agent will not send the promised resources  since both agents are aboutto possess their targetsets and no future interactions are expected. in such cases  there is no motivation for the other agent to maintain its credibility and to avoid deceiving.  1  when the other agent has already deceived in the past.  1  when there are very few rounds till the end of the game. in all the situations mentioned above  the cca waits to send its resources until one round after receiving the resources from the other agent  i.e  if ogivelother = sotherl .
negotiation strategy: in round l of the game  if the agent has already satisfied its goal  nmel =    it accepts offers in which it promises to send the other agent only one resource which the other agent needs in order to satisfy its goal  i.e |ogivelme| = 1 and ogivelme   notherl . the logic behind sending one resource at a time is to minimize the damage in case the other side is a liar and does not fulfill its agreement. the number of resources it demands for sending this resource decreases over time. similarly  if the agent has not

our experiment we used two variations of sc agents: a simple agent that negotiates several resources at a time and a complex agent that negotiates one resource at a time.
satisfied its goal     it accepts any offer in which it is promised one resource which it needs to satisfy its goal  i.e. |ogivelother| = 1   ogivelother   nme . the number of resources it agrees to send in return increases over time.
experiment design
in our experiment 1 subjects were divided to three equal groups. each group was provided with a different recommended agent's code1 ea  cca or sca. all programmers of the same group received the same initial code. we also presented a short description of the recommended agent's strategy. the group that received the ea agent was also explained the meaning of their agents being equilibrium agents. we conveyed to the subjects in all the groups that the provided agent is recommended. each programmer was requested to submit an agent's code aiming to maximize its score  as specified below   which was not necessarily equal to or based upon the recommended agent. they were required to submit their final agents in 1 days. we explained that each agent would play in a tournament against all the other 1 subjects' agents who had received the same recommended agent. each agent played both as the role of the dependent and the role of the independent agent against all the other agents. it is worthy to note that this experimental methodology is innovative since no one  as far as we know  has ever examined the influence of providing a recommended agent to a population of programmers.
　all subjects who participated in our experiment were upper-class undergraduate and graduate computer science students at bar-ilan university  who are experienced programmers. the subjects were motivated to perform well by receiving a course grade. a subject's grade was calculated according to the score obtained by his agent accumulated over all its 1 plays. we emphasized that the grade is based only upon the subject's own score  and not upon other agents' scores - similar to real negotiation environments  where traders gain money only according to their own agents' performance. the game was explained in class and the participants were able to ask questions. in addition  they received an accurate written description of the game. for debugging purposes  we gave participants a server upon which they could run their agents. we made sure that each subject knew how to run the server and we offered any technical support needed.
　our main hypothesis was that the groups provided with sc agents would achieve better results  as specified below  than a group provided with the equilibrium agents. the results were evaluated based on two aspects:  1  the average score of the players that adopted the recommended agent without changing it.  1  the overall score of all the agents in the environment  including agents that were modified to deviate from the recommended strategy. this hypothesis was based on our assumption that people tend not to change their agents  as explained in the introduction.

figure 1:  a  recommended agent's average score;  b  average score of all the agents in the environment.
1 results
the average scores achieved by the agents in the tournaments are presented in figure 1. the results depicted in figure 1.a show that the average scores achieved both by sca and cca agents  which were not modified  are significantly higher than the ea's average score  mann-whitney test  p   1 . similar results are presented in figure 1.b  which depicts the average scores of all agents in the environments  including agents modified to deviate fromthe recommendedagent strategy . the superiority of using the sc agents over using the ea agents applies to both the dependent and the independent roles.
　these results supportour hypothesiswhich claims that providing sc recommended agents to a population yields better results than providing the equilibrium agent. we have based our hypothesis mainly upon the assumption that people tend not to change the recommended agents. this assumption was supported by the experimental results. in all three groups  most subjects did not modify their agents. in particular  only 1 subjects  of 1  modified the recommended agent in the ea group  1 in the sca group and 1 in the cca group.
　the provided agents' performance is determined not only by the number of people that change their agents  but also by the way they modify their agents. some changes do not affect the recommended agents' score and therefore are not relevant. other changes do reduce the recommended agents' score. therefore we classify the modified agents according to the way they affect the recommended agent's score  when they play against it. more specifically the modified agents can be classified into three types. these types are determined by comparing the performance of the modified agent when playing against a recommended agent to the recommended agent's performance when playing against another recommended agent:  1  counter agents - agents that achieve higher scores than the recommended agent. the best-response agent is the agent that achieves the highest score among all the counter agents.  1  agents with neutral changes- agents that achieve the same score as the recommended agent.  1  inferior agents-agents whose scores are lower than the recommended agents. in the ea group  all the modified agents were agents of type 1  and no resources were sent during the ea group tournament. unlike the ea group  in the sca and the cca groups most of the modified agents were counter agents  1 out of 1 and 1 out of 1  respectively . surprisingly  only one subject modified its agent to the bestresponse agent.
comparing the performance of sca and cca groups reveals higher average scores of the latter  though nonsignificant  see figures 1.a and 1.b . similarly  as mentioned above  there were more modified agents in the sca group. this can be attributed to the higher sophistication of the cca's negotiation method. indeed  no changes were made in cca's negotiation method  and the only changes were in the send method. the sca's negotiation method  on the other hand  was naive  i.e. it accepted any offer that increased its score  and therefore called for more modifications. another observation  which indicates that the recommended agent's strategy affects the way people modified their agents  is that no subject modified its agent to become an inferior agent  type 1 .
1 users' response to their agents' performance
in the previous section we showed that most subjects did not modify the provided sc agent. however  consider a scenario in which people are able to observe their agents performance after playing several games. even though most people would not have modified their agents before observing their agents' results they may modify it after such observation. in order to investigate whether people modify their agents after observing their results  we provided the subjects with feedback on their agents' performance  after they submitted their agents  as described in the previous section . each subject received a file which detailed the final score of each of his agent's games and the other agent's scores. in order to keep the other player anonymous we identified each player by a random number. in addition  the subject received a log file for each game its agent played  which included the course of the game.1 after observing these log files  subjects had one week to revise their agents and resubmit them.
　we hypothesized that the number of subjects that would modify their agents at this stage would still be small enough  such that it would still be profitable to provide the sc agent. there are several reasons for our hypothesis. first  as shown in figure 1  the sc agents achieved high scores in the tournament. thus  we assumed that most players would be satisfied with their score and would not modify their agents. second  the tasks of reading all log files and understanding the course of the games is very exhausting and time consuming. third  even if subjects recognize that other players modified the original agent  it is not trivial to derive which are the modified agents codes. fourth  even if we assume that someone succeeded in recognizing the hidden codes of all the agents in the environment  sometimes it is very difficult to calculate the strategy that will yield better results against all other modified agents. thus we believed that most people would not modify their agents after observing their performance. the experiment results support our hypothesis. only one subject modified his agent.
　in order to examine how seriously the participants treated the experiment  including the first part   we asked them to fill out an anonymous questionnaire after the experiment. it was revealed that the exercise was considered very seriously  and 1% of the respondents read their agents code very carefully. we believe that this percentage is even higher than the percentage of traders who would read a recommended agent's code in the real world  for several reasons. first  not all traders are programmers. therefore  in order to read the recommended agent's code or modify it they must make an effort and consult a programmer. second  in our experiment we explicitly mentioned the possibility of changing the recommended agent's code. in real world situations  however  we believe that many traders would not be aware of this possibility.
1 comparison: sc and peer designed agents
in the previous sections we discussed the question of which kind of agent a central entity should provide to a population  given that it should provide a certain recommended agent. however frequently the central entity has the choiceof deciding whether to provide a recommended agent or to let traders design their own agents by themselves. it is not trivial that the first option is preferable  for a few reasons. first  it is well documented that people do not play and do not design agents according to the equilibrium strategy  grosz et al.  1 . second  when each trader designs his own agent  no trader knows the other agents' strategies. this is in contrast to the recommended agent approach  in which traders can exploit their knowledge about the strategy of others and modify their agents to achieve higher scores at the expense of others.
　in order to compare the recommended agents to peer designed agents  pdas   we asked another group of 1 subjects to design agents that play the resource allocation game  without providing any recommended agent code. in addition  the subjects were asked to present verbal documentation explaining their strategy. in order to help subjects to focus on strategy matters and not on coding  we provided them with an agent skeleton which included three functions: accept  send and propose. the subjects were instructed to implementthese functions.
　following the high performance of sc agents  described in figure 1  we hypothesized that the group that received a recommended sc agent would yield a higher overall utility compared to a group that had not received a recommended agent. we based our hypothesis on the assumption that providing a default sc recommended agent would cause some people to adopt it and to play cooperatively  though they would not have designed such a cooperative agent by themselves. as expected  the average score of all the games played by the pdas  shown in figure 1.b  is significantly higher  mannwhitney test  p   1  than in the ea tournament. however  this score is significantly lower  mann-whitney test  p   1  than the average score of agents in both sca and cca groups. in particular  three pdas were equilibrium agents  and ten others never sent their opponents all the re-
sources required for satisfying their goals. the remaining 1 agents enabled their opponents to satisfy their goals in some of the games. this explains the higher performance of the pdas compared to the ea group. however  there were games  where the 1 agents played against each other without satisfying the goal of both players. this is because the pdas were heterogeneous and two pdas could have different exchange rates. thus  in some of games they could not reach an agreement during negotiations. in contrast  since most subjects adopted the recommended agents in the cca and sca tournaments both players usually satisfied their goals.
1 conclusions and future work
in this work we present a novel approach for providing automated trading agents to a population. we focus on bilateral negotiations with unenforceable agreements. unlike the traditional game theory approach that recommends the provision of equilibrium agents which are not always paretooptimal  we propose to provide a new type of agents called semi-cooperative agents that are not in equilibrium. when these agents negotiate with each other they reach a paretooptimal solution that is mutually beneficial. the theoretical risk in providing such agents is that people can change their agents in order to increase their own utility at the expense of others. however  we hypothesized that if people are provided with agents that are reasonable and beneficial for both sides  most people will not spend time and effort to change it. therefore  we designed semi-cooperative agents which yield higher benefits for both sides using it  compared to the case of both sides using equilibrium agents. in order to test our approach we designed an unenforceable resource allocation game  which simulates real life bilateral negotiations. indeed  experimental results of this resource allocation game fully supported our hypothesis. the experiments show that providing sc agents to a human population yields better results than providing equilibrium agents or letting people design their own agents. our results  based on 1 programmers who mostly did not change their agents  has led us to assert that common clients  who are typically non programmers  will not invest the efforts needed to change the code in complex real world situations. in light of these findings we propose that users' reactions to recommended agents should be taken into consideration when developing agents that are provided to a population.
　our research focuses on negotiation environments  which are very common in commercial life. however  the sc principle may also be successfully implemented in other environments  such as: information exchange  where the information transferred is not necessarily reliable  or tasks distribution  where each agent decides how much effort to invest in carrying out its part in the assigned task. in the future we intend to examine our approach in such environments. in addition we plan to develop a formal model that will support our approach and explore our agents in real trading problems.
1 acknowledgment
this work was supported in part by nsf #iis1 and isf #1. kraus is also affiliated with umiacs.
references
 croson and marks  1  r. croson and m. marks. the effect of recommended contributions in the voluntary provision of public goods. economic inquiry  1 :1  1.
 da-jun and liang-xian  1  c. da-jun and x. liangxian. a negotiation model of incomplete information under time constraints. in aamas1  pages 1  1.
 fatima et al.  1  s. fatima  m. wooldridge  and n. r. jennings. a comparative study of game theoretic and evolutionary models for software agents. ai review  1 :1  1.
 gal et al.  1  y. gal  a. pfeffer  f. marzo  and b.j. grosz. learning social p