
detecting and tracking latent factors from temporal data is an important task. most existing algorithms for latent topic detection such as nonnegative matrix factorization  nmf  have been designed for static data. these algorithms are unable to capture the dynamic nature of temporally changing data streams. in this paper  we put forward an online nmf  onmf  algorithm to detect latent factors and track their evolution while the data evolve. by leveraging the already detected latent factors and the newly arriving data  the latent factors are automatically and incrementally updated to reflect the change of factors. furthermore  by imposing orthogonality on the detected latent factors  we can not only guarantee the unique solution of nmf but also alleviate the partial-data problem  which may cause nmf to fail when the data are scarce or the distribution is incomplete. experiments on both synthesized data and real data validate the efficiency and effectiveness of our onmf algorithm.
1 introduction
discovering latent factors  or topics  from an evolving data collection is an important topic in many applications ranging from text mining  xu and gong  1  to image processing  guillamet et al.  1 . many existing methods  including nonnegative matrix factorization  nmf   lee and seung  1   latent semantic indexing  lsi   deerwester et al.  1  and probabilistic latent semantic indexing  plsi   hofmann  1  are widely used to find latent factors from a static data collection. however  in reality  we need to consider the dynamic nature of data when they arrive over time in the form of a stream bearing the meaningful time stamps. for example  in the news mining problem domain  news articles on a certain event appear one after another  reflecting the development of an event. by considering the time information of the event  we may discover the evolution pattern of the latent factors  which reflect the event's appearance  development  fading away  and termination. such evolution patterns are beneficial for the understanding of the event as a whole. in this paper  we will focus on the detection and tracking of latent topics that characterize the temporal data.
¡¡a key challenge of detecting and tracking the latent topics is that the data may contain various topics and the topics may evolve with time. take the reports about asia tsunami disaster as an example. at the beginning  one major topic in the reports is about the  financial aids   but finally this topic evolves to  debt  and  reconstruct  when the tsunami disaster is ending. thus this task requires that the algorithm adapts itself to the topic evolvement quickly and accurately. however  most existing approaches mentioned before cannot be directly used on this task because they are aimed at handling static data. techniques for data-stream classification  such as  domingos and hulten  1   are not designed for handling text data  while techniques for topic detection in data streams such as  mei and zhai  1  are not incremental in nature.
¡¡in this paper  we tackle these challenges by improving the basic nmf method along two directions. in previous works  the basic nmf method has been proven to be an effective method for discoveringlatent factors from co-occurrencedata by seeking the nonnegative factors  lee and seung  1 . however  the basic nmf and its existing variations assume the latent factors and data are static  which prohibits them from reflecting the dynamic nature of data streams. in order to apply these nmf-based methods on data streams  where the data continuously arrive in a sequential manner  we have to re-calculate the latent factors from scratch every time new data come. this procedure is clearly time-consuming. furthermore  the factors discovered at different times are independent of each other  which cannot be made to reflect the evolution of the factors. thus  our first direction is aimed at improving the basic nmf method by developing an online version  known as onmf  which can automatically update the latent factors by combining the old factors with the newly arrived data. at the same time  onmf can discover the connections between the old and new factors  so that we can track the evolutionary patterns of latent factors naturally. a second direction in our research is that when data are incomplete  the latent factors foundby nmf may be incorrect. to preventthis so-called partial-data problem to occur in onmf  we impose a set of orthogonal constraints on all the latent factors and design an orthogonal nmf algorithm. the orthogonal nmf guarantees the uniqueness of nmf decomposition  a good property in tracking the latent factors. experiments on both synthesized data and real data help validate the efficiency and effectiveness of our proposed approach in onmf.
1 related work
our work is related to temporal data analysis and nmf. a major direction in temporal data analysis is topic detection and tracking  tdt   allan et al.  1 . tdt aims at discovering and threading together topically related material in streams of data. in this problem  a  topic  is actually a specific event or activity  described by a series of news stories. in our work  we assume that a news story/document may contain multiple topics and these topics may evolve over time.  wang et al.  1  discussed the classification problem on the time series data and  edmond h.c. wu  1; aggarwal et al.  1  discussed the clustering problem. these works are all on the  document  level rather than  topic  level. in  mei and zhai  1   the authors conducted research with an aim similar to ours and proposed a temporal text mining framework. they split a document collection into sub-collections according to time stamps and then extracted topics from each sub-collection independently using a simple probabilistic mixture model. they then judged the connections among the discovered topics from different subcollections by kl-divergence. different from their work  we propose an online nmf approach to extract the topics and exploit the relations among topics in a unified framework.
¡¡nmf has attracted much attention in the past years  berry et al.  1 . most of the previous works focused on designing factorization algorithms for nmf  lee and seung  1  and imposing certain constraints to improve nmf's performance  hoyer  1; j. piper and giffin  1; li et al.   . there is also some work on accelerating the algorithms' convergence rate  wild et al.  1 . to our best knowledge  this paper is the first attempt to extend nmf to an online setting for exploiting temporal data.
1 nonnegative matrix factorization  nmf 
nmf seeks a lower rank decomposition of a nonnegative matrix  berry et al.  1 . it is formalized in equation  1 :
	v ¡Ö wh	 1 
where v   w and h are nonnegative matrices. v is a m ¡Á n matrix  in which each row represents a data sample and each column corresponds to an attribute. h is a k ¡Á n matrix with each row representing a latent factor. w is an m ¡Á k matrix  reflecting the association weights between the data samples and the factors. to simplify our following derivations  we use equality sign  =  and the approximately equal sign    ¡Ö    interchangeably.
¡¡the nmf problem is solved by minimizing the distance between the original matrix and the reconstructed one  as shown in equation  1 :
	min||v   wh||	 1 
where || ¡¤ || is a norm operator.
¡¡often  the solution to this problem is not unique. if v = wh  we can find another solution  wp  p 1h  so long as wp and p 1h are nonnegative matrices.
1 online nonnegative matrix factorization
the conventional nmf assumes that the input data and the latent factors are static. clearly  this assumption does not hold for temporally changing data. a straightforward way to apply nmf on temporal data is to feed nmf with the global up-to-datedata matrix whenevernew data come. however  the approach is not efficient since we need to work on a larger and larger data matrix without leveraging the previous factorization results. another method is to split the data to sub-collections according to different time spans and apply nmf on each sub-collection independently. but this approach cannot detect the relations between the factors from different time. to cater for temporal data  we put forward our proposed online nmf  or onmf  approach.
1	onmf problem formulation
in order to formulate the online nmf problem  we consider matrix factorization at two neighboringtime spans t and t+1. assume that at time t  we have a m ¡Á n data matrix v where each row represents a data sample; v is factorized by
v = wh
at time t + 1  assume that there are p new data samples that are represented by a p ¡Á n nonnegative matrix u. hence the whole data matrix becomes  . now the online
nmf problem is how to integrate w and h into w and h so that.
1	our solution to onmf problem
the following theorem makes it possible to design an online version of nmf.
theorem 1.  full-rank decomposition theorem 
ifare both full rank decompositions  then there exists one invertible matrix p satisfying
.
proof. with the condition  by multiplying
ht in both sides we have. from full rank condition we get  where . as the same we can get h =
 . it is easy to validate pq =  where i is the identity matrix. therefore  q =
consider the factorization problem.
		 1 
where v and u respectively. therefore  we have v = w1h. since we already have another form of decomposition of v with v = wh  according to theorem  1   we can build the relationship beh = p 1h where p is an invertible matrix. thus  the orig- tween the two decomposition forms by w1 = wp and inal factorization problem is converted to
		 1 
the old factor matrix h. all the decompositions satisfy the p reflects the relations between the new factor matrix h and
nonnegative constraint. we return to this discussion in section 1.
¡¡in order to find a solution to equation  1    we consider the factorization of the new data matrix by replacing v by h
		 1 
by solving this problem we obtain 
 implies that is
invertible. now we get the solution to equation  1  by setting
. based on the previous
factorization result  we have

here we summarize the factor updating rules:
		 1a 
 1b 
¡¡since the solution to equation  1  is solved by minimizing a target function which is not convex  our current solution to equation  1  is an approximation rather than an exact solution. however  the following analysis shows the approximate solution is reasonable. furthermore  the empirical results on two datasets validate the reasonability of this approach.
1	discussions of onmf
from the algebra point of view  the task of nmf is to find a set of nonnegative bases to represent the input data by a linear combination. when new data arrive  the bases need to be updated to represent the new data. since the old bases can be used to represent the old data  we can update the bases using the previous bases and the new data instead of using all the data. this is the philosophy behind our onmf approach. in order to adjust the contributions of the old factors  we can modify our current onmf by introducing a weighting schema. that is  we can use ¦«h to replace h in equation  1 . ¦« is a nonnegative diagonal matrix with ¦«ii representing the weight of factor hi. then the relation between the old factors and the new factors isand the update rules become:
	 1 
represents the relation between the old latent factors and the new factors through a linear transformation. in some real apare not linear. just as a nonlinear smooth function can be ap- plications  it is possible that the relations between h and h
proximated by a linear function within a small region  the linear relation can be a good approximation in a short time span while the latent factors are changing smoothly. this claim is verified by our experiment on a simulated image dataset  which is discussed in section 1.

figure 1: an example of partial-data problem
1 orthogonality constraint on onmf
as discussed in  donoho and stodden  1  and verified in our experiments  when the data are scarce or incomplete in distribution  nmf may find the latent factors correctly. we refer to this problem as the partial-data problem. figure 1 shows an illustration of this problem. in this figure  assume that we have three hidden factors  each being represented by a corner of a triangle in figure 1. in figure 1   we have enough observed data which are distributed in regions represented by a  b  c  respectively. in figure 1   the observed data are only distributed within region d. as a result  the factors discovered from figure 1  are correct. however  since the possible factors that generate the data in figure 1  are not unique  the discovered factors are also wrong. this partial-data problem can be a serious problem in temporal data as the data may arrive in an irregular fashion.
¡¡the partial-data problem is inherently related to the unique solution problem of nmf decomposition. in  plumbley  1   the authors studied the unique solution of nmf under permutation. in  donoho and stodden  1   the authors proposed the complete factorial sampling requirement for correct factorization from a geometric point of view. however  none of the abovework answers how to solve the partialdata problem. to solve the partial-data problem  below we first give theorem 1 to clarify the condition for unique nmf decomposition from an algebra point of view. then we introduce the orthogonal constraints on onmf to tackle the partial-data problem. the proofs of theorems in this section are not provided for space reasons.
theorem 1. suppose that we are given a nonnegative factorization v = wh  where w and h satisfy w =
  and where p1 and p1 are per-
mutation matrices  while ¦¤1 and ¦¤1 are diagonal matrices. the factorization is unique under permutation  apart from a scaling factor .
¡¡intuitively  theorem  1  requires the latent factors to have distinct features from each other and the data distribution should be complete. in order to make the solution unique when the data are incomplete  more strict requirements are needed for the factors.
theorem 1. if we restrict h to satisfy
 hi hj are the ith and jth rows of h   then the nonnegative factorization v = wh is unique under permutation  apart from a scaling factor .
¡¡theorem 1 requires the factors are orthogonal  thus the decomposition problemis convertedto a minimization problem:   1 
where is the inner product. by introducing a regularizer for the orthogonality constraint  the minimization problem is further converted to the following problem:
		 1 
where ¦£ is a symmetry nonnegative matrix with diagonal elements equal to zero and other elements greater than zero. ¦Á is a positive number. according to the karush-kuhntucker kkt  conditions  xu and gong  1   we can obtain the solution to equation  1  by the following the iterative formulas:
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡ v ht ij wij ¡û wij  whht ij
 1 
 wtv  ij

hij ¡û hij  wtwh + ¦Á¦£h ij
the proof of this algorithm' convergence is omitted here  but we note that during the iterations  we need to let ¦Á increase from a small value to infinity in order to solve equation  1 . detailed study of the change of ¦Á is left to our future work.
¡¡now we can summarize the procedure of applying onmf on data streams in algorithm 1:

algorithm 1 : onmf

timestep 1: initialization  using current data v to calculate w and h by orthogonal nmf 1 ; timestep t:
substep 1: use new data u and h to calculate w and h by orthogonal nmf 1 ; substep 1: update w and
 1 ;
timestep t: output final w and h.

¡¡because the algorithm of orthogonal nmf  1  is iterative  initial parameter values must chosen appropriately. we can set these values randomly  but in the context of online classification tasks  a natural choice at time step t is the result get from time step t   1.
1 experiments
we conduct experiments using three different datasets to verify the effectiveness of our onmf approach.
1	experiments on temporal image data
the first dataset consists of a series of simulated image data. figure 1 shows the factors used for data generation. each factor corresponds to a picture of 1 ¡Á 1 pixels with a horizontal or vertical bar. the intensity of any pixel is between 1 and 1. each simulated picture is generated by a linear combination of these factors. in order to introduce evolving latent factors during the data generation process  the two factors on the left-most side in figure 1 are made to change over time  while the other factors are kept static. the short horizontal bar moves from left to right and the short vertical bar moves from bottom to top step by step. in each step  we generated 1 data. a subset of the simulated data are shown in figure 1. our task is to detect the latent factors and track their evolution from the simulated data.

figure 1: factors used for data generation

figure 1: two evolving factors used for data generation

figure 1: simulated data generated from real factors

figure 1: factors reconstructed by nmf

figure 1: factors reconstructed by orthogonal nmf
¡¡we fist investigate whether the orthogonal nmf can help handle the partial-data problem. figure 1 shows the factors learned by nmf and figure 1 shows the factors learned by orthogonal nmf on 1 randomly sampled simulated data. we can see that the orthogonal nmf correctly detects the real factors while nmf only learns the mixtures of them. in this experiment  we let ¦Á = 1 ¡Á 1n during the iterations  where n is the iteration number. figure 1 shows the kl distance between the reconstructed factors and the real factors during the iterations. clearly  compared with nmf  the orthogonal nmf can find better latent factors  which validates

figure 1: reconstructed factors' error

figure 1: two moving factors reconstructed by onmf
the effectiveness of orthogonal constraint on alleviating the partial-data problem.
¡¡figure 1 shows the evolution of the latent factors discovered by our onmf. although all the factors  including the static ones  have been detected  we only show the two dynamic factors for brevity. from this figure  we can see that onmf successfully detects and tracks the two evolving factors. as shown in figure 1  the relations between the old factors and the new factors does not follow a linear transformation. but our onmf can approximate the nonlinear relations and track the latent factors  as the two evolving factors change smoothly. this fact validates our conclusions in section 1.
1	experiments on 1ng dataset
the second experiment is carried out on the 1ng dataset1  consisting of approximately 1 newsgroup documents which are evenly distributed across 1 categories. since the original 1ng did not contain time information  we manually construct 1 threads for experiments  illustrated in figure 1. in each thread  1 documentsare ordered according to their category sequence. the first thread contains documents about autos  denoted by  rec.*   . in the second thread   comp.*    the first 1 documents are about 'comp.ibm.hardware' and the remaining documents are about 'comp.mac.hardware'. in the third thread   talk.*    the first 1 documents are about 'talk.politics.mideast'  while the middle 1 documents are about 'talk.politics.misc'  and the last 1 documents are about 'talk.religon.misc'.
¡¡documents in different threads are then mixed together. our onmf updates its latent factors when 1 new documents arrive. figure 1 shows the change in the similarity between the topics at time t and those at time t 1. from this figure  we can find both the topic evolvement trend and the time spans with severe topic change detected by our onmf algorithm are consistent with the real data.
1	experiments on tsunami news data
we also tested our approach on the real tsunami news data set used by  mei and zhai  1 . this dataset consists of 1

figure 1: three threads of topics of 1ng dataset

figure 1: changes of similarity of topics
news articles about the asian tsunami event dated from dec. 1  1 to feb. 1  1  sorted by their reporting times. these articles are collected from 1 sources  with the keyword query  tsunami .
¡¡to track the latent topics  we feed the news articles sequentially to our onmf algorithm. to illustrate the topics tracked in the whole process  we select a special topic  finance  and use three representative terms  aids   reconstruct  and  debt  to show the evolution of the topic. to avoid the  report delay  problem mentioned in  mei and zhai  1   only news from cnn are used in this experiment. as shown in figure  1   the  aids  topic has a large probability at the beginning and then decreases in the following days.  debt  and  reconstruct  have small probabilities at the very beginning but increase in the following days.
1	time complexity
our onmf is more efficient for finding new factors when new data arrive. the basic nmf algorithm  lee and seung  1  has a complexity of o mn . our online nmf has a complexity of o pn  to update the latent factors while the basic nmf computation needs o  m + p n   to get the new factors. figure 1 shows the comparisonof the computational

figure 1: evolution of probability for terms  reconstruct  
 aids  and  debt 

figure 1: time comparison
time  in seconds  used by onmf and nmf on the tsunami data  which validates the efficiency of onmf.
1 conclusions and future work
in this paper  we proposed a novel framework for detecting and tracking the latent factors in data streams by extending the nonnegative matrix factorization techniques. different from the previous approaches  our proposed methods can solve problem of topic detection and tracking in data streams efficiently within a unified framework. we also impose orthogonal constraints on nmf for tackling the partial data problem  which is an importantcomponentof our overall framework.
¡¡however  transforming the factorization problem into a minimization problem may give us only the local optimal solutions. therefore  in the future a better algorithm needs to be designed to find the globally optimized factorization result. we also plan to test the effectiveness of our approach on more data sets.
acknowledgement
dou shen and qiang yang are supported by a grant from hong kong rgc hkust 1e.
