
in this paper  we focus on extending the expressive power of constraint-based temporal reasoning formalisms. we begin with the well-known simple temporal problem with uncertainty  and incorporate three extensions: prior observability  in which the values of uncontrollable events become known prior to their actual occurrence; partial shrinkage  in which an observation event triggers the reduction of a contingent temporal interval; and a generalization of partial shrinkage to requirement links  making it possible to express certain types of uncertainty that may arise even when the time points in a problem are themselves fully controllable. we describe levels of controllability in the resulting formalism  the generalized stpu  and relate this formalism to related developments in disjunctive temporal reasoning. throughout  we motivate our approach with simple  real-world examples that illustrate the limitations of existing formalisms and the flexibility of our proposed extensions.
1	introduction
several recent studies have addressed the problem of uncertainty in constraint-based temporal reasoning  vidal and ghallab  1; vidal and fargier  1; morris et al.  1 . in this line of research  traditional temporal networks  dechter et al.  1  are extended to include two classes of time points: controllable ones  whose time of occurrence can be set by the execution agent  and uncontrollable ones that are instead determined by an external force  often called  nature . as a result  the problem of consistency is transformed into one of controllability. recent efforts have made significant progress toward increasing both the expressivity  venable and yorke-smith  1  and efficiency  morris and muscettola  1  of constraint-based temporal reasoning with uncertainty.
모however  significant limitations in expressive power do exist in the formalisms developed to date. in particular  they have all assumed that temporal uncertainty is resolved in a specific way: the execution agent discovers the duration of a contingent link only at the exact moment of its conclusion  or equivalently  it discovers the time of a uncontrollable time point only at the time of its occurrence . this is not an accurate reflection of how such knowledge is obtained in many practical situations: one often learns the time of an initially uncertain event before its actual execution  and can use that knowledge to make informed decisions about the remainder of the plan. in addition  one may acquire only partial information about the time of an upcoming event. finally  and perhaps surprisingly  certain varieties of uncertainty may exist even for problems that should be modeled entirely with controllable time points  something that again cannot be captured by previous formalisms.
모in this paper  we generalize the problem of controllability in constraint-based temporal reasoning. we begin with the simple temporal problem with uncertainty  an increasingly popular framework that models uncertain events and contingent constraints. we then consider three progressive extensions to this formalism. the first introduces the notion of prior observability  in which the values of uncontrollable events become known prior to their actual occurrence. the second captures situations in which an observation event triggers the reduction of a contingent temporal interval  a form of partial observability that has not yet been captured in previous work. the third and final extension generalizes this notion to the requirement links  making it possible to express certain additional types of uncertainty. finally  we draw relationships between our extended framework and related developments in disjunctive temporal reasoning  and suggest promising avenues of continued research. throughout the text  we make use of practical  real-world examples that illustrate the limitations of existing formalisms and the flexibility of our proposed extensions.
1	background
1	simple temporal problems
the simple temporal problem  dechter et al.  1   stp  is defined by a pair   where each xi in x designates a time point  and each eij in e is a constraint of the form
	lij 뫞 xi	xj 뫞 uij
with. an stp is said to be consistent if there exists a that satisfies all constraints in e.
모each stp has an associated graph-based encoding  which contains a node for each time point  and a directed edge for each inequality having weight uij or  lij  depending on its direction . an stp is consistent if and only if its corresponding graph contains no negative cycles; this can be determined in polynomial time by computing its all pairs shortest path matrix and examining the entries along the main diagonal.
1	simple temporal problems with uncertainty
the stp models situations in which the agent in charge of plan execution is in complete control of all time points. the simple temporal problem with uncertainty  stpu  is an extension of the stp that relaxes this assumption. specifically  the stpu is defined as a tuple  where:
  xc and xu are sets of controllable and uncontrollable time points  respectively. their union  xc 뫋 xu  forms an entire set x of time points.
  e is a set of requirement links  where each eij is of the form lij 뫞 xi   xj 뫞 uij.
  c is a set of contingent links  where each cij is of the form lij 뫞 xi   xj 뫞 uij and xi 뫍 xu.1
모the contingent links in the stpu can be regarded as representing causal processes whose durations are uncertain  and thus their endpoints  the uncontrollable time points  are determined by some external force. the remaining time points are in the control of the agent  who is charged with the task of assigning them in such a way as to satisfy the requirement links.
모it is often convenient to refer to a projection p of the stpu  vidal and ghallab  1   which is simply an stp obtained by replacing the interval of each contingent link  l u  with a particular fixed bound  b b  where l 뫞 b 뫞 u. a schedule t is defined as a mapping

where t x  is the time of time point x. a schedule is deemed consistent if it satisfies all links. the prehistory of a time point x with respect to a schedule t  denoted t{  x}  specifies the durations of all contingent links that finish prior to x; it can be determined directly from any schedule.
finally  we define an execution strategy s as a mapping:
s : p 뫸 t
where p is the set of all projections  and t is the set of all schedules. an execution strategy s is viable if s p   henceforth written sp  is consistent with p for each projection p.
1	controllability of the stpu
with the addition of uncontrollable events and contingent links in the stpu  the previously defined notion of consistency for the stp is no longer sufficient. instead  we explore various flavors of controllability  which have all been defined previously in  vidal  1 . to illustrate these concepts  we put forth the following example  which will later be extended :
모example 1: acme appliances is delivering a new refrigerator to your apartment at some  unknown  time td between

contingent link  and that contingent links do not share endpoints.1as in prior work  we assume 1   lij   uij    for each
 example 1:
 t
r
c  1  1 
 t d모모모 example 1:  t
r  1  1 
 t
c  1  1  t
o

 t
dcontingent link
requirement linkfigure 1: networks corresponding to examples 1 and 1.
1 and 1. at time tc  you begin to clean out the items in your current fridge; to guarantee that all items can be removed without any spoiling  this must happen no later than 1 minutes  and no earlier than 1 minutes  before they arrive.  the network corresponding to this example is depicted graphically in figure 1  left . the time point tr is a temporal reference point representing midnight  and is used to express constraints with respect to wall-clock time.
weak controllability
an stpu is said to be weakly controllable if there is a viable execution strategy; in other words  for every possible projection  there exists a consistent solution. our example is indeed weakly controllable; if we happen to know what nature will assign to td  we can obtain a consistent solution by setting tc to td   x for any x between 1 and 1 minutes.
strong controllability
an stpu is said to be strongly controllable if there is a viable execution strategy s such that
sp1 x  = sp1 x 
for each controllable time point x and all projections p1 and p1  i.e.  there exists a single consistent solution that satisfies every possible projection. our example is clearly not strongly controllable; for instance  there is no solution for the case when td = 1 that will also work for the case when td = 1.
dynamic controllability
the most interesting and useful type of controllability is that of dynamic controllability  a concept that exploits the temporal nature of plan execution. specifically  an stpu is said to be dynamically controllable if there is a viable execution strategy s such that:
sp1{  x} = sp1{  x}   sp1 x  = sp1 x 
for each controllable time point x and all projections p1 and p1. in other words  there must exist a strategy that depends on the outcomes of only those uncontrollable events that have occurred in the past  and not on those which have yet to occur . our current example is not dynamically controllable  since we need to set the time of tc before we learn that td has occurred.
모of the three types of controllability  dynamic controllability has been the most extensively studied. recently  it was shown to be computable in polynomial time  morris and muscettola  1 .
1	adding observation events
the concept of dynamic controllability assumes that the values of uncontrollable events become known at the same time as their occurrence; that is  we learn when they happen  only when they actually happen. however  as we see in the following example  the temporal uncertainty of an event is sometimes resolved earlier than its actual execution.
모example 1: consider example 1; however  now acme appliances agrees to phone you exactly 1 minutes before they arrive. 
모in this new scenario  we discover the time of the uncontrollable event before that particular time arrives. while obtaining this information earlier has no impact on the weak or strong controllability of the problem  it serves to enable dynamic controllability  e.g.  we can begin clean out the fridge immediately after receiving the phone call .
모fortunately  prior observability of this form can be modeled with the existing stpu framework. we achieve this by introducing an uncontrollable observation event - for instance  to - and making it  rather than td  the endpoint of a contingent link. a requirement link can then be introduced between the new observation action and the original uncertain event. therefore  the act of  splicing  contingent links in this fashion makes it possible for the agent to reason about the foreknowledge of events. the stpu for the current example is shown graphically in network of figure 1  right .
모despite the fact that our current notion of prior observability is a mere modeling issue  this concept will prove to be essential in extensions to follow.
1	partial shrinkage of contingent links
in the stpu  the occurrence of an uncontrollable event can be thought of as establishing complete shrinkage of a contingent link; that is  a constraint xi  xj 뫍  l u  is squeezed to a single point xi xj 뫍  b b . however  many real-world problems demand a generalization of this mechanism  in which an intermediate reduction is achieved. we refer to this as partial shrinkage.
모example 1: again consider example 1; however  acme appliances agrees to phone you very early in the morning to inform you of within which of the three half-hour blocks they intend to arrive  e.g.  they may say  sometime between 1 and 1  . 
모unlike example 1  here the time of the phone call is only a portion of the information obtained. in addition  there is knowledge conveyed during the observation event that triggers the reduction of a contingent link: the original interval  l u  is reduced to a subinterval   where
.  for example  the interval  1 1  may become  1 1  . this reduction becomes known simultaneously with the execution of to  the phone call . unfortunately  the reduction is not sufficient to achieve dynamic controllability. however  if acme instead provided a 1-minute time window on their arrival  then the reduction would supply enough information to guarantee dynamic controllability  despite the fact that the exact delivery time would still not be known precisely .
모this scenario clearly addresses a different kind of knowledge acquisition than the previous examples. partial observability is a very general phenomenon that commonly arises in a broad range of practical instances that involve complex sequences of decision making. for instance  consider a mars rover domain where the texture of the upcoming terrain is unknown. as the rover moves forward  it may execute a sensing action to establish whether the ground will be rough or smooth. while this information might not allow it to calculate the exact travel time  it could enable the estimation of a more accurate window on the time of arrival. the need to model constraint  shrinkage  of this type motivates the development of an extension to the stpu formalism.
1	the stpu+
we define the stpu+ as a tuple  where:
  xc and xu are as in the stpu  and x is their union .
  e is a set of requirement links  as in the stpu.
  c is a set of generalized contingent links  where each cij is of the form:
xi   xj 뫍 {dij1 :  lij1 uij1  ... dijnij :  lijnij uijnij } and xi 뫍 xu. each sub-interval dijk is referred to as a reduction.1
  o : xo 뫸 c is a mapping from observation events to generalized contingent links  where xo   x. each event in xo specifies  at the time of its occurrence  the reduction of its corresponding constraint in c .
모turning to example 1  let us assume that the phone call will occur sometime between 1 and 1. we can then encode example 1 as an stpu+ by creating a generalized contingent link cdeliv containing three possible reductions:
td   tr 뫍 { 1 1   1 1   1 1 }
and establishing that this link will be resolved at the time of the phone call:
o to  = cdeliv
regular stpu-style contingent links can be modeled as well by encoding them as generalized contingent links with singleton intervals. an example of this is the contingent link on the time of the phone call:
to   tr 뫍 { 1 1 }
in figure 1  left  we provide a graphical interpretation of this example. the generalized contingent link is labeled with each
 example 1:
c  1  1  d example 1:
c  1  1  dcontingent link
requirement link
observation mappingfigure 1: networks corresponding to examples 1 and 1.
of the possible reductions  and a dotted arrow is added to signify that the reduction occurs simultaneously with to.
모one might wonder why we enumerate the set of all allowed partial shrinkages  rather than the leave the potential reductions completely unspecified. although the latter alternative might seem to be more general  we will see in the next section how it precludes the possibility of generalized notions of controllability.
1	partial shrinkage of requirement links
the generalization in the stpu+ is limited to the contingent link  an interval whose endpoint is an uncontrollable event. as we demonstrate in the following example  this expressive power can be further extended to express uncertainty over requirement links that constrain pairs of purely controllable time points.
모example1: consider another variation of example 1. this time  acme tells you to call them sometime between 1 and 1. when you do  they'll tell you which half-hour block works best for them  but then allow you to specify the exact time in that block for delivery.1 
모note that in this final variation  depicted in figure 1 right   all events involved - including the phone call  to  and the delivery time  td  - are both controllable. yet there is still uncertainty that can only be resolved dynamically  i.e.  during the execution of the plan. in particular  you do not know what constraint on delivery time must be satisfied prior to the phone call  even though the exact time is ultimately up to you. further  the nature of this uncertainty interacts directly with the level of controllability that can be achieved. for instance  our current example is dynamically controllable even with half-hour intervals  as we can decide td and thus tc once the delivery interval becomes known. however  if instead our phone call had to be placed at 1  we would have a problem if acme selected the interval  1  1 : even though we can choose to schedule the delivery as late as 1  we now only have 1 minutes to clean out the fridge  whereas we need 1 .
모we can now see the advantage of explicitly specifying the set of allowed reductions. in the current example  because we know up front that the possible resolutions of the tr 뫸 td link are each a half-hour in length  we are able to determine that the problem is dynamically controllable. if  instead  any arbitrary reduction were possible  we could never conclude this: indeed  in the worst case  the  reduction  might not result in any shrinkage at all.1
1	the generalized stpu
we	define	the	generalized	stpu	as	a	tuple
  where:
  xc and xu are as in the stpu  and x is their union .
  e is a set of generalized requirement links  where each eij is of the form:
xi   xj 뫍 {dij1 :  lij1 uij1  ... dijnij :  lijnij uijnij }
  c is a set of generalized contingent links  where each cij is of the form: xi   xj 뫍 {dij1 :  lij1 uij1  ... dijnij :  lijnij uijnij } and xi 뫍 xu.
  o : xo 뫸 e 뫋c is a mapping from observation events to generalized links  where xo   x.
모in the generalized stpu  we augment both requirement links and contingent links in an identical fashion  expanding them from single intervals to sets of intervals  the reductions   and associating the moment at which a single reduction is selected with observation events. the definitions of projection and schedule can remain unchanged from the stpu. in addition to these  we introduce a new notion  an observation trace v  which is a record of the generalized link reductions dynamically selected  by nature :

where l = e 뫋 c is the set of all generalized links. we also need to extend the notion of a prehistory: t{  x}  the prehistory of x with respect to schedule t  now specifies both the durations of all contingent links that finish prior to x  and the selected reduction of all generalized links whose associated observation event occurs before x.
모finally  we define a generalized execution strategy s to be a mapping:
s : p 뫄v 뫸 t
where p and t are as before  and v is the set of all possible observation traces. a generalized execution strategy s is viable if s p v   henceforth written sp v  is consistent with p and v for each mutually consistent pair of a projection p and an observation trace v.
1	generalizing controllability
with these new definitions in hand  we can now specify the three levels of controllability for the generalized stpu. a generalized stpu can be said to be weakly controllable if there exists a viable generalized execution strategy; this is equivalent to saying that every pair of a projection p and an observation trace v is consistent.
모a generalized stpu is strongly controllable if there is a viable generalized execution strategy s such that
sp1 v1 x  = sp1 v1 x 
for each executable time point x  all projections p1 and p1  and all observation traces v1 and v1. as before  this means that a single schedule is guaranteed to satisfy all constraints  regardless of the choices  assignments to uncontrollable events or partial shrinkages of generalized links  that nature makes.1
모finally  a generalized stpu is said to be dynamically controllable if there is a viable execution strategy s such that:
sp1 v1{  x} = sp1 v1{  x}   sp1 v1 x  = sp1 v1 x 
for each executable time point x  all projections p1 and p1  and all observation traces v1 and v1. in other words  there exists a strategy that depends on the outcomes of only those uncontrollable events and partial shrinkages that have occurred in the past  and not on those which have yet to occur .
1	disjunctions  generalized links  and controllability
as mentioned earlier  there is an apparent similarity between the reductions of a generalized  requirement or contingent  link  and the disjuncts in a constraint of a binary temporal csp  dechter et al.  1  or disjunctive temporal problem  dtp   stergiou and koubarakis  1 . however  the semantics of the two types of links are in fact quite different from one another.
모recall that the dtp is a generalization of the stp  in which each constraint ci may consist of a disjunction of simple temporal constraints:
li1 뫞 xi1   yi1 뫞 ui1 뫈 ... 뫈 lini 뫞 xini   yini 뫞 uini
a solution to a dtp is an assignment to its time points that satisfies every constraint; of course  since the constraints are disjunctive  what is required is that some disjunct from each constraint be satisfied.
모in contrast  consider a generalized stpu; for the moment  to facilitate comparison with the dtp  which has only controllable time points   assume that it is also comprised exclusively of controllables. because nature may select any reduction  or disjunct  for each constraint  it will be controllable only if there is a set of solutions  at least one of which satisfies each combination of selected reductions. in other
agent picks a durationnature picks a durationdisjunctive
requirement dtp linkdisjunctive
contingent
dtpu linkgeneralized
requirement
stpu linkgeneralized
contingent
stpu linktable 1: classification of  disjunctive  links
words  we need to be able to satisfy each of the disjuncts in the generalized requirement link.
모further properties of the solution set will define the level of controllability: the generalized stpu will be strongly controllable if the set of solutions is a singleton  so that the same assignment to controllables  works  regardless of the decisions made by nature ; it will be dynamically controllable if the solutions for sets of selections that are identical prior to time point x make an identical assignment to x; and it will otherwise be weakly controllable.
모interestingly  the difference in what is needed to satisfy standard disjunctive links  e.g.  of the dtp  versus generalized links closely parallels the difference in what is needed to satisfy requirement versus contingent links of either flavor. given a problem with only requirement links  what is needed for consistency is the existence of a solution that  selects  a particular legal duration for each constraint. however  once contingent links are added  controllability depends upon there being solutions that satisfy each possible combination of durations that the contingent links might take.
모these distinctions are summarized in table 1. this analysis reveals that there are additional scenarios that can be modeled using this general approach: for example  by introducing observation events and partial shrinkage into dtpu's  we can model cases in which both nature and the agent can  pick  reduced intervals from contingent links.
모note that just as the generalized stpu with controllable time points serves as a counterpart to the tcsp or dtp  the full generalized stpu  which allows contingent time points  parallels the recently proposed dtpu  venable and yorkesmith  1 .
1	other related work
the addition of observation events is similar to the approach taken in conditional temporal problems  tsamardinos et al.  1 . however  in that line of research  the observation actions serve to remove events from the execution plan  rather than to specify the resolution of constraints. furthermore  pure temporal uncertainty is not modeled in the ctp  as all time points are required to be controllable.
모also  there are some relationships between our generalized stpu and the uncertain csp  yorke-smith and gervet  1   a formalism that augments a standard csp with a set of uncertain coefficients 붦 and a set of corresponding uncertainty sets u. since the presence of disjunctions in temporal csps often results in a meta-csp reformulation  where the constraints become meta-level variables whose domains are their associated disjuncts   one can view nature's selection of a disjunct as the assignment to a finite-domain coefficient from its respective uncertainty set. however  the ucsp cannot model the underlying semantics of these values  which in our case are temporal differences  nor can it model scenarios where values are assigned online in a dynamic environment.
1	conclusion and future work
in this paper  we have generalized the problem of controllability in constraint-based temporal reasoning. beginning with the simple temporal problem with uncertainty  we have progressively extended the formalism to take into account prior observability and partial shrinkage of both contingent and requirement links. these extensions make it possible to capture more complex sequences of dynamic knowledge acquisition  and even to express some types of uncertainty that arise when the temporal events are themselves fully controllable.
모this line of research opens the door to several avenues of continued progress. first of all  our focus so far has been entirely on expressive power  and significant work remains to be done to develop algorithms for effectively computing controllability  especially dynamic controllability  in the generalized stpu. second  our current extension requires a strong coupling between a generalized link and a single observation event that selects a specific reduction from within a generalized link; in some cases  it may be useful to allow reductions to be spread out over multiple observation events. also  we believe that the formal relationship between generalized links in our generalized stpu and the disjunctive constraints in the dtpu could potentially be exploited in a hybrid formalism.
acknowledgements
we thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive feedback. this material is based upon work supported by the defense advanced research projects agency  darpa  under contract no. nbchd1 and the
air force office of scientific research under contract no. fa1-1. any opinions  findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of darpa  the department of interior-national business center  or the united states air force.
