
electoral control refers to attempts by an election's organizer   the chair   to influence the outcome by adding/deleting/partitioningvoters or candidates. the groundbreaking work of bartholdi  tovey  and trick  on  constructive  control proposes computational complexity as a means of resisting control attempts: look for election systems where the chair's task in seeking control is itself computationally infeasible.
we introduceand study a method of combining two or more candidate-anonymous election schemes in such a way that the combined scheme possesses all the resistances to control  i.e.  all the nphardnesses of control  possessed by any of its constituents: it combines their strengths. from this and new resistance constructions  we prove for the first time that there exists an election scheme that is resistant to all twenty standard types of electoral control.
1 introduction
elections are a way of  from a collection of voters'  or agents'  individual preferences over candidates  or alternatives   selecting a winner  or outcome . the importance of and study of elections is obviously central in political science  but also spans such fields as economics  mathematics  operations research  and computer science. within computer science  the applications of elections are most prominent in distributed ai  most particularly in the study of multiagent systems. for example  voting has been concretely proposed as a computational mechanism for planning  ephrati and rosenschein  1; 1  and has also been suggested as an approach to collaborative filtering  pennock et al.  1 . however  voting also has received attention within the study of systems. after all  many distributed algorithms must start by selecting a leader  and election techniques have also been proposed to attack the web page rank aggregation problem and the related issue of lessening the spam level of results from web searches  dwork et al.  1; fagin et al.  1 . indeed  in these days of a massive internet with many pages  many surfers  and many robots  of intra-corporate decision-making potentially involving electronic input from many units/individuals/warehouses/trucks/sources  and more generally of massive computational settings including many actors  it is easy to note any number of situations in which elections are natural and in which the number of candidates and/or voters might be massive. for example  suppose amazon.com were to select a  page of the week  via an election where the candidates were all its web pages and the voters were all visiting surfers  with preferences inferred from their page-viewing times or patterns ; such an election would have an enormous number of candidates and voters. all these applications are exciting  but immediately bring to a theoretician's mind the worry of whether the complexity of implementing election systems is satisfyingly low and whether the complexity of distorting  controlling or manipulating  election systems is reassuringly high.
모since the complexity of elections is a topic whose importance has made itself clear  it is natural to ask whether the standard tools and techniques of complexity-theoretic study exist in the context of elections. one important technique in complexity is the combination of problems. for example  for sets in complexity theory  a standard approach to combination is the join  also known as the disjoint union and as the marked union : a  b = {1x | x 뫍 a} 뫋 {1y | y 뫍 b}.
모in some sense  our work in this paper can be thought of as simply providing  for elections  an analog of the join. that is  we will propose a method of combining two  or more  elections in a way that will maintain desirable simplicity properties  e.g.  if all of the constituent elections have polynomialtime winner algorithms then so will our combined election  while also inheriting quite aggressively desirable hardness properties  we will show that any resistance-to-control-in the sense that is standard  bartholdi et al.  1  and that we will provide a definition of later-possessed by even one of the constituent elections will be possessed by the combined election . one cannot directly use a join to achieve this  because the join of two sets modeling elections is not itself an election. rather  we must find a way of embedding into election specifications-lists of voter preferences over
candidates-triggers that both allow us to embed and switch between all the underlying election systems and to not have such switching go uncontrollably haywire when faced with electoral distortions such as adding/deleting/partitioning voters/candidates  since we wish hardness with respect to control by such mechanisms to be preserved.
모we above have phrased this paper's theme as the development of a way of combining multiple election systems-and in doing so  have desirable types of simplicity/complexity inheritance. however  this paper also has in mind a very specific application-both for its own interest and as a sounding board against which our election hybridizationscheme can be tested. this application is the control of election systems.
모in election control  we ask whether an election's organizer  the chair  can by some specific type of manipulation of the election's structure  adding/deleting/partitioning voters/candidates  cause a specified candidate to be the  unique  winner. as mentioned earlier  the complexity-theoretic study of control was proposed by bartholdi  tovey  and trick . we will closely follow their model. in this model  the chair is assumed to have knowledge of the vote that will be cast by each voter  and there are ten different types of control  candidate addition  candidate deletion  voter addition  voter deletion  partition of candidates  run-off partition of candidates  and partition of voters  bartholdi et al.  1 -and for each of the three partition cases one can have subelection ties promote or can have subelection ties eliminate  see  hemaspaandra et al.  1a  .
모of course  the dream case would be to find an election system that has the desirable property of having a polynomialtime algorithm for evaluating who won  but that also has the property that for every single one of the ten standard types of control it is computationally infeasible  np-hard  to assert such control. unfortunately  no system yet has been proven resistant to all ten types of control. in fact  given that broad  impossibility  results exist for niceness of election systems  e.g.  arrow's theorem  arrow  1 revised edition 1   and for nonmanipulability of election systems  e.g.  the gibbard-satterthwaite and duggan- schwartz theorems   gibbard  1; satterthwaite  1; duggan and schwartz  1   see also  taylor  1     one might even momentarily wonder whether the  dream case  mentioned above can be proven impossible via proving a theorem of the following form:  for no election system are all ten types of control np-hard.  however  such a claim is proven impossible by our work: our hybrid system in fact will allow us to combine all the resistance types of the underlying elections. and while doing so  it will preserve the winner-evaluation simplicity of the underlying elections. thus  in particular  we conclude that the  dream case  holds: there is an election system-namely  our hybridization of plurality and condorcet elections-that is resistant to all ten types of constructive control. we also show-by building some artificial election systems achieving resistance to destructive control types for which no system has been previously proven resistant and then invoking our hybridization machinery-thatthere is an election system that is resistant to all ten types of destructive control  in which the chair's goal is to preclude a given candidate from being the  unique  winner  as well as to all ten types of constructive control  theorem 1 .
our hybridization system takes multiple elections and maintains their simplicity while inheriting each resistance-tocontrolpossessed by any one of its constituents. thus  it in effect unions together all their resistances-thus the  broaden  of our title. we mention in passing that in the quite different setting of election manipulation  which regards not actions by the chair but ratherwhich regardsvoters altering their preferences in an attempt to influence who becomes the winner   bartholdi et al.  1a   there has been some work by conitzer and sandholm  regarding making manipulation hard  even for systems where it is not hard  by changing the system by going to a two-stage election in which a single elimination pre-round is added  and elkind and lipmaa  have generalized this to a sequence of elimination rounds conducted under some system s  followed by an election under some other system. though the latter paper like this paper uses the term  hybrid   the domains differ sharply and the methods of election combination are nearly opposite: our approach  in order to broaden resistance to control  embeds the election systems in parallel and theirs  in order to fight manipulation  strings them out in sequence. of the two approaches  ours far more strongly has the flavor of our simple motivating example  the join.
모the previous work most closely related to that of this paper is the constructive control work of bartholdi  tovey  and trick  and the destructive control work of hemaspaandra  hemaspaandra  and rothe  1a . work on bribery is somewhat related to this paper  in the sense that bribery can be viewed as sharing aspects of both manipulation and control  faliszewski et al.  1 . of course  all the classical  bartholdi et al.  1b; 1a; bartholdi and orlin  1  and recent papers  of which we particularly point out  for its broad framework and generality  the work of spakowski and vogel   on the complexity of election problems share this paper's goal of better understanding the relationship between complexity and elections.
모we here omit proofs due to lack of space  but detailed proofs are available in the full version of this paper  hemaspaandra et al.  1 .
1 definitions and discussion
1 elections
an election system  or election rule or election scheme or voting system  e is simply a mapping from  finite though arbitrary-sized  sets  actually  mathematically  they are multisets  v of votes  each a preference order-strict  transitive  and complete-overa finite candidate set  to  possibly empty  possibly nonstrict  subsets of the candidates. all votes in a given v are over the same candidate set  but different v 's of course can be over different  finite  candidate sets. each candidate that for a given set of votes is in e's output is said to be a winner. if for a given input e outputs a set of cardinality one  that candidate is said to be the unique winner. election control focuses on making candidates be unique winners and on precluding them from being unique winners.
모throughout this paper  a voter's preference order will be exactly that: a tie-free linear order over the candidates. and we will discuss and hybridize only election systems based on preference orders.
모we now define two common election systems  plurality voting and condorcet voting. in plurality voting  the winners are the candidates who are ranked first the most. in condorcet voting  the winners are all candidates  note: there can be at most one and there might be zero  who strictly beat each other candidate in head-on-head majority-rule elections  i.e.  get strictly more than half the votes in each such election . for widely used systems such as plurality voting  we will write plurality rather than eplurality.
모we say that an election system e is candidate-anonymous if for every pair of sets of votes  such that v  can be created from v by applying some oneto-one mapping h from the candidate names in v onto new candidate names in v   e.g.  each instance of  george  in v is mapped by h to  john  in v  and each instance of  john  in v is mapped by h to  hillary  in v  and each instance of  ralph  in v is mapped by h to  ralph  in v   it holds that. informally put  candidate-anonymity says that the strings we may use to name the candidates are all created equal. note that most natural systems are candidate-anonymous. for example  both the election systems mentioned immediately above-plurality-rule elections and the election system of condorcet-are candidate-anonymous.
1 our hybridization scheme
we now define our basic hybridization scheme  hybrid.
definition 1 let e1 e1 ... ek 1 be election rules that take as input voters' preference orders. define hybrid e1 e1 ... ek 1  to be the election rule that does the following: if there is at least one candidate and all candidate names  viewed as natural numbers via the standard bijection between   and n  are congruent  modulo k  to i  for some i  1 뫞 i 뫞 k   1  then use election rule ei. otherwise use  by convention  ek 1 as the default election rule.
모having defined our system there is much to discuss. why did we choose this system  what are its properties  what other approaches did we choose not to use  and why  what aspects of the input is our method for switching between election systems using  and what aspects is it choosing not to exploit  and what are the costs associated with our choices 
모as to the properties of this system  section 1 is devoted to that  but most crucially we will see that this system possesses every resistance-to-control property possessed by even one of its constituents. and this will hold essentially due to the fact that hybrid is a close analog of the effect of a join: it splices the constituents together in such a way that key questions about the constituent systems can easily be many-one polynomial-time reduced  뫞pm-reduced or reduced  for short  to questions about their hybrid.
모as to why we chose this particularsystem  note that hybrid  switches  between constituent systems via wildly redundant information. this will let us keep deletions/partitions of voters/candidates from causing a switch between the underlying systems  if the starting state routed us to a nondefault case . note that some other approachesthat one might take are more sensitive to deletions. for example  suppose we wanted to hybridize just two election systems and decided to do so by using the first election system exactly if the first voter's most disliked candidate's name is lexicographically less than the first voter's second-most-disliked candidate's name. note that if  as part of our control problem  that voter is deleted  that might suddenly change the system to which the problem is routed. or  as another example  if we use the modulo k value of the name of the lexicographically smallest candidate to control switching between the k election systems  then that hybridization approach would be very sensitive to jumping between systems if  as part of our control problem  that candidate is deleted. these examples give some idea of why we chose the approach we did  though admittedly even it can in some cases be nudged into jumping between systems-but at least this happens in very limited  very crisply delineated cases and in ways that we will generally be able to appropriately handle.
모finally  we come to what we allow ourselves to use to control the switching  what we choose not to use  and what price we pay for our choices. what we use  as is allowed in the  bartholdi et al.  1  model  are the candidates' names and only the candidates' names. we use absolutely nothing else to control switching between elections. we do not use voters' names. indeed  in the  bartholdi et al.  1  model that we follow  voters  unlike candidates  do not even have names. but since the votes are input as a list  their ordering itself could be used to pass bits of information-e.g.  we could look at whether the first vote in the list viewed as a string is lexicographically less than the last vote in the list viewed as a string. we in no way  cheat  by exploiting such input-order information  either for the votes or for the list of candidates  as per  bartholdi et al.  1   formally the candidate set is passed in separately to cover a certain boundary case . our  switch  is based purely on candidates' names and just candidates' names. this also points to the price we pay for this choice: even when all its constituent elections are candidateanonymous  hybrid may not possess candidate-anonymity.
1 types of constructive and destructive control
constructive control problems ask whether a certain class of actions by the election's chair can make a specified candidate the election's unique winner. constructive control was first defined and studied by bartholdi  tovey  and trick . destructive control problems ask whether a certain class of actions by the election's chair can make a specified candidate fail to be a unique winner of the election. destructive control was defined and studied by hemaspaandra  hemaspaandra  and rothe  1a   and in the different context of electoral manipulation destruction was introduced even earlier by conitzer  lang  and sandholm  conitzer and sandholm  1; conitzer et al.  1 .
모bartholdi  tovey  and trick's  groundbreaking paper defined seven types of electoral control. among those seven  three are partition problems for which there are two different natural approaches to handling ties in subelections  see  hemaspaandraet al.  1a  which introduced these tiehandling models for this context : eliminating tied subelection winners  the  te  model  or promoting tied subelection winners  the  tp  model . thus  there are  1 +1몫1 = 1 different standard types of constructive control  and there are essentially the same ten types of destructive control.
모since it is exceedingly important to not use a slightly different problem statement than earlier work whose results we will be drawing on  we will state the seven standard constructive control types  which become ten with the three partition control types each having both  te  and  tp  versions  and their destructive analogs using word-for-word definitions from  hemaspaandraet al.  1a; 1b   which themselves are based closely and often identically on  bartholdi et al.  1   see the discussion in  hemaspaandra et al.  1a; 1b  .
모though v   the set of votes  is conceptually a multiset as in the previous related work  we take the view that the votes are input as a list   the ballots    and in particular are not directly input as a multiset in which cardinalities are input in binary  though we will mention later that our main result about hybrid holds also in that quite different model .
constructive  destructive  control by adding candidates: given a set c of qualified candidates and a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  a set d of possible spoiler candidates  and a set v of voters with preferences over c 뫋 d  is there a choice of candidates from d whose entry into the election would assure that c is  not  the unique winner 
constructive  destructive  control by deleting candidates: given a set c of candidates  a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  a set v of voters  and a positive integer  is there a set of k or fewer candidates in c whose disqualification would assure that c is  not  the unique winner 
constructive  destructive  control by partition of candidates: given a set c of candidates  a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  and a set v of voters  is there a partition of c into c1 and c1 such that c is  not  the unique winner in the sequential two-stage election in which the winners in the subelection  c1 v   who survive the tie-handling rule move forward to face the candidates in c1  with voter set v   
constructive  destructive  control by run-off partition of candidates: given a set c of candidates  a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  and a set v of voters  is there a partition of c into c1 and c1 such that c is  not  the unique winner of the election in which those candidates surviving  with respect to the tie-handling rule  subelections  c1 v   and  c1 v   have a run-off with voter set v  
constructive  destructive  control by adding voters: given a set of candidates c and a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  a set v of registered voters  an additional set w of yet unregistered voters  both v and w have preferences over c   and a positive integer  is there a set of k or fewer voters from w whose registration would assure that c is  not  the unique winner 
constructive  destructive  control by deleting voters: given a set of candidates c  a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  a set v of voters  and a positive integer  is there a set of k or fewer voters in v whose disenfranchisementwould assure that c is  not  the unique winner 
constructive  destructive  control by partition of voters: given a set of candidates c  a distinguished candidate c 뫍 c  and a set v of voters  is there a partition of v into v1 and v1 such that c is  not  the unique winner in the hierarchical twostage election in which the survivors of  c v1  and  c v1  run against each other with voter set v  
1 immunity  susceptibility  vulnerability  and resistance
again  to allow consistency with earlier papers and their results  we take this definition from  hemaspaandra et al.  1a; 1b   with the important exception regarding resistance discussed below definition 1. it is worth noting that immunity and susceptibility both are  directional   can we change this   but that vulnerability and resistance are  in contrast  outcome-oriented  can we end up with this happening   and complexity-focused.
definition 1 we say that a voting system is immune to control in a given model of control  e.g.   destructive control via adding candidates   if the model regards constructive control and it is never possible for the chair to by using his/her allowed model of control change a given candidate from being not a unique winner to being the unique winner  or the model regards destructive control and it is never possible for the chair to by using his/her allowed model of control change a given candidatefrom being the unique winner to not being a unique winner. if a system is not immune to a type of control  it is said to be susceptible to that type of control.
모a voting system is said to be  computationally  vulnerable to control if it is susceptible to control and the corresponding language problem is computationally easy  i.e.  solvable in polynomial time .
모a voting system is said to be resistant to control if it is susceptible to control but the corresponding language problem is computationally hard  i.e.  np-hard .
모we have diverged from all previous papers by defining resistance as meaning np-hardness  i.e.  np-뫞pm-hardness  rather than np-completeness  i.e.  np-뫞pm-completeness . in  bartholdi et al.  1   where the notion was defined  all problems were trivially in np. but control problems might in difficulty exceed np-completeness  and so the notion of resistance is better captured by np-hardness.
모an anonymous ijcai referee commented that even polynomial-time algorithms can be expensive to run on sufficiently large inputs. we mention that though the comment is correct  almost any would-becontrollerwould probablymuch prefer that challenge  solving a p problem on large inputs  to the challenge ourresults give him/her  namely solving an npcomplete problem on large inputs. we also mention that since the hybridscheme is designed so as to inherit resistances from the underlying schemes  if a hybrid requires extreme ratios between the number of candidates and the number of voters to display asymptotichardness  that is purely dueto inheriting that from the underlying systems. indeed  if anything the hybrid is less likely to show that behavior since  informally put  if even one of the underlying systems achieves asymptotic hardness even away from extreme ratios between the number of candidates and the number of voters  then their hybrid will also.
1 inheritance
we will be centrally concerned with the extent to which hybrid e1 e1 ... ek 1  inherits the properties of its constituents. to do so  we formally define our notions of inheritance  if all the constituents have a property then so does their hybrid and of strong inheritance  if even one of the constituents has a property then so does the hybrid .
definition 1 we say that a property 붞 is strongly inherited  respectively  inherited  by hybrid if the following holds: let k 뫍 n+. let e1 e1 ... ek 1 be candidate-anonymous election systems  each taking as input  c v   with v a list of preference orders . it holds that hybrid e1 e1 ... ek 1  has property 붞 if at least one of its constituents has  respectively  all its constituents have  property 붞.
모definition 1 builds in the assumption that all constituents are candidate-anonymous. this assumption isn't overly onerous since as mentioned earlier candidate-anonymity is very common-but will be used in many of our proofs.
모though we will build candidate-anonymity into the assumptions underlying inheritance  we will often try to let interested readers know when that assumption is not needed. in particular  when we say  inherited  and flexibly so   or  strongly inherited  and flexibly so    the   and flexibly so   indicates that the claim holds even if in definition 1 the words  candidate-anonymous  are deleted. for example  the following easy but quite important claim follows easily from the definition of hybrid.
proposition 1  winner problem membership in p    unique winner problem membership in p    winner problem membership in np   and  unique winner problem membership in np  are inherited  and flexibly so  by hybrid.
1 inheritance and hybrid elections: results
in this section we will discuss the inheritance properties of hybrid with respect to susceptibility  resistance  immunity  and vulnerability. table 1 summarizes our results for the cases of constructive control and destructive control.  this table does not discuss/include the issue of when   and flexibly so   holds  i.e.  when the candidate-anonymity assumption is not needed  but rather focuses on our basic inheritance definition. 
1 susceptibility
we first note that susceptibility strongly inherits. we remind the reader that throughout this paper  when we speak of an election system  we always implicitly mean an election system that takes as input  c v   with v a list of preference orders over c.
theorem 1 let k 뫍 n+ and let e1 e1 ... ek 1 be election systems. let 붯 be one of the standard twenty types of  constructive and destructive  control. if for at least one i  1 뫞 i 뫞 k   1  ei is candidate-anonymous and susceptible to 붯  then hybrid e1 e1 ... ek 1  is susceptible to 붯.
corollary 1 hybrid strongly inherits susceptibility to each of the standard twenty types of control.
1 resistance
we now come to the most important inheritance case  namely  that of resistance. since our hope is that hybrid elections will broaden resistance  the ideal case would be to show that resistance is strongly inherited. and we will indeed show that  and from it will concludethat there exist election systems that are resistant to all twenty standard types of control.
모we first state the key result  which uses the fact that hybrid can embed its constituents to allow us to 뫞pm-reduce from control problems about its constituents to control problems about hybrid.
theorem 1 let k 뫍 n+ and let e1 e1 ... ek 1 be election systems. let 붯 be one of the standard twenty types of  constructive and destructive  control. if for at least one i  1 뫞 i 뫞 k 1  ei is candidate-anonymousand resistant to 붯  then hybrid e1 e1 ... ek 1  is resistant to 붯.1
corollary 1 hybrid strongly inherits resistance to each of the standard twenty types of control.
모before we turn to applying this corollary  let us note that theorem 1 and corollary 1 are both  as is this entire paper  within the most natural  most typical model: votes are input as a list   nonsuccinct  input  and each vote counts equally   unweighted  votes . we mention that for each of the other three cases- succinct  weighted    succinct  unweighted   and  nonsuccinct  weighted -theorem 1 and corollary 1 both still hold.
모let us apply corollary 1 to obtain election systems that are broadly resistant to control.
corollary 1 there exist election systems-for example  hybrid plurality condorcet -that are resistant to all the standard ten types of constructive control.
모to make the same claim for destructive control  a bit more work is needed  since for three of the standard ten types of destructive control no system has been  as far as we know  proven to be resistant. so we first construct an  artificial  system having the missing three resistance properties.
lemma 1 there exists a candidate-anonymous election system  enot-all-one  that is resistant to  a  destructive control by deleting voters   b  destructive control by adding voters  and  c  destructive control by partition of voters in the te model.
corollary 1 there exist election systems that are resistant to all ten standard types of destructive control.
control bysusceptibilityresistanceimmunityvulnerabilityadding candidatessisinot i / i ideleting candidatessisii / not i i iff p = nppartitionsisinot ion    systems:of candidates  te i iff si iff p = nppartitionsisinot ion    systems:of candidates  tp i iff si iff p = nprun-off partitionsisinot ion    systems:of candidates  te i iff si iff p = nprun-off partitionsisinot ion    systems:of candidates  tp i iff si iff p = npadding voterssisiiideleting voterssisiiipartition of voters  te sisiiipartition of voters  tp sisiii
table 1: inheritance results that hold or provably fail for hybrid. key: i = inherits. si = strongly inherits. boxes without a   state results for both constructive and destructive control. in boxes with a    the   refers to the destructive control case.  on    systems  is a shorthand for  on election systems having winner problems in the polynomial hierarchy.   on    systems  is a shorthand for  on election systems having unique winner problems in the polynomial hierarchy. 모we cannot apply theorem 1 directly to rehybridize the systems of corollaries 1 and 1  because hybrid itself is not in general candidate-anonymous. however  we can get the same conclusion by directly hybridizing all the constituents underlying corollaries 1 and 1.
theorem 1 there exist election systems that are resistant to all twenty standard types of control.
the proof simply is to consider hybrid plurality condorcet 
enot-all-one .
1 immunity
we now turn to inheritance of immunity. here  for each of constructiveand destructivecontrol  five cases inherit and five cases provably fail to inherit.
theorem 1 any candidate-anonymous election system that is immune to constructive control by deleting candidates can never have a unique winner.
모since  never having a unique winner  is inherited by hybrid  theorem 1 implies:
theorem 1 immunity to constructive control by deleting candidates is inherited by hybrid.
모by applying a duality result of hemaspaandra  hemaspaandra  and rothe multiple times  we can retarget this to a type of destructive control.
proposition 1   hemaspaandra et al.  1b   a voting system is susceptible to constructive control by deleting candidates if and only if it is susceptible to destructive control by adding candidates.
corollary 1 immunity to destructive control by adding candidates is inherited by hybrid.
hybrid's immunity to all voter-related types of control is
immediate.
theorem 1 immunity to constructive and destructive control under each of  a  adding voters   b  deleting voters   c  partition of voters in model te  and  d  partition of voters in model tp is inherited  and flexibly so  by hybrid.
for the ten remaining cases  inheritance does not hold.
1 vulnerability
hybrid strongly inherited resistance  which is precisely what one wants  since that is both the aesthetically pleasing case and broadens resistance to control. however  for vulnerability it is less clear what outcome to root for. inheritance would be the mathematically more beautiful outcome. but on the other hand  what inheritance would inherit is vulnerability  and vulnerability to control is in general a bad thing-so maybe one should hope for  not i nherits   entries for our table in this column. in fact  our results here are mixed. in particular  we for ten cases prove that inheritance holds unconditionally and for ten cases prove that inheritance holds  though in some cases we have to limit ourselves to election systems with winner/uniquewinner problemsthat fall into the polynomial hierarchy  if and only if p = np.
1 conclusions
table 1 summarizes our inheritance results. the main contribution of this paper is the hybrid system  the fact that hybrid strongly inherits resistance  and the consequence that there is an election system that resists all twenty standard types of electoral control. the authors jointly with p. faliszewski are currently working to show that some natural election systems may exhibit broad resistance to control.
acknowledgments
we thank holger spakowski and the ijcai '1 referees for helpful comments.
