
temporal reasoning is widely used within both computer science and a.i. however  the underlying complexity of temporalproofin discrete temporal logics has led to the use of simplified formalisms and techniques  such as temporal interval algebras or model checking. in this paper we show that tractable sub-classes of propositional linear temporal logic can be developed  based on the use of xor fragments of the logic. we not only show that such fragments can be decided  tractably  via clausal temporal resolution  but also show the benefits of combining multiple xor fragments. for such combinations we establish completeness and complexity  of the resolution method   and also describe how such a temporal language might be used in application areas  for example the verification of multi-agent systems. this new approach to temporal reasoning provides a framework in which tractable temporal logics can be engineered by intelligently combining appropriate xor fragments.
1 introduction
temporal logics have been used to describe a wide variety of systems  from both computer science and artificial intelligence. the basic idea of proof  within propositional  discrete temporal logics  is also both intuitive and appealing. however the complexity of satisfiability for such logics is high. for example  the complexity of satisfiability for propositional linear time temporal logic  ptl  is pspace-complete  sistla and clarke  1 . consequently  model checking  clarke et al.  1  has received much attention as it also allows users to check that a temporal property holds for some underlying model of the system.
﹛often temporal problems involve an underlying structure  such as an automaton  where a key property is that the automaton can be in exactly one state at each moment. such problems frequently involve several process or agents  each with underlying automaton-like structures  and we are interested in properties relating to how the agents progress under particular models of concurrency such as synchrony  asynchrony etc.  or particular coordination or cooperation actions.
﹛in this paper we considera new fragmentof ptl that incorporates the use of xor operators  denoted  q1q1...qn  meaning that exactly one qi holds for 1 ≒ i ≒ n. since the complexity of unsatisfiability for xor clauses in classical propositional logic is low  schaefer  1   there is the potential to carry much of this over to the temporal case.
﹛thus  in this paper we provide several results. first  we introduce the ptl fragment to be considered  called tlx  and show a complete clausal resolution system for this. the fragment allows us to split the underlying set of propositions into distinct subsets such that each subset  except one  represents a set of propositions where exactly one proposition can hold  termed xor sets ; the remaining set has no such constraints. then we show that deciding unsatisfiability of specifications in such a logic is  indeed  tractable.
1 xor temporal logic
the logic we consider is called  tlx   and its syntax and semantics essentially follow that of ptl  gabbay et al.  1   with models  isomorphic to the natural numbers  n  of the form: 考 = t1 t1 t1 t1 ... where each state  ti  is a set of proposition symbols  representing those propositions which are satisfied in the ith moment in time. the notation  考 i  |= a denotes the truth  or otherwise  of formula a in the model 考 at state index i ﹋ n. this leads to semantic rules:
	iff	 考 i + 1  |= a
 考 i  |=  a	iff	 and  考 k  |= a
 考 i  |= a	iff	 then  考 j  |= a
for any formula a  model 考  and state index i ﹋ n  then either  考 i  |= a holds or  考 i  |= a does not hold  denoted
. if there is some 考 such that  考 1  |= a  then a is said to be satisfiable. if  考 1  |= a for all models  考  then a is said to be valid and is written |= a.
﹛the main novelty in tlx is that it is parameterised by xor-sets p1  p1 ...  and the formulae of tlx p1 p1 ...  are constructed under the restrictions that exactly one proposition from every set pi is true in every state. for example  if we consider just one set of propositions p  we have
 p1  p1  ...  pn  for all pi ﹋ p.
furthermore  we assume that there exists a set of propositions in addition to those defined by the parameters  and that these propositions are unconstrained as normal. thus  tlx   is essentially a standard propositional  linear temporal logic  while tlx p q r  is a temporal logic containing at least the propositions p ﹍ q ﹍ r  where p = {p1 p1 ... pl} 
q = {q1 q1 ... qm}  and r = {r1 r1 ... rn} where p 
q and r are disjoint  but also satisfying
  p1p1...pl ＿ q1q1...qm ＿ r1r1...rn  
1 normal form
assume we have n sets of xor propositions p1 =
{p1 ...p1}  ...  pn = {pn1 ...pnnn} and a set of additional propositions a = {a1 ...ana}. in the following:
 denotes a conjunction of negated xor propositions
from the set pi;
 denotes a disjunction of  positive  xor proposi-
﹛tions from the set pi; denotes a conjunction of non-xor literals; denotes a disjunction of non-xor literals.
a normal form for tlx is of the form i ci where each ci is an initial  step or sometime clause  respectively  as follows:
start
  true.
note that due to the semantics of the xor clauses  if
	pji ＿ pjk √ false	 pji ˍ  pjk √ true
﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛﹛nj	nj and false  true.
also	
allow us to maintain positive xor propositions on the right hand sides of clauses and negated xor propositions on the left hand side of clauses.
1 resolution rules
we decide the validity of formulae in tlx using a form of clausal temporal resolution  fisher et al.  1 . the resolution rules are split into three types: initial resolution  step resolution and temporal resolution. these are presented in fig. 1. initial resolution resolves constraints holding in the initial moment in time. step resolution involves resolvingtwo step clauses or deriving additional constraints when a contradiction in the next moment is derived. temporal resolution resolves a sometime clause with a constraint that ensures that the right hand side of this clause cannot occur.
﹛in the conclusion of these resolution rules denotes the disjunction of the propositions in both and  or false if there are no propositions common to both. for
example  com p1 ˍ p1 p1 ˍ p1  = p1.
﹛observe that iresa and sresa apply classical resolution to the right hand side of the parent clauses whereas irespk and srespk involve xor resolution. note we can only apply iresa and sresa between clauses with complementary  non-xor  literals on the right hand side. we can also apply the irespk and srespk rules to these clauses but the dis-
	ˍ	ˍ
junct a1ˍa1 on the right hand side of the conclusion will be equivalent to true.
1 soundness and completeness
similarly to  fisher et al.  1; degtyarev et al.  1   one can show that whenever the parent clauses are satisfiable then so is the resolvent. since all the rules of initial  and step resolution follow the same pattern  we first prove the classical propositional counterpart of the completeness theorem  and then use it to prove the completeness of temporal resolution. consider the following classical set of resolution rules consisting of the rule resa:
	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ
	 p1+ ˍ ...pn+1 ˍ a1 ˍ a ;	 p1+ ˍ ...pn+1 ˍ a1 ˍ a 

	ˍ+	ˍ+ ˍ+	ˍ+	ˍ	ˍ
          p1 ˍ ...pn1 ˍ p1 ˍ ...pn1 ˍ a1ˍ a1  and  for every k ﹋ {1 ... n}  the rule respk:
	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ
 p1+ ˍ ...pk+1 ˍ ...pn+1 ˍ a1 
﹛ˍ+ ˍ+ ˍ+  p1 ˍ ...pk1 ˍ ...pn1 ˍ a1 

	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ ˍ	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ	ˍ
 p1+ ˍ p1+ ˍ ...com pk+1 pk+1  ˍ ... ˍ pn+1 ˍ pn+1 ˍ a1ˍ a1 
lemma 1 if a set of classical propositional clauses is unsatisfiable than its unsatisfiability can be established by the rules
resa and respk in o n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na  time.
proof: first we show that if an unsatisfiable set of clauses c does not contain non-xor literals  then its unsatisfiability can be established by rules respk. note that any such set of clauses c is unsatisfiable if  and only if  for every l  1   l ≒ n  and every set of propositions p1 p1 ... pl  where pi ﹋ pi  the set cp1 ... pl of clauses from c  which contain none of p1 ...  pl  is nonempty. indeed  otherwise every clause from c contains at least one of the propositionsp1 ...pl  so making p1 ... pl true satisfies c.
﹛assume all clauses from c consist of propositions from p1  ...  pk only  originally  k = n  and show that with the rule respk one can obtain an unsatisfiable set of clauses c in which all clauses consist of propositions from p1 ...  pk 1 only.
﹛take arbitrary propositions p1 ﹋ p1  p1 ﹋ p1  ...pk 1 ﹋ pk 1 and take arbitrary clauses c1 ﹋ cp1 p1 ... pk 1 pk 1  c1 ﹋ cp1 p1 ... pk 1 pk 1 ...  cnk ﹋ cp1 p1 ... pk 1 pk nk . applying rule respk to c1 ...  cnk one can obtain a clause
c consisting of propositions from p1 ...  pk 1 only such  does not contain any of p1 ... pk 1. the set c is formed from such clauses c for all possible combinations of p1 ﹋ p1  p1 ﹋ p1  ...pk 1 ﹋ pk 1. clearly  for every l  1   l ≒ n  and every set of propositionsp1 p1 ... pl  where pi ﹋ pi  the set is nonempty  hence  c is unsatisfiable. applying this reasoning at most n times  one can obtain an empty clause.

figure 1: resolution rules for the xor fragment﹛consider now a set of clauses c  which may contain nonxor literals. for arbitrary p1 ﹋ p1 ...pn ﹋ pn consider cp1 ... pn. similarly to the previous case  every such cp1 ... pn should be nonempty. consider the set of clauses obtained by deleting all xor-propositions from clauses of cp1 ... pn. every must be unsatisfiable  otherwise  extending the satisfying assignment for with p1 ... pn we satisfy all the clauses in c . then classical binary resolution will be able to prove unsatisfiability of. applying resa  in the same way   one can obtain a clause c  which does not contain neither non-xor literals  nor p1 ... pn. the set c  formed from such clauses c for all possible combinations of p1 ﹋ p1  p1 ﹋ p1 
...pk 1 ﹋ pk 1  is an unsatisfiable set of clauses not containing non-xor literals.
﹛finally  one can see that it is possible to implement the described procedure in o n1 ℅n1 ℅﹞﹞﹞℅nn ℅1na  time.

next we sketch the proof of completeness of temporal resolution  which is obtained combining the ideas of  fisher et al.  1; degtyarev et al.  1  and lemma 1.
definition 1  behaviour graph  we split the set of temporal clauses into three groups. let i denote the initial clauses; t be the set of all step clauses; and e be the sometime clauses.
﹛given a set of clauses over a set of propositional symbols p  we construct a finite directed graph g as follows. the nodes of g are interpretations of the set of propositions  that satisfy the xor constraints over the xor subsets. notice that  because of the xor-constraints  exactly one proposition from each set of xor propositions pi and any subset of propositions in a are true in i. this means that there at at most n1℅n1℅﹞﹞﹞℅nn℅1na nodes in the behaviour graph.
﹛for each node  i  we construct an edge in g to a node i if  and only if  the following condition is satisfied:
  for every step clause then
.
a node  i  is designated an initial node of g if i |= i. the behaviour graph g of the set of clauses is the maximal subgraph of g given by the set of all nodes reachable from initial nodes.
if g is empty then the set i is unsatisfiable. in this case there must exist a derivation by iresa and irespk as described in lemma 1  and in o n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na  time .
	1.	start   st
1. true     st
1. start   ts
		  finish  
figure 1: automata for agents s and t  together with corresponding clauses in normal form.﹛now suppose g is not empty. let i be a node of g which has no successors. let be the set of all step clauses such that i |= pi  then ＿qi is unsatisfiable. using lemma 1  one can show that step resolution proves ＿pi   false. after the set of clauses is extended by the conclusion of the conv rule  ˍ pi  the node i is deleted from the graph.
﹛in the case when all nodes of g have a successor  a contradiction can be derived with the help of the temporal resolution rule tres. note that we impose no restriction on this rule  it coincides with the temporal resolution rule for the general calculi presented in  fisher et al.  1; degtyarev et al.  1   and the proof of completeness is no different from what is already published  fisher et al.  1; degtyarev et al.  1 .
1 complexity
again  we consider initial and step resolution first.
lemma 1 using the rules of initial and step resolution  it is possible to reduce a set of temporal clauses to one whose behaviour graph does not have nodes without successors in  time.
proof: consider the following resolution strategy. for every set of propositionsp1 ﹋ p1 ...  pn ﹋ pn and a ﹋ a  consider the set of all step-clauses

such that  do not contain any of a p1 ... pn  there are at most n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na such sets of clauses   and try establishing the unsatisfiability of the conjunction of the right-hand sides together with the universal clauses by step resolution  as lemma 1 shows  this can be done in o n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na  time.
then  all nodes without successors will be deleted from the behaviour graph  but some new such nodes may emerge . after n1 ℅n1 ℅﹞﹞﹞℅nn ℅1na repetitions  we obtain a graph in which every node has a successor. 
lemma 1 given a set of temporal clauses  it is possible to find l such that l    qk  as required for the tres
k
rule  in time polynomial in n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na.
proof: to find such l  it suffices to find a strongly connected componentin the behaviourgraph of the set of clauses  such that for every node i of this component .
the simplest brute-force algorithm would analyse all pairs of nodes  and there are  n1℅n1℅﹞﹞﹞℅nn℅1na 1 such pairs   and this can be done more efficiently with step resolution as in  degtyarev et al.  1 .	
theorem 1 if a set of temporal clauses is unsatisfiable  temporal resolution will deduce a contradiction in time polynomial in n1 ℅ n1 ℅ ﹞﹞﹞ ℅ nn ℅ 1na.
1 example
having described the underlying approach  we will now consider an example that makes use of some of these aspects. in particular  we will have multiple xor fragments  together with standard propositions  unconstrained by xor clauses . the example we will use is a simplification and abstraction of agent negotiation protocols; see  for example  ballarini et al.  1 . here  several  in our case  two  agents exchange information in order to come to some agreement. each agent essentially has a simple control cycle  which can be represented as a finite state machine. in fact  we have simplified these still further  and sample basic control cycles are given in fig. 1  for both agents s and t .
﹛thus  we aim to use these automata as models of the agents  then formalise these within our logic. importantly  we will add additional clauses  and propositions  characterising agreements or concurrencyand  finally  we will show how our resolution method can be used to carry out verification.
﹛we begin by characterising each agent separately as a set of clauses within our logic. to achieve this  we use a set of propositions for each agent. thus  the automaton describing agent s is characterised through propositions of the form sa  sb  etc.  while the automaton describing agent t is characterised using propositions such as tr  ts  etc. both these sets are xor sets. thus  exactly one of sa  sb  ...  and exactly one of tr  ts  ...  must be true at any moment in time.
	1.	
1. true	   agree
1.  agree
	 sw ˍ sa 	1..	 agree	 
1.	 st ＿  sb ＿  sa	 
1.
﹛﹛1. 1.
﹛﹛1.  agree
1.
﹛﹛1.  agree
1.	 ts ＿  tf	 
1. true	   sb ˍ sw ˍ sa ˍ tr ˍ tf 
1.   st ＿  sb ＿  sw ＿  ts ＿  tr 	  false	 1 1 srespk 
1. true	   st ˍ sb ˍ sw ˍ ts ˍ tr 	 1 conv 
1.  agree ＿  st ＿  sb ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  false	 1 1 srespk 
1. true	    agree ˍ st ˍ sb ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 conv 
1.   agree ＿  st ＿  sb ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	   agree	 1 1 srespk 
1. true	   agree ˍ st ˍ sb ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 1 tres 
1. true	   st ˍ sb ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 sresa 
1.   st ＿  sw ＿  sa 	   ts ˍ tf 	 1 srespk 
1.   agree ＿  st ＿  sw ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  false	 1 srespk 
1. true	   agree ˍ st ˍ sw ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 conv 
1.  agree ＿  st ＿  sw ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  false	 1 srespk 
1. true	    agree ˍ st ˍ sw ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 conv 
1. true	   st ˍ sw ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 sresa 
1.  sb ＿  sw ＿  sa	   st ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 srespk 
1.   agree ＿  sb ＿  sw ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  st	 1 srespk 
1.  agree ＿  sb ＿  sw ＿  sa ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  st	 1 srespk 
1. true	   sb ˍ sw ˍ sa ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 1 1 tres 
1.   agree ＿  st ＿  sb ＿  sw ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  false	 1 1 srespk 
1. true	   agree ˍ st ˍ sb ˍ sw ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 conv 
1.  agree ＿  st ＿  sb ＿  sw ＿  ts ＿  tf 	  false	 1 1 srespk 
1. true	    agree ˍ st ˍ sb ˍ sw ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 conv 
1. true	   st ˍ sb ˍ sw ˍ ts ˍ tf 	 1 sresa 
1. true	   ts ˍ tf 	 1 1 srespk 
1.  tr ＿  tf	 	false	 1 srespk 
1. start	 	r	f	 1 conv 
1. start	 	false	 1 irespk 
figure 1: resolution proof for automata agents example.﹛now  the set of clauses characterising the two automata are given in fig. 1. regarding automaton s's description  note that clause 1 ensures that the automaton is infinitely often in a state other than st  ensuring that the automaton can not remain in state st forever.
﹛we can also characterise how the computationswithin each automaton relate. to begin with  we assume a simple  synchronous  concurrent model where both automata make a transition at the same time  see section 1 for variations on this . next we add a key aspect in negotiation protocols  namely a description of what happens when an agreement is reached. in our example  this is characterised as a synchronised communication act. logically  we use the proposition agree to denote this  and add the following clauses.
1. true    agree
1.  agree
1.  agree
1.   agree
1.   agree
1.  sw ＿ agree
1.   sw ＿ agree
here  we say that agreements will occur infinitely often in the future  clause 1 . clauses 1 and 1 capture the exact synchronisation. if an agreementoccurs while automatons is in state sw and automaton t is in tr  then the automata make transitions forward to states sa and tf respectively. finally  clauses 1 ensure that  if no synchronised agreement is possible  then the automata remain in their relevant states.
﹛the clauses above represent the specification of a simple system. as an example of how resolution can be used  we also wish to verify that the system is simultaneously in states st and ts eventually. to verify this  we add the negation of this property  as characterised by clause 1:
1. true
thus  if we can derive a contradiction from clauses 1 then we know the negated property is valid for this specification. we first rewrite clauses 1 in the correct format for the normal form. the refutation is given in figure 1.
﹛the example above essentially captures activity within a synchronous  truly concurrent  system. if we wish to move to more complex models of computation  we can do so  essentially by introducing the notion of a turn. thus  when it is automaton s's turn to move  turns is true; when it is automaton t's turn to move  turnt is true. then  each clause describing an automaton transition  for example   is replaced by two clauses
1a.	 sb ＿ turns 	  sw 1b.	 sb ＿  turns 	  sb .
in the example above  turns and turnt are effectively both true together  and forever . however  we can modify the synchronisation clauses and model a different form of concurrency. for example  if we were to introduce interleaving concurrency  we might use the following clauses1:
	start   turns	turns   turnt	turnt   turns
if we go further still  and introduce an asynchronous model of concurrency  then we might get
	true    turns	true    turnt
in both the above cases if we want to ensure that exactly one of turns and turnt hold at each moment we implicitly have  turns  turnt  and so we are effectively using tlx s t  {turns turnt} .
1 concluding remarks and related work
in this paper we have developed a tractable sub-class of temporal logic  based on the central use of xor operators. this logic can be decided  tractably  via clausal temporal resolution. importantly  multiple xor fragments can be combined. this new approach to temporal reasoning provides a framework in which tractable temporal logics can be engineered by intelligently combining appropriate xor fragments. further  this has the potential to provide a deductive approach  with a similar complexity to model checking  thus obtaining a practical verification method. in addition  this approach has the potential to be extended to first-order temporal logics which can deal with infinite state systems.
﹛the complexity result means that tlx is more amenable to efficient implementation than other similar temporal logics. moreover  since no two propositions from the same xor set can occur in the right-  or left-  hand side of any temporal clause  one can efficiently represent disjunctions of  positive  propositions  and conjunctions of negated propositions  as bit vectors and the rules of temporal resolution as bit-wise operations on such bit vectors. thus  temporal reasoning in tlx can be efficient not only in theory  but also in practice.
﹛demri and schnoebelen  consider sub-fragments of ptl  particularly those restricting the number of propositions  the temporal operators allowed  and the depth of temporal nesting in formulae. demri and schnoebelen show that  since the formulae tackled in practical model checking often fall within such fragments  then this provides a natural explanation for the viability of model checking in ptl.
﹛recent results relating to a clausal resolution calculus for propositional temporal logics can be found in  fisher et al.  1; hustadt and konev  1; hustadt et al.  1 . since deciding unsatisfiability of ptl is also pspace-complete  then deductiveverification of ptl formulaewould seem to be an impractical way to proceed. however  just as demri and schnoebelen showed how ptl model checking can be seen as being tractable when we consider fragments of ptl  so we have been examiningfragments of ptl that allow clausal resolution to be tractable. the fine grained complexity analysis shows that the calculus is polynomial in the number of xor propositions  and exponential in the non-xor propositions  making it efficient for problems with large numbers of xor propositions and just a few non-xor propositions.
﹛related to the fragment presented in this paper is a more restricted case in  dixon et al.  1  which can be used to represent bu“chi automata. in that paper  a particular fragment allowing two xor sets of propositions but where the allowable clauses were further restricted is considered and a polynomial resolution calculus given. one can show that every resolvent within that calculus can be derived by applying resolution rules from the resolution calculus proposed in this paper restricted to two xor sets.
