
this paper presents a methodology for designing trading agents for complex games. we compute  for the first time  bayes-nash equilibria for firstprice single-unit auctions and mth-price multi-unit auctions  when the auction has a set of possible closing times  one of which is chosen randomly for the auction to end at. to evaluate this approach we used our analysis to generate strategies for the international trading agent competition. one of these was evaluated as the best overall and was subsequently used very successfully by our agent whitebear in the 1 competition.
1 introduction
auctions are becoming an increasingly popular method for transacting business  both between individuals over the internet and between businesses and their suppliers. in this context  auction theory provides us with some simple equilibria  mostly for the case when a single item is being bought or sold. however  in practice  agents  or humans  are rarely interested in a single item. rather  they often wish to bid in several auctions in parallel for multiple goods. moreover  the fact that the value of each good to an agent often depends on other goods makes this problem particularly hard. given this background  the international trading agent competition  tac   wellman et al.  1  defined a benchmark game that incorporates several elements found in real marketplaces  and different researchers adopted a variety of approaches to tackle the problem  see e.g.  stone et al.  1  or  greenwald and boyan  1  . now  most of these approaches operate based on some form of heuristics  because it is widely claimed that a principled theoretic approach is not practical. however  in  vetsikas and selman  1  we outline a general  principled methodology for systematically exploring the space of bidding strategies for complex games with multiple interdependent goods  which are traded in several different auctions  like tac  where it is not possible to find an equilibrium solution. specifically  to handle this complexity  we decompose the problem into sub-parts  which are then analyzed separately  before the various resulting strategies are recombined to generate the strategy the agent should use.
¡¡against this background in this paper we actually compute bayes-nash equilibria for some of these sub-problems and then use them to generatenew trading strategies. even though our general methodology is motivated from the fact that complex games cannot be analyzed using the current game theoretic tools  by concentrating on one sub-problem  we can now analyze it. in particular  we examine auctions that have a set of possible closing times  one of which is chosen randomly for the auction to end at  and compute several novel equilibria. to evaluate our work we applied it to a sub-problem of tac  the purchase of a hotel room of a particular type. in more detail  in tac classic  m = 1 rooms are available in each category  meaning hotel and day  and they are sold in separate  ascending  multi-unit  mth-price auctions  one per category . these auctions close at randomly determined times and  more specifically  a random auction will close every minute throughout the game. the agents want to buy up to 1 rooms  but for ease of analysis we assume that each such agent is represented by 1 sub-agents  each of which is interested in a single room. in this way  we have n = 1¡Á 1 = 1 agents each wishing to buy 1 unit  room  in the auction. between closing times  the agents may place bids  but these are not opened until the next possible closing time; hence each round that takes place between consecutive closing times is effectively a sealed bid auction. the agents' bids are binding  as they cannot subsequently be retracted.1
¡¡this paper makes a number of contributions to the state of the art. in section 1  we analyze the bayes-nash equilibria that exist in mth-price auctions with multiple possible closing times and compute several equilibria that have not been seen in the literature before. in particular  the equilibrium that we look for in each case is the unique symmetric equilibrium. now  some of the initial stages of this work appeared in  vetsikas and selman  1  where we presented equilibria for the 1-round case  without any implementation details. the current paper extends this very preliminary work by presenting equilibria  with proofs in most cases  for the general multi-round case  as well as for the special case of a first price auction. in section 1  we describe the implementation of this work to various cases  including the tac game. finally  in section 1  we generate two new tac strategies inspired by this analysis  and we determine  via experiments  that one of them is superior. we then used this strategy in the actual competition  where the corresponding agent was highly successful . we conclude this paper  in section 1  by detailing interesting directions for future extensions of this work.
1 computing the equilibria
we assume that n risk-neutral agents wish to buy 1 unit of a certain good each. an independent seller sells m units of the desired good in an mth price auction. the agents have valuations  utilities  uri at round r which are i.i.d. drawn from distribution fr u . each agent knows accurately its own valuation uri at the current round and all the distributions fr u . the probability that round r is the last round is known to be pr. if more rounds exist  an agent can submit new bids as long as they are greater or equal to the bid price from the end of the previous round; this is the minimum bid allowed at round r which is denoted as qr. we make two different assumptions about the information each agent i knows about its utility   at the start of the round r:
 can be assumed to be relatively similar to the current utility uri  and thus; this is reasonable for tac because usually there is a correlation between the valuation of the same room over the course of the game. this assumption is used in theorems 1 and 1.
  the more general case is when the agent only knows that is drawn from some distribution. this distribution could even be   when no information whatsoever exists. we use this assumption in theorem 1.
¡¡in addition  agents may not subtract bids. in the tac game  when the valuation of a room drops below the bid price qr  it is an optimal behavior for the agent to place a bid equal to qr as late as possible  since in this way it might be lucky enough to get rid of the room. if only k   m agents have utilities uri ¡Ý qr  the rest of the rooms are sold to  m   k  winners of the round  r   1   that no longer wish to buy; all their bids are equal to qr and the tac rules state that the  m   k  earliest placed such bids will get the rooms  therefore this means that a random selection of those winners will get the rooms  as the order of their bid placements is random. it should be noted that all the equilibria when are the solutions of differential equations of the form described by theorem 1  which is taken from  atkinson and han  1 .
theorem 1 let be continuous functions of x and z at all points  x z  in some neighborhood of the initial point  x1 y1 . then there is a unique function y  x  defined on some interval  x1   ¦Á x1 + ¦Â   satisfying:  and
this theorem guarantees the existence and uniqueness of the equilibria we compute in the next sections.
1 equilibria for a single unit auction
in this section  m = 1 and the single unit is sold to the agent which submitted the highest bid at a price equal to its bid. in theorem 1  we assume that in the second round the utilities are drawn from the same distribution as in the first round  and that. each agent i submits a bid vi in the first round. we compute a bayes-nash equilibrium g u  that maps utilities ui to bids vi. in the case of p1 = 1  only one round  and q1 = 1  we know from standard auction theory that each risk-neutral agent i with valuation ui should bid:

theorem 1 if the starting price is q1 ¡Ý 1 and the bidding lasts for exactly 1 round  p1 = 1  the equilibrium strategy is
n
 1 
proof. since q1   1   i  some agents might have stopped participating in the auction  since the current price q1 exceeds their private valuation ui  and  ii  the probability distribution of the valuations f1 u  has changed  since now we know that the valuation of agents that still participate is ui ¡Ý q1. the new probability distribution is:

¡¡we also know the probability ¦Ðk of the event that exactly k agents participate in the auction at price q1; it is the probability that exactly  k   1  of the other agents' valuations1 ui are ui ¡Ý q1  which is  see e.g.  rice  1  :

let us assume that it is a bayes-nash equilibrium for each agent i to bid vi = g ui . if k agents participate then the utility of agent i is 1  if it does not have the highest bid  and  ui   vi   if it does. the expected utility of agent i when it places a bid of vi  in the case of k agents  is:
j
since vj = g uj   it is prob vi ¡Ý vj  = fq g 1 vi  . let
. the expected utility regardless of the
number of agents participating is:
	 1 
the bid vi that maximizes eui vi  can be found by setting
.
since we assumed that the optimal solution is vi = g ui   the previous equation becomes:

the solution of this equation  for boundary condition g q1  = q1  is equation 1; this can be easily verified.  it should be noted that this theorem is reminiscent of the work in  mcafee and mcmillan  1  concerning the equilibrium solution in the case that the distribution f1 u  has a minimum value vl  presented by equation 1 in that paper. in fact the two equilibria are given by similar equations  where the minimum valuation vl is substituted by the minimum allowable bid q1. however there are also some important differences between theorem 1 and that work. in particular  in the case examined by theorem 1  the number of agents participating is not known a priori  because some of them may have a private valuation ui which is smaller than the minimum allowable bid q1; this creates a fundamental difference compared to the case examined by mcafee and mcmillan where there is a minimum valuation vl. indeed  dealing with this uncertainty concerning the number of bidders  which participate in the auction  constitutes the core of the proof of theorem 1.
¡¡theorem 1 if the starting price is q1 = 1  a second round of bidding exists with probability   and the utility of the agents in the second round is drawn from the same distribution f1 u  = f1 u  as in the first round  and each agent i in fact has utility of a similar value to the utility ui of the first round  then the equilibrium strategy is the solution of the differential equation:
		 1 
where the boundary condition is g 1  = 1   and .
proof. due to space considerations we omit this proof. however it has similarities with the proof of theorem 1. 
¡¡as a special case  we can examine this equation when only n = 1 agents participate and their valuations ui ¡« u 1   which means that f1 u  = u  u ¡Ê  1 . equation 1 becomes:
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡¡  1  in figure 1  left   we graph the solution for various values of 1 pp. we provide this figure in order to contrast with the bayes-nash equilibrium for the case that p = 1  which is
  see e.g.  krishna  1  . one may notice that as the probability  1   p  of a second round increases  the equilibrium strategy suggests that the agent should bid less. in section 1  we compare these results with those produced by our algorithm for solving the r-round case.
1 equilibria for multiple round auctions
in this section we present the system of equations for computing the equilibria for the r-round auction  r ¡Ý 1 . let us define ¦µr x  and yr x  as follows:
in the short paper  vetsikas and selman  1  1 we give the following theorem for the 1-round case:
theorem 1 if the starting price is q1 ¡Ý 1 and the bidding lasts for exactly 1 round  p1 = 1  the equilibrium strategy is

in the next proofs  we will use the following derivation from the proof of theorem 1  without proving it here; that the expected utility  if the auction closes at this round r  is:

 1 
theorem 1 if the starting price of the current round r is qr ¡Ý 1  the next round of bidding  r + 1  exists with probability   and the utility of the agents in round r is drawn from the distribution fr u   and each agent i in fact has utility uri of a similar value to the utility ui of the first round  then the equilibrium strategy is the solution of the differential equation:

 1  where  
and ur+1 ui qr+1  is the expected utility at round  r + 1   when the agent's utility is ui and the starting price is qr+1. the boundary condition is g qr  = qr. in addition  the expected utility at round r given this strategy gr ui  is then:
u	 q
proof. if the auction closes at the first round  then the expected utility is given by equation1. to compute the expected utility from the other rounds  we need to examine the value of qr+1  which depends on the bids placed in the current round. the probability distribution of the  m 1 th and mth highest bids among all other agents at this round  named respectively
b m 1  and b m   are
.
if b m    vir  then qr+1 = b m . if b m 1    vir ¡Ý b m   then the agent submitted the mth price  so qr+1 = vir. if vir ¡Ý b m 1   then qr+1 = b m 1 . note that prob qr+1 = vir  =
prob b m 1  vir ¡Ýb m   = ¦µr gr 1 vir     yr gr 1 vir  .
as a result  we can now compute the expected utility from the rest of the rounds ui  as follows:
 1 
1.1.1.1.1	starting price: q	1	utility: u utility: u
figure 1: equilibrium strategies for case n = 1  m = 1 and utility drawn from uniform distribution u 1    left  using equation 1 for the case when r = 1 rounds exist  and q1 = 1  and  right  using the algorithm of figure 1 for the 1st round of 1and probabilities pr equal to those of tac.
the expected utility for both rounds is:
		 1 
the bid vi that maximizes euir vir  can be found by setting
. then we set vir = gr ui  and eventually we derive the differential equation 1.
if ui = qr then the agent must bid vir = qr  hence the boundary condition.
from equations 1 and 1  by substituting vir = gr ui   we derive equation 1. 
¡¡in the following theorem the utility in the later rounds is assumed not to be precisely known and to be drawn from distribution gr u .
theorem 1 if the starting price of the current round r is
qr ¡Ý 1  the next round of bidding r+1  exists with probabil-
   and the utility of the agents in round r is drawn from the distribution fr u   and each agent i knows more accurately that  in fact  its utility uri is drawn from distribution gr u    then the equilibrium strategy gr uri qr  is the solution of the differential equation:
where  and
and the expected utility at round r when uri is drawn from gr u  is:
		 1 
the boundary condition is g uri qr  = qr  when uri = qr.
ur uri qr  is the expected utility at round r  when the agent's utility is uri and the starting price is qr and given that gr uri qr  has been computed it is:

proof. due to space limitations and because the proof of this theorem shares a number of common steps with the proof of theorem 1  we will give a sketch of the proof. one should notice that equation 1 is derived in almost the same way as equation 1. however since the utility uri in round r is not precisely known  and is drawn from distribution gr u   we must use equation 1 in order to compute the expected utility at a round r  based on all posible utility values. the other important difference between the two proofs  is that we must also compute the expected gain of utility  actually it's negative  so it's a loss   if the agent is a winner in the round r and in the next round  r + 1  its utility is uri+1   qr+1. initially we compute the utility difference   and then it is

the final equation for is:


the rest of the proof proceeds along the same lines as the proof of theorem 1. 
set ur+1 u q  = 1   u q for r = r to 1 do
	p	 q
 q compute gr u q  by solving differential eq. 1
¡¡ u q compute ur u qr  using equation 1 end for

figure 1: algorithm for solving the system of theorem 1.
1 implementation
figure 1 provides the algorithm that we used in order to compute the equilibrium described by theorem 1 using matlab. at each round r  starting from the last round  r   the equilibrium strategy and expected utility from round  r + 1  are used to compute the equilibrium strategy for round r  using the equations of theorem 1. to solve equation 1  we used the differential equation solver ode1. r is set to r = 1 rounds in all cases  since tac hotel auctions can have up to 1 rounds. initially we computed the equilibria for a uniform distribution. the simplest case is when n = 1 agents are buying m = 1 items; this case was used in order to compare the results of the algorithm with the known solution as shown in figure 1. we only present the equilibrium strategy for the first round of 1 rounds here in figure 1  right ; the solutions of all the other rounds have similar graphs with different curvatures. one notices that in earlier rounds the agent bids less than in the later rounds as was expected. by comparing figure 1  left  to the solution for the 1th round  we verify that they are identical for the case that the current price q = 1. however we observed that the solution at each round is very similar to the solution that we would get if  instead of several later rounds  with probability  1   p  that the auction will close later   we only have one possible later round  again with probability  1 p  that the auction does not close at this round  but at the next one . this indicates that  from the pointof view of the agent  the number of possible rounds does not matter  as long as the probability of having more rounds is the same. for example  the equilibrium strategies for all the rounds are almost identical to the one presented in figure 1  left  when q = 1. this would mean that we only need to solve one differential equation instead of a system when the utility distribution is the same in every round.
¡¡still using a uniform distribution  we computed the equilibria when n = 1 agents are buying m = 1 items; this uses the correct number of agents and items for a real tac scenario. in every round the equilibrium strategy is to bid closer to each agent's utility; that is 1% or more in round 1 and almost 1% in the last round. this happens because of the fact that many more agents participate  compared to the number of items offered. in this case  the agent makes a profit by the fact that its bid is likely not to be the mth price  and thus  usually pays less than its actual bid  if it wins.
¡¡finally  we computed the equilibria using an experiment derived distribution. since our stated goal was to apply these equilibria to a tac agent in order to generate more candidate strategies  we collected the utilities of the hotel rooms from a large number of actual games and used these to create the distributions fr u  and gr u . the cdf of the distribution
fr u  that we used is presented in figure 1. we make sure that

figure 1: experimental distribution fr u   which is used to generate the strategies for our tac agent.
these functions and their derivatives are continuous  so that we can apply ode1 and guarantee uniqueness. to do this  we group all the samples in buckets of size 1  and then to make it continuous  we expand each bucket to a normal distribution with ¦Ò = 1 and center ¦Ì equal to the center of the bucket; this is the most common way  which is used in statistics  for turning sampled discrete distributions into continuous ones. in figure 1  we present the equilibrium strategy for rounds 1  1 and 1. the fact that the utility distribution fr u  is different in every round causes the bid function to vary significantly between different rounds. in the later rounds  it is advisable to bid close to the marginal utility ui that the agent gets if it buys a unit of the commodity sold in the auction  whereas in the early rounds  it is preferable to bid closer to the current price q of the auction.
¡¡we also computed the equilibrium strategies described by theorem 1. we set the distribution of the later rounds gr u  to be equal to gr u  = fr u|u ¡Ý ur 1   which means that we disregard any value of u that is smaller than the utility ur 1 in the previous round; this is reasonable for tac  since utilities rarely decrease between rounds. we only need to add one step to the algorithm of figure 1 in order to implement this: before finishing each iteration  we add a step  see equation 1  in order to compute the utility of this round when the utility uri is only known to be drawn from distribution gr u . even though  due to space limitations  we can't show any figures of the equilibrium strategies  they all have the same general form as the strategies generated by theorem 1. however  for any values of the valuation u and starting price q and at every round r these strategies bid less than the corresponding strategies given by theorem 1; this is something that we expected  because of the form of distribution gr u   which only allows for higher than the current utility uri.
1 strategy generation and experiments
each candidate strategy for the hotel auctions determines the prices offered in each round; they are differentiated by how aggressively the agent bids. in  vetsikas and selman  1   we present three strategies. two of them are the boundary strategies  that is the lowest and highest possible prices respectively  that a rational agent would ever consider bidding at:


figure 1: the equilibrium strategies g1 u q   g1 u q  and g1 u q   are presented  from left to right   for rounds 1  1 and 1 respectively. these strategies are generated for the experimental distribution fr u  when n = 1 and m = 1. it should be noted that when ur ¡Ü qr  left half of each diagram   the agent should bid ur  but this bid will be rejected by the auction.figure 1: expected utilities for a game  where n = 1 agents participate and m = 1 item is sold  for all possible combinations of agents. the agents use either  i  the single-round  s  equilibrium strategy  or  ii  the two-round  t  equilibrium strategy described by equation 1.
 i  the l owest aggressiveness  strategy is to bid reasonably close to the current bid price q of the auction  which is the lowest price that one can offer for its bid to be valid  and  ii  the h ighest aggressiveness  strategy is to bid progressively closer to the actual  marginal  utility it has for the item  which is the highest price that a rational agent should bid at if it doesn't wish to lose money.
¡¡then we must generate a number of intermediate strategies  which would bid between the lowest and highest reasonable prices  these are the bids of the boundary strategies  at each instance. in  vetsikas and selman  1   we proposed one such strategy which worked very well in practice  iii  the m oderate aggressiveness  strategy  which combines the behaviour of the boundary strategies  l and h  depending on the marginal utility of the desired good: if the marginal utility is low  then it bids similarly to the l strategy  whereas if it is high  it bids similarly to the h strategy.
¡¡in this paper we expand this methodology to use strategies based on the equilibria presented in section 1:
 iv  the actual e quilibrium  strategy gr u q   which was computed in section 1 by applying the equations of theorem 1 for the tac  experiment derived  distribution  is used.
¡¡however  the basic premise for generating this equilibrium was that each agent is interested in maximizing its own profit. in contrast  in a competition  like tac  the actual goal of each agent is to beat the competition; that is  maximize the difference of its profit to that of the other agents  rather than to just maximize its profit. this change can have a significant impact on the equilibrium strategy. to explore this issue we looked at the single item  m = 1  first price auction with n = 1 agents and r = 1 rounds when the valuations are drawn from uniform distribution u 1 .
¡¡the equilibrium strategy for a  s ingle round is g ui  = u1i  and for  t wo rounds is given by equation 1. figure 1 presents the expected utilities in all possible combinations of the two agents for varying values of the probability p of the auction closing after the first round. we observe that  when only the s strategy is used  the scores are the lowest  whereas when only the t strategy is used  the scores are highest. however  when the two agents use different strategies  one uses s and the other t  the s strategy usually performs better than the t strategy. this verifies that in a competition the more aggressive s strategy  which bids higher than t  would win  whereas if we care only about maximizing profit  the s strategy is dominated by the t strategy; we expected this since t is an equilibrium strategy for the two-round auction.
¡¡we also computed the equilibrium strategy for the  competition objective function   that is to maximize the difference of profit rather than the actual profit . this strategy would beat the strategy in direct competition for a single-round auction: its expected utility is 1 vs 1.1theorem 1 if we care about maximizing the difference in profit from the opponent  then the bayes-nash equilibrium strategy for the first-price  single-unit  single-round auction when two agents participate with i.i.d. utilities drawn from the uniform distribution
¡¡this demonstrates that the e strategy's bids are lower than they should be in order to beat the opponents. by looking at the form of gr u q  in all rounds  see figure 1   we observe that  at round 1 the bids are a bit higher than the current price q  at round 1 closer to the marginal utility  and in the intermediate rounds  the bids are approximately equal to a weighted sum of the values provided by these extreme strategies with the weight equal to the probability pr of the current round r being the one when the auction closes. since the problem of the e strategy are these bid levels  we modify it:
 v  the p strategy  which uses the boundary strategies l and h  rather than e  as the strategies that give the two extreme values  low and high   and mixes these values in the same way as e  namely by placing bids at a price equal to the weighted sum of those bids with weights pr and  1   pr  respectively.
¡¡we would like to point out that bidding more aggressively  i.e. higher  than suggested by the strategies we present in this paper  is actually going to produce inferior results  even in the case that the agent is interested in outperforming the competition. the reason for this is that  if the agent bids higher than that point  it will end up paying too much for whatever it buys  and this amount will be higher than the benefit from the opportunities  which are stolen from its competitors.
¡¡we now have 1 intermediate strategies to test  in addition to the two boundary ones. according to our methodology we must organize a tournament among the intermediate strategies in order to determine the best strategy  as we should not use more than two of the agents employing intermediate strategies. the rest of the agents use the boundary strategies and the number is varied  so that the whole spectrum of possible strategic combinations might be explored. to determine which is the best strategy we use paired t tests1 on the scores of the agents; and  generally  we consider scores to be statistically significant if the test is below 1%  and definitely less than 1% in a small numberof cases only .1 in the first phase  we use intermediate strategies m and e. the results are presented in table 1. the m agents outperform the e agents by a small margin  about 1% . this is mainly due to the fact that in competition there is a different objective than simply maximizing one's profit  as we have demonstrated earlier in this section. note that the difference between the m and h agents is not quite statistically significant  but  with more experiments  it probably would be and thus is denoted by  .1 this is not important  however  as we found out what we wanted from this phase  namely that we should promote the m agent
#h agentsaverage scoresstat. significant diff. emlhl / m m / h	l / h1  1 11n/a1  1 11 ¡Á	1  1 1n/a1 table 1: scores for agents of low  l   moderate  m  and high  h  bidding aggressiveness  as well as the equilibrium  e  agent  as the number of aggressive agents participating increases. in each experiment  we use two e and two m agents. indicates statistically significant difference in the scores of the selected agents  and ¡Á statistically similar scores.  in parentesis we give the numberof games ran for each experiment 
#h agentsaverage scoresstat. significant diff. pmlhp / m m / h	p / h1  1 11n/a¡Á1  1 11¡Á 	¡Á	¡Á 1  1 1n/a1¡Á	¡Á	¡Átable 1: scores for agents of low  l   moderate  m  and high  h  bidding aggressivenessas well as the p agent  as the number of aggressive agents participating increases. in each experiment  two p and two m agents participate.
to the next phase of the tournament. thus  in the last phase  we use intermediate strategies m and p. the results are presented in table 1. here the m and the p agents outperform the l agents. the other agents perform reasonably similarly between themselves  and  in fact  the performances were statistically similar for most cases  as denoted in the table . the only exceptions to this rule were the performance of the p agents  about +1%  as opposed to that of the m and h agents in the case that two agents of each type participated. based on this  and empirical data from the early rounds of tac 1  we decided that the p agent is performing best  which is the reason it was chosen as the strategy we used in most of the seeding round and the finals of tac 1.
¡¡strategy m was used as our tac entry since the semi-finals of tac 1 thru the finals of tac 1. in 1 we used the p strategy mainly. the performance in the seeding  semifinal and final rounds of tac show this  in parenthesis we give the difference from the top competing agent :
1:semi-final 1st  +1%   final 1st  +1% .1:seeding 1st  +1%   semi-final 1st  +1%   final 1rd   1% .1:seeding 1st  +1%   semi-final 1st  +1%   final 1st  +1% .1:seeding 1st  +1%   semi-final 1st  +1%   final 1nd   1% .¡¡throughout this time  our agent has consistently achieved the highest scores in the competition. in 1 our agent was first in all rounds with statistically significant differences in the scores  which has never happened before or since in tac classic. in 1 the top three finalists mertacor  whitebear1  and walverine were very close to each other. the reason for this extremely competent performance by all agents seems to have been  at least partly  the fact that the other two top scoring agents adopted some of our techniques; in particular  the founding principle of our methodology that trading commodities should be based entirely on maximizing the agent's utility. walverine used this especially in redesigning their procurement of entertainment tickets. moreover  the walverine team also used an experimental methodology  reeves et al.  1  which is probably the closest approach to the one we outlined in  vetsikas and selman  1 . however  no one else thought that it was feasible to look for an equilibrium strategy  even for a sub-problem of a large problem like tac  and thus our approach as outlined in this paper is truly unique.
1 conclusions and future work
this paper analyzed auctions that have a set of possible closing times  one of which is chosen randomly for the auction to end at. these auctions can be decomposed into one or more rounds  each of which is defined by the interval between possible closing times  and during which the auction is treated as sealed bid. specifically  we analyzed the bayes-nash equilibria that exist in such cases and computed several novel solutions for these auctions. in so doing  we deal with the tradeoff that exists in this case  namely the price offered in the agent's bids. we also explained how to apply these results in the design of a tac agent; we generated two new trading strategies  e and p  based on the form of the equilibria we computed  one of which  p  was successfully used in our top-scoring agent during the 1 competition.
¡¡we are currently working towards generating equilibria for multi-demand auctions; this would allow us to remove the current restriction that each agent must bid for a single item. while this improvement is not expected to change the results of our analysis for the tac game significantly 1 success in this endeavor will lead to a more generally applicable result  which is important for a wide range of game theoretic situations.
¡¡we are also working on recomputing the equilibria for the  competition objective function   namely when the agent wishes both to maximize its own profit and minimize that of its opponents  which is more realistic for a competition setting. we have been able to generate equilibria for the mth and  m+1 th price auctions with one round of bidding for a range of objective functions. we plan to incorporatethis work in the analysis presented in this paper in order to generate strategies that are more appropriate to a competition setting like tac.
acknowledgements
we would like to thank prof. robin mason at the university of southampton  and prof. steven h. strogatz at cornell university  as well as the reviewers of this paper  for comments on this work.
most of this research was undertaken as part of the first author's thesis. the latter parts  as well as ongoing related work  is undertaken as part of the aladdin  autonomous learning agents for decentralised data and information systems  project  which is jointly funded by a bae systems and epsrc  engineering and physical research council  strategic partnership  ep/c1 .
references
 atkinson and han  1  kendall atkinson and weimin han. elementary numerical analysis. john wiley & sons inc.  1.
 brandt et al.  1  f. brandt  t. sandholm  and y. shoham. spiteful bidding in sealed-bid auctions. in proc of the 1th international joint conference on
artificial intelligence  1.
 greenwald and boyan  1  greenwald and boyan. bid determination for simultaneous auctions. in ec-1  october 1.
 krishna  1  vijay krishna. auction theory. academic press  1.
 mcafee and mcmillan  1  r. preston mcafee and john mcmillan. auctions and bidding. journal of economic literature  1-1  june 1.
 reeves et al.  1  d. m. reeves  k. m. lochner  s. cheng  and r. suri. approximate strategic reasoning through hierarchical reduction of large symmetric games. in aaai-1  july 1.
 rice  1  john a. rice. mathematical statistics and data analysis. duxbury press  california  1.
 stone et al.  1  p. stone  r. schapire  m. littman  j. csirik  and d. mcallester. attac-1: a learning  autonomous bidding agent. in amec iv. lncs  vol. 1. springer verlag  1.
 vetsikas and jennings  1  i. a. vetsikas and n. r. jennings. outperforming the competition in multi-unit sealed bid auctions. in  forthcoming   1.
 vetsikas and selman  1  i. a. vetsikas and b. selman. a principled study of the design tradeoffs for autonomous trading agents. in proceedings of the 1nd international joint conference on autonomous agents and multi-agent systems  pages 1  1.
 vetsikas and selman  1  i. a. vetsikas and b. selman. bayes-nash equilibria for m-th price auctions with multiple closing times. in sigecom exchanges  1.
 vetsikas  1  ioannis a. vetsikas. a principled methodology for the design of autonomous trading agents with combinatorial p