
spam deobfuscationis a processing to detect obfuscated words appeared in spam emails and to convert them back to the original words for correct recognition. lexicon tree hidden markov model  lthmm  was recently shown to be useful in spam deobfuscation. however  lt-hmm suffers from a huge number of states  which is not desirable for practical applications. in this paper we present a complexity-reduced hmm  referred to as dynamically weighted hmm  dw-hmm  where the states involving the same emission probability are grouped into super-states  while preserving state transition probabilities of the original hmm. dwhmm dramatically reduces the number of states and its state transition probabilities are determined in the decoding phase. we illustrate how we convert a lt-hmm to its associated dw-hmm. we confirm the useful behavior of dw-hmm in the task of spam deobfuscation  showing that it significantly reduces the number of states while maintaining the high accuracy.
1 introduction
large vocabulary problems in hidden markov models  hmms  have been addressed in various areas such as handwriting recognition  a. l. koerich and suen  1  and speech recognition  jelinek  1 . as the vocabulary size increases  the computational complexity for recognition and decoding dramatically grows  making the recognition system impractical. in order to solve the large vocabulary problem  various methods have been developed  especially in speech and handwriting recognition communities.
모for example  one approach is to reduce the lexicon size by using the side information such as word length and word shape. however  this method reduces the global lexicon to only its subset so that the true word hypothesis might be discarded. an alternative approach is to reduce a search space in the large lexicon  since the same initial characters are shared by the lexical tree  leading to redundant computations. compared to the flat lexicon where whole words are simply corrected  these methods reduce the computational complexity. however  the lexical tree still has a large number of nodes and its effect is limited. other approaches involve various search strategies. the viterbi decoding is a time-consuming task forhmms which contain a largevocabulary  e.g.  1 words . the beam search algorithm  jelinek  1  speeds up the viterbi decoding by eliminating improper state paths in the trellis with a threshold. however  it still has a limitation in performance gain if a large number of states are involved  e.g.  1 states  since the number of states should still be taken into account in the algorithm.
모spam deobfuscation is an important pre-processing task for content-based spam filters which use words of contents in emails to determine whether an incoming email is a spam or not. for instance  the word  viagra  indicates that the email containing such word is most likely a spam. however  spammers obfuscate words to circumvent spam filters by inserting  deleting and substituting characters of words as well as by introducing incorrect segmentation. for example   viagra  may be written as  vi graa  in spam emails. some examples of obfuscated words in real spam emails are shown in table 1. thus  an importanttask for successful content-basedspam filtering is to restore obfuscated words in spam emails to original ones. lee and ng  lee and ng  1  proposed a method of spam deobfuscation based on a lexicon tree hmm  lthmm   demonstrating promising results. nevertheless  the lt-hmm suffers from a large number of states  e.g.  1 states   which is not desirable for practical applications.
table 1: examples of obfuscated words in spam emails.
con. tains forwa. rdlook. ing sta. tementscontains forwardlooking statementsth'e lowest rates in thkhe u.s.the lowest rates in the usd1scl a1mer bel ow:disclaimer below모in this paper  we present a complexity-reduced structure of hmm as a solution to the large vocabulary problem. the core idea is to group states involving the same emission probabilities into a few number of super-states  while preserving state transition probabilities of the original hmm. the proposed complexity-reduced hmm is referred to as dynamically weighted hmm  dw-hmm   since state transition probabilities are dynamically determined using the data structure which contains the state transition probabilities of the original hmm in the decoding phase. we illustrate how to construct a dw-hmm  given a lt-hmm  reducing the number of states dramatically. we also explain conditions for equivalence between dw-hmm and lt-hmm. we apply dw-hmm to the task of spam deobfuscation  emphasizing its reduced-complexity as well as performance.
1 dynamically weighted hidden markov model
a hidden markov model is a simple dynamic bayesian network that is characterized by initial state probabilities  state transition probabilities  and emission probabilities. notations for hmm are as follows:
1. individual hidden states of hmm are denoted by{q1 q1 q1 ... qk}  where k is the number of states. the hidden state vector at time t is denoted by qt 뫍 rk.
1. observation symbols belong to a finite alphabet  {y1 y1 ... ym}  where m is the number of distinct observation symbols. the observation data at time t is denoted by yt 뫍 rm.
1. the state transition probability from state qi to state qj is defined by p qj|qi .
1. the emission probability of observation symbol yi  given state qj is denoted by p yi|qj .
1. the initial state probability of state qi is denoted by 붫 qi .
with these definitions  hmm is characterized by the joint distribution of states q1:t = {q1 ... qt} and observed symbols y1:t = {y1 ... yt}  which is of a factorized form
.
모we first illustrate the dw-hmm with a simple example. figure 1 shows a transition diagram of a 1-state hmm and its associated dw-hmm that consists of four super-states  s1  s1  s1  and s1. in this example  the original 1-state hmm  as shown in the top in figure 1  has four distinct emission probabilities  i.e. 
p y|q1  
p y|q1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1  
p y|q1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1   p y|q1 .
모the states involving the same emission probability  are grouped into a super-state  denoted by s in the dw-hmm  as shown in the left of the bottom in figure 1 . in such a case  we construct a dw-hmm containing 1 super-states  s1  s1  s1  and s1  where the following is satisfied:
p y|s1  = p y|q1  
p y|s1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1  
p y|s1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1  = p y|q1  
p y|s1  = p y|q1 .
in the dw-hmm  the number of states is reduced from 1 to
1.
모the data structure 붯  as shown in the right of the bottom in figure 1  is constructed  in order to preserve the state transition probabilities defined in the original hmm. each node in 붯 is labeled by the super-state which it belongs to and state transition probabilities are stored  following the original hmm.

	dw-hmm	붯
figure 1: transition diagrams for the 1-state hmm  its associated 1-state dw-hmm  and the data structure 붯  are shown. the original hmm contains 1 different states with 1 different emission probabilities. the nodes with the same emission probabilities are colored by the same gray-scale. dw-hmm contains 1 different super-states and the data structure 붯 is constructed in such a way that the transition probabilities are preserved for the dw-hmm.
모the trellis of the 1-state dw-hmm is shown in figure 1. transition probabilities are determined by searching 붯 using a hypothesis  s1:t. to show the relation between dw-hmm and hmm  we define that super-state sequence of dw-hmm  s1:t  is corresponding to state sequence of hmm  q1:t  if
	p y|qi  = p y|si  	1 뫞 i 뫞 t.
thus  in figure 1  the hypothesis of the 1-state hmm corresponding to s1 = {s1 s1 s1 s1} is the state sequence  q1 = {q1 q1 q1 q1}. given an observation sequence  y1 = {y1 y1 y1 y1}  the joint probabilities of the state sequence and the observation sequence are as follows:
 
	observation y1	y1	y1	y1
	hypothesis	{s1}	{s1 s1}	{s1 s1 s1}	{s1 s1 s1 s1}
figure 1: trellis of the 1-state dw-hmmconvertedfrom the 1-state hmm. transition probabilitiesare determined by searching a data structure  붯  with a hypothesis  s1:t. the search process at a time instance is represented by the thick line in 붯..
since q1 is the state sequence corresponding to s1  the emission probabilities involved in the joint probabilities are equal as follows:
p y|q1  = p y|s1  
p y|q1  = p y|s1  
p y|q1  = p y|s1   p y|q1  = p y|s1 .
the dw-hmm searches 붯 with the hypothesis  s1:t  determining the transition probabilities as follows:
붫 s1  = 붫 q1  
p s1|s1  = p q1|q1  
p s1|s1  = p q1|q1   p s1|s1  = p q1|q1 .
by the aboveequalities  the 1-state hmm and the 1-state dwhmm have the same joint probability as follows:
p q1 y1  = p s1 y1 .
모in searching of a probability  p st|st 1   we assume that state sequence s1:t is unique in 붯. the constraint is not so strong in that if there are several state sequences which have exactly the same emission probabilities for each state  it is very possible that the model has redundant paths. therefore  it is usual when the constraint is kept in hmms.
	the	joint	probability	of	state	sequenceq1:t={q1 q1 ... qt} and an observation sequencey1:t={y1 y1 ... yt} of hmms equals that of the corresponding super-state sequence s1:t = {s1 s1 ... st} and the same observation sequence y1:t of converted dw-hmms as follows:
p q1:t y1:t  = p s1:t y1:t .
모the state transition probability of dw-hmm is defined as follows:
1 if s1:t does not match any paths in 붯
 뷎 s1:t  otherwise  where s1:t is state sequence decoded so far  s1:t = {s1 s1 ... st 1 st}. 뷎 s1:t  is a weight function which returns transition probabilities from 붯. the weight function  뷎 s1:t   traces a hypothesis  s1:t  in 붯  and returns a state transition probability  p st|st 1  that is stored in a node visited by st. for example  in figure 1  뷎 s1  determines the state transition probability  p s1|s1  at t = 1. the thick line in 붯 shows that 뷎 s1  traces the hypothesis s1  and returns the transition probability  p s1|s1   stored in the node  s1  which is the same as the value of p q1|q1  as shown in figure 1. if a node contains several state transition probabilities  we choose the correct one according to the node visited at t   1. it should be noted that dw-hmm determines the transition probability by searching the data structure of 붯 whereas hmms find them in the transition probability matrix. dw-hmms converted from hmms have the following characteristics. first  dw-hmms are useful for hmms which have a very large state transition structure and common emission probabilities among a number of states  such as lt-hmms. when we convert a hmm to its associated dw-hmm  the computational complexity significantly decreases because the number of states is dramatically reduced.
second  there is no need to maintain a transition probability matrix since the weight function dynamically gives transition probabilities in the decoding phase. third  dw-hmms are so flexible that it is easy to add  delete  or change any states in the state transition structure since only the data structure  붯  needs to be updated. fourth  the speed and accuracy are configurable by using beam search algorithm and n-best search  jelinek  1  respectively  thus securing a desirable performance.
1 conversion algorithm
to convert a hmm to dw-hmm  we should make a set of super-states  s  from the states of hmm which represent unique emission probabilities. when s consists of a small number of super-states and the original hmm's state transition structure is large  the dw-hmm is more efficient than hmms. for example  a lt-hmm is a good candidate to convert to a dw-hmm  because it only has a few states with unique emission probabilities and contains large trie dictionary. the following explains the algorithm of converting a hmm to dw-hmm.

algorithm: conversion of hmm to dw-hmm

1. make a set of super-states which have unique emissionprobabilities  s = {s1 s1 ... sk}  from a hmm. in this step  the number of states of hmm is reduced as shown in figure 1.
1. if there are any loops  self-transitions  in the hmm add additional super-states. for example  if si has a loop  an additional sj state is made. it makes it possible to distinguish between self-transitions and non-self-transitions.
1. construct the dw-hmm associated with the hmmusing super-states in s. state transitions are made between super-states if there exists a state transition in the hmm  from which the super-states are made. for example  in figure 1  the 1-state dw-hmm has a state transition from s1 to s1 because q1 may transition to q1 in the 1-state hmm.
1. make a data structure  붯  to define a weight function  뷎 s1:t   which gives the transition probability of the dw-hmm. 붯 contains the transition structure of the hmm and stores transition probabilities in each node. in making 붯  self-transitions in the hmm are changed as shown in figure 1. the super-state that has a loop transitions to an additional super-state made from step 1 and it transitions to states where the original state goes. the structure of 붯 and the state transition structure of the hmm may be differentdue to self-transitions.
1. define emission probabilities of the dw-hmm's superstates which are the same as of the corresponding states
of the hmm.

figure 1: representation of self-transitions of hmms in 붯.
1 conditions for equivalence
in the conversion process  dw-hmm conserves transition and emission probabilities. however  there is a difference between hmm and its associated dw-hmm when we use straightforward viterbi algorithm. figure 1 illustrates trellis of dw-hmm at t = 1 and the state s1  the only state path {s1 s1 s1} that can propagate further since {s1 s1 s1} has a smaller probability than {s1 s1 s1}. therefore  the path {s1 s1 s1} is discarded in a purging step of the viterbi algorithm. however  in case of hmm shown in figure 1  at t = 1 and the state q1  both state paths {q1 q1 q1} and {q1 q1 q1} can propagate to the next time instant because there are two q1 states.
모to ensure that the results of dw-hmm and hmm are the same  we adapt n-best search for dw-hmms and we choose the best path at the last time instant in the trellis. figure 1 shows that the two-best search makes two hypotheses at s1 and t = 1. both state paths {s1 s1 s1} and {s1 s1 s1} are kept to propagate further.

figure 1: trellis for dw-hmm.

	t = 1	t = 1	t = 1
figure 1: trellis for hmm.
모figure 1 illustrates the case when two-best search is useful in lt-hmm. we denote the physical property of the states in the nodes  showing which states have the same emission

figure 1: trellis for two-best search.
probability. q1 and qn are the initial and final state of the lthmm  respectively. assuming that there exist two hypotheses at t = 1  {q1 a b a}  {q1 a c a}  the lt-hmm allow them to propagate further. however  the dw-hmm cannot preserve both at t = 1 if we use one-best search. since the states labeled  a  in the lt-hmm are grouped into a superstate  one hypothesis should be selected at t = 1. thus  in case of the dw-hmm  if the answer's state sequence is {q1 a c a c i a qn}  and only onehypothesis  {q1 a b a}  is chosen at t = 1  we will fail to find the answer. we address the problem with n-best search. if we adapt two-best search  two hypotheses  {q1 a b a}  {q1 a c a}  are able to propagate further  thereby preservingthe hypothesis for the answer. hmm and converted dw-hmm give exactly the same results if we adapt the n-best search where n is the maximum number of states of hmms that compose the same super-state and propagate further at a time instant. however  for practical purposes  n does not need to be large. our application for spam deobfuscation shows that the dw-hmm works well when n is just two.

figure 1: transition diagram of lt-hmm. by using two-best search  its associated dw-hmm is able to keep two states labeled  a  at a time instance.
1 application
a lexicon tree hidden markov model lt-hmm  for spam deobfuscation was proposed by lee and ng  lee and ng  1 . it consists of 1 states and 1 observation symbols  such as the english alphabet  the space  and all other standard non-control ascii characters. we transform the lthmm to the dw-hmm which consists of 1 super-states and the same observation symbols as the model of lee and ng. transition probabilities of the dw-hmm are determined in the decoding phase by a weight function equipped with 붯  which is a data structure of lexicon tree containing transition probabilities of the lt-hmm. null transitions are allowed and their transition probabilities are also determined by the weight function. it recovers deletion of characters in the input data. 1
모the set of individual hidden super-states of the dw-hmm converted from the lt-hmm is as follows:
s = {s1 s1 s1 ... s1} 
where s1 is an initial state and states in {s1 ... s1} are match states. states in {s1 ... s1} are insert states and s1 is the final state. a match state is the super-state representing the letters of the english alphabet and an insert state is the state stems from the self-transitions of the lt-hmm. since self-transitions of the lt-hmm reflect insertion of characters in obfuscated words  the state is named an insert state. the final state is the state which represents the end of words. transition probability of the dw-hmm is as follows:
1 if s1:t does not match a prefix in 붯
	뷎 s1:t 	otherwise.
모the structure of 붯 is made using lexicontree and each node of 붯 has the transition probability of the lt-hmm.
모here  a hypothesis s1:t starts from s1 which is the initial state decoded. the dw-hmm converted from the lt-hmm has only one initial state and it may appear many times in the hypothesis since the input data is a sentence. to reduce the computational cost in searching 붯  we can use the subsequence of s1:t to search 붯 since it is possible to reach the same node of 붯 if a subsequence starts from the initial state at any time instant.
모we deobfuscate spam emails by choosing the best path using decoding algorithms given observation characters. for example  given the observation characters   vi    the best state sequence  {s1 s1 s1 s1}  is chosen which represents  via .
we define emission probabilities as follows:
p yt|st  when st is a match state 뷈1	if yt is a corresponding character if yt is a similar character
	뷈1	otherwise
p yt|st  when st is a insert state 1	if yt is a corresponding character 
	  	a similar character 
=
or not a letter of the english alphabet 1 otherwise
p yt| st  when st is a final state 뷍1	if yt is a white space if yt is not a letter of the english alphabet
	뷍1	otherwise.
모an emission probability mass function is given according to the type of the observation. here  a corresponding character is a physical property of each node. for example  if a node represents a character  a   the letter  a  is the corresponding character. a similar character is given by leet  1 which lists analogouscharacters. for example      is a similar character of the letter  a. 
1 decoding
the straightforward viterbi algorithm is used to find the best state sequence  s1:t = {s1 s1 ... st}  for a given observation sequence y1:l = {y1 y1 ... yl}. here  t and l can be different due to null transitions.
모the accuracy and speed are configurable for dw-hmm by using the n-best search and the beam search algorithm. nbest search makes it possible to improve the accuracy in that multiple super-states are preserved in the decoding phase. for our model  we select the best path rather than n most probable paths at the final time instant in the trellis. however  it increases computational complexity at a cost of the improved accuracy.
모the time complexity of the viterbi algorithm is o k1t   where k is the number of states and t is the length of the input. when the n-best search is used  the time complexity is o  nk 1t . to address the speed issue  the beam search algorithm is used and it improves the speed without losing much accuracy. although lt-hmms are also able to speed up by using beam search algorithm  the large numberof states limits the speed to some extent.
모in our experiment  when we use the viterbi algorithm  the rate of process was 1 characters/sec. we speed up the deobfuscation process at a rate of 1 characters/sec with a beam width of 1 by using the beam search algorithm.
모when it comes to the complexity of the weight function  뷎 s1:t   it is almost negligible since trie has o m  complexity where m is the maximum length of words in the lexicon. 1 parameter learning
our model has several parameters    which should be optimized. we adapt greedy hillclimbing search to get local maxima. by using a training set which consists of obfuscated words and corresponding answers  we find the parameter set which locally maximize the log likelihood.
 argmax 
where  s1:t y1:t  is a pair of obfuscated observations in the training data and corresponding answer's state sequence. is the locally optimized parameter set and n is the number of lines of the training set.determine the probability of the self-transition and null transition respectively  lee and ng  1 .
모we start optimizing parameters  붿  from initial values which are set according to their characteristics. for example 

1
	leet is defined as the modification of written text 	see
 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/leet  website.
		.
the parameter for the self-transition should be significantly smaller than the parameter for non-self-transition  because the insertion of characters is less frequent than correctly written letters. from the starting point  we optimize each value in 붿 and get which is locally maximized around the initial values of the parameters.
1 experimental results
in our experiment  we define transition probabilities  p qt|qt 1   and make 붯 using a english dictionary  1 words  and large email data from spam corpus. 1 parameters of our model are optimized with actual spam emails containing 1 lines and 1 words. we perform an experiment with actual spam emails which contain 1 lines and 1 words  including insertion  substitution  deletion  segmentation  and the mixed types of obfuscation. almost all the words are included in the lexicon that we use. table 1 exhibits some examples of various types of obfuscation.
table 1: some examples of various types of spam obfuscation.
typeobfuscateddeobfuscatedwordswordsinsertionci-iallis sof-tabscialis softabssubstitutionultr   liureultra alluredeletiondisolves underdissolves undersegmentationassu mptionsassumptionsmixedin-ves tmentinvestment모our experiments are performed using various decoding methods. we use the one-best and two-best searches with various beam widths and evaluate the results in terms of the accuracy and speed. table 1 shows the accuracy of the results of spam deobfuscation when two-best search with a beam width of five is used. it represents that our model performs well for the insertion  substitution  segmentation  and the mixed types of obfuscation. however  considering that the deletion type of obfuscation is rare in real spam emails  our model has not trained it well.
table 1: accuracy of dw-hmm with two-best search and a beam width of five.
typesuccesstotalaccuracyinsertion11substitution11deletion11segmentation11mixed11all obfuscation11all words11모figure 1 shows the effect of n-best search and beam width for the overall accuracy and computation speed 1 of our model. overall accuracy is defined as the fraction of correctly deobfuscated words and the computation speed is the number of processed characters per second. as the beam width increases  the overall accuracy rises a little only when the onebest search with a beam width of five is used. however  it turns out that the two-best search significantly improves the overall accuracy compared to the one-best search. the twobest search with a beam width of five shows the accuracy of 1% and the processing speed of 1 characters/sec. the experimental results show that two-best search with a beam width of five is a desirable configuration maintaining the high accuracy and a low computational cost.

figure 1: effect of beam width and n-best search on the speed and overall accuracy.
1 conclusions
we have presented dynamically weighted hidden markov model  dw-hmm  which dramatically reduced the number of states when a few sets of states had distinct emission probabilities. the states sharing the same emission probabilities were grouped into super-states in dw-hmm. state transition probabilities in dw-hmm were determined by a weight function which reflects the original state transitions maintained in the data structure 붯  rather than a large transition probability matrix. we have shown how an hmm is converted into its associated dw-hmm  retaining a few number of super-sates. we have applied dw-hmm to the task of spam deobfuscation  where the lt-hmm was replaced by the dw-hmm. our experimental results showed that it improves the speed from 1 characters/sec to 1 characters/sec when a straightforward viterbi algorithm is applied. dw-hmm can be applied to diverse areas where a highly structured hmm is used with a few distinct emission probabilities. for example  in speech and handwriting recognition areas  our model may be used to address the large vocabulary problems. we can also use dw-hmm where the state transition structure frequently changes since it is easy to maintain such changes for dw-hmm.
acknowledgment
portion of this work was supported by korea mic under itrc support program supervised by the iita  iita-1-1 .
