
we consider competition between sellers offering similar items in concurrent online auctions through a mediating auction institution  where each seller must set its individual auction parameters  such as the reserve price  in such a way as to attract buyers. we show that in the case of two sellers with asymmetric production costs  there exists a pure nash equilibrium in which both sellers set reserve prices above their production costs. in addition  we show that  rather than setting a reserve price  a seller can further improve its utility by shill bidding  i.e.  bidding as a buyer in its own auction . this shill bidding is undesirable as it introduces inefficiencies within the market. however  through the use of an evolutionary simulation  we extend the analytical results beyond the two-seller case  and we then show that these inefficiencies can be effectively reduced when the mediating auction institution uses auction fees based on the difference between the auction closing and reserve prices.
1 introduction
online markets are becoming increasingly prevalent and extend to a wide variety of areas such as e-commerce grid computing  recommender systems  and sensor networks. to date  much of the existing research has focused on the design and operation of individual auctions or exchanges for allocating goods and services. in practice  however  similar items are typically offered by multiple independent sellers that compete for buyers and set their own terms and conditions  such as their reserve price and the type and duration of the auction  within an institution that mediates between buyers and sellers. examples of such institutions include ebay  amazon and yahoo!  where at any point in time multiple concurrent auctions with different settings are selling similar objects  resulting in strong competition1.
모given this competition  a key research question is how a seller should select their auction settings in order to best attract buyers and so increase their expected profits. in this paper  we consider this issue in terms of setting the seller's reserve price  since the role of the reserve price has received attention in both single isolated auctions and also in cases where sellers compete . in particular  we extend the existing analysis by considering how sellers may improve their profit by shill bidding  i.e.  bidding within their own auction as a means of setting an implicit reserve price . we do so analytically in the case of two sellers  and then develop an evolutionary simulation to enable us to solve the general case of multiple sellers. moreover  since shill bidding is generally undesirable  it undermines trust in the institution and decreases overall market efficiency   we then extend our evolutionary simulation to investigate how the institution can deter shill bidding through the use of appropriate auction fees. more specifically  we make the following contributions:
  we analytically describe the seller's equilibrium strategies for setting reserve prices for the two-seller case  and we advance the current state-of-the-art by finding nash equilibria by iteratively discretising the search space. we show that  although no pure strategies exist when the sellers are symmetric  these can be found if production costs differ sufficiently between the two sellers.
  for the first time  we investigate shill bidding within a setting of competing sellers. to this end  we derive analytical expressions for the seller's expected utility when sellers shill bid. using these expressions  we show that  without auction fees  a seller can considerablybenefit by shill bidding when faced with competition.
  we introduce an evolutionary simulation technique that allows us to extend the analytical approach described above to the general case where an arbitrary number of sellers compete  and we benchmark this approach against our analytical results.
  finally  we extend our evolutionary simulation  and use it to compare various types of auction fees. we evaluate the ability of different fees to deter shill bidding and quantify their impact on market efficiency. we show the novel results that within a market with competing sellers  auction fees based on the difference between the payment and the reserve price are more effective than

figure 1: the competing sellers game.
the more commonly used auction fees with regards to deterring shill bidding and increasing market efficiency.
the remainder of the paper is organised as follows. section 1 describes related work in this area and section 1 describes our model of competing sellers. section 1 analyses the buyer and seller strategies  and identifies the cases for which a pure nash equilibrium exists  in the case of two sellers. section 1 introduces an evolutionary simulation that allows us to solve the general case of multiple sellers. in section 1 we compare auction fees  and finally  section 1 concludes.
1 related work
mcafee  was the first to consider mechanism design and reserve prices in the context of competing sellers. in his paper  sellers can choose any direct mechanism and these mechanisms are conducted for multiple periods with discounted future payoffs. however  he assumed that  i  a seller ignores his influence on the profits offered to buyers by other sellers  and  ii  that expected profits in future periods are invariant to deviation of a seller in the current period. as mcafee notes  these assumptions are only reasonable in the case of infinitely many players. in contrast  we consider the more realistic finite case  with a small numbers of buyers and sellers  where strategic considerations become important.
모subsequent papers have relaxed some of mcafee's strong assumptions. in burguet and sa뫣kovics   a unique equilibrium strategy for the buyers in the two-seller case is derived  see also section 1 . in addition  they show that there always exists an equilibrium for the sellers  but this cannot be a symmetric one in pure strategies. they are unable to fully characterize the mixed equilibrium  but argue that sellers set a reserve price abovetheir own valuation of the item. this analysis is generalised for a large number of sellers in hernandoveciana   where it is shown that reserve prices tend to production costs in the limit case for asymmetric sellers.
모our work extends these results in a number of ways. first  we are able to locate pure nash equilibria for the asymmetric seller setting  analytically in the case of two sellers and through an evolutionary simulation in the general case . second  we introduce a mediator that charges commission fees to the seller for running the auction  and we investigate the case that sellers submit shill bids. such shill bidding has previously been researched within isolated auctions  wang et al.  1; kauffman and wood  1 . however  our work is the first that considers shill bidding as a result of sellers having to compete. finally  we investigate how auction fees can best be used to reduce a seller's incentive to shill bid. this is important since in many auctions shill bidding is illegal  but since it is hard to detect  it is difficult to prevent in practice. again  whilst using auction fees to deter shill bidding has been considered in isolated auctions  wang et al.  1   here we investigate this issue in the context of competing sellers  and also consider how the auction fees affect the overall efficiency of the market.
모finally  we note that our work is also closely related to recent research on simultaneous auctions  anthony and jennings  1; byde et al.  1 . however  unlike our case  this research does not explicitly consider that the sellers need to tune their auction parameters such as the reserve price in order to attract buyers.
1 model of competing sellers
the model of competing sellers proceeds in four stages  see figure 1 . first  the mediator  an institution such as ebay or yahoo! that runs the auctions  announces the auction fees to the sellers. the sellers then simultaneously post their reserve prices in the second stage. in the third stage  the buyers simultaneously select an auction  or  equivalently  a seller  based on the observed reserve prices. in the final stage  the buyers  and possibly the sellers who are shill bidding  submit bids and the auctions are executed concurrently. we now detail the three main components of our model:
1 the mediator
the mediator decides on the auction fees and determines the market rules or mechanism to be used in the auctions. in our current model  we use a second-price sealed bid  or vickrey  auction  in which the highest bidder wins but pays the price of the second-highest bidder.
1 the sellers
a seller has the option to openly declare a minimum or reserve price. in addition  the seller is able to shill bid. if the shill bid wins the auction  effectively no sale is made  but a seller is still required to pay the auction fees.
1 the buyers
a buyer first selects a single auction based on the announced reserve price  and then bids in the selected auction. note that buyers are unaware that sellers shill bid. the bidding strategy is not affected by the reserve price; it is a weakly dominant strategy to bid the true value  krishna  1 . on the other hand  the reserve price is an important factor in determining which auction the buyer should choose. to this end  the buyer's equilibrium strategies for selecting an auction are detailed in the next section.
1 theoretical analysis: two sellers
a complete analysis of equilibrium behaviour and market efficiency for the complete model is intractable  mcafee  1 . therefore  in this section  we analyse a simplified version with two sellers and no auction fees  in section 1 we consider the general case of more than two sellers and in section 1 we address the complete model . we assume that there are n risk neutral buyers  each of whom requires just one item. each buyer has valuation v independently drawn from a commonly known cumulative distribution f with density f and support  1 . each risk neutral seller offers one item for sale  has production costs xi  and decides upon a reserve price ri and shill bid si. production costs are only incurred in case the item is sold. the preferences of buyers and sellers are described by von neumann and morgenstern utility functions.
1 buyer equilibrium behaviour
the buyers' behaviour for two sellers has been analysed in  burguet and sa뫣kovics  1 . a rational buyer with valuation v   r1 will not attend any auction. furthermore  if r1   v   r1  the buyer will always go to seller 1. the interesting case occurs when v   r1. in a symmetric nash equilibrium  there is a unique cut-off point 1 뫟 w 뫟 r1 where buyers with v   w will always go to seller 1  and buyers with v 뫟 w will randomize equally between the two auctions1. the cut-off point w is exactly where a buyer's expected utility is equal for both auctions  and is thus found by solving:

where f y w  = f y  +  1   f w  /1. given this cut-off point  we can now calculate the sellers' expected revenue.
1 seller equilibrium behaviour
to calculate the equilibrium behaviour of the sellers  we derive a general expression for the sellers' expected utility. this is calculated by considering the probability of one of three events occurring:  i  no bidders having valuations above the reserve price and the item does not sell   ii  only one bidder having a valuation above the reserve price and the item sells at the reserve price  or  iii  two or more bidders having valuations above the reserve price and the item sells at a price equal to the second highest valuation. thus  the expected utility of seller i who has a production cost of xi and sets a reserve price of ri is:

where g y  is the probability that a bidder is present in the auction and that this bidder has a valuation greater than y.
모now  in the auction with no competing sellers  we have the standard result that.
however  for two competing sellers  we must account for the fact that the number and valuation of the bidders in the auction is determined by the bidders' cut-off point w. thus  for sellers  with the lower reserve price  this probablity is given by:
		 1 
and for seller 1  by:
		 1 
thus  the sellers' expectedutility dependson the reserveprice of both sellers and the equilibrium behaviour is complex. we now apply this result to three different cases:  i  where both sellers declare public reserve prices   ii  where one seller declares a public reserve price and the other submits a shill bid  and  iii  where both sellers shill bid1.
both sellers announce public reserve prices.
in this case  the equilibrium strategy of each seller is given by a nash equilibrium at which each seller's reserve price is a utility maximising best response to the reserve price of the competing seller. when x1 = x1  no pure strategy nash equilibrium exists  burguet and sa뫣kovics  1 . however  when the sellers have sufficiently different production costs  we find that a pure nash equilibrium exists where the reserve price of both sellers is higher than their production costs. we find this equilibrium numerically by iteratively discretising the space of possible reserve prices. that is  for all possible values of r1 and r1 that satisfy the conditions x1 뫞 r1 뫞 1 and r1 뫞 r1 뫞 1  we calculate w and hence the expected utility of the two sellers. we then search these reserve price combinations to find the values of and that represent the utility maximising best responses to one another. by iterating the process and using a finer discretisation at each stage  we are able to calculate the nash equilibrium to any degree of precision  and we can confirm that this is indeed the pure nash equilibrium by checking that the utility of seller 1 cannot be further improved by undercutting seller 1
 i.e.  . figure 1 shows an example of the utilities of each seller at this equilibrium
  in this case x1 = 1  x1 = 1 and n = 1 . note that in this case there is clearly no advantage for seller 1 to undercut seller 1  and the reserve prices of r1 = 1 and r1 = 1 represent a stable nash equilibrium from which neither seller will unilaterally deviate. figure 1 shows a plot indicating the range of asymmetric cases  i.e.  cases where   in which we find a pure strategy nash equilibrium.

figure 1: nash equilibrium at which the reserve price of each seller is a utility maximising best response to the reserve price of the competing seller  x1 = 1  x1 = 1 and n = 1 .
as can be seen  the symmetric case is very much a special case  and the majority of possible production cost combinations yield unique pure strategy nash equilibria  at which we can calculate the seller's expected utility.
one seller shill bids.
rather than announce a public reserve price  either seller may choose to announce a reserve price of zero to attract bidders  and then submit a shill bid to prevent the item from selling at too low a price. thus  the seller who does not shill bid  seller 1 since r1 will be greater than r1  should declare a reserve price that is a best response to the zero reserve price announced by the bidder who does shill bid. this reserve price is simply given by the value of r1 that maximises u1 r1 x1   given that we calculate g1 y  as in equation  1  and take r1 = 1 in order to calculate w. given the best response reserve price of seller 1  and the resulting value of w  we can also calculate the shill bid that seller 1 should submit in order to maximise its own expected utility. by substituting s1 for r1 in equation 1  and using g1 y  as given in equation  1   we find the shill bid that maximises u1 s1 x1 .
both sellers shill bid.
finally  when both sellers declare a zero reserve price and shill bid  the bidders will randomise equally between either auction  since there is no reserve price information to guide their decision. thus we find the equilibrium shill bids of both sellers by again substituting si for ri in equation 1 and hence finding the value of si that maximises ui si xi  when w = 1.
table 1 shows an example of the resulting four strategy com-
seller 1
rpsbrp1   11   1sb1   11   1seller 1
table 1: sellers' expected utility when either declaring a reserve price  rp  or to shill bidding  sb .
equilibrium strategy plot

figure 1: regions where pure nash equilibria exist  shaded grey  for n = 1 and a uniform buyer valuation distribution.
binations as a normal form game  in this case n = 1  x1 = 1  and x1 = 1 . note that both sellers have dominant strategies to submit shill bids  this result holds in general in the absence of auction fees . at this equilibrium  seller 1 achieves its maximum possible utility. however  seller 1 receives more when neither seller shill bids and would thus prefer a mechanism that deters shill bidding.
1 empirical analysis: beyond two sellers
in this section  we describe and validate an evolutionary simulation that allows us to simultaneously solve both the buyers' and sellers' equilibrium strategies in the more general setting beyond the two-seller case. since our goal is to use this evolutionary simulation to compare auction fees  we also relax the assumption that a seller places a zero reserve price when shill bidding. this assumption was reasonable in the previous section and allowed us to derive analytic results. however  in the presence of auction fees we require that sellers are able to trade-off between the reserve price that they set  and the value of the shill bid that they submit.
모we chose an evolutionary simulation  or more precisely evolutionary algorithms  since they provide a powerful metaphor for learning in economics. in the past  they have been successfully applied to settings where  like the one we consider here  game-theoreticsolutions are not available  anthony and jennings  1; bohte et al.  1 .
모in the following  m refers to the number of sellers in the game  and n to the number of buyers.
1 the evolutionary simulation

figure 1: plots showing agreement between analytical equilibrium  continuous curves  and evolutionary results  error-bars denoting 1% confidence intervals  for the competing sellers game with varying number of buyers for the cases where none  one or both sellers shill bids  with production costs x1 = 1 and x1 = 1 . experimental results are averaged over 1 runs.our simulation works as follows. the evolutionary algorithm  ea  maintains two populations  one with seller and one with buyer strategies. a seller strategy determines both the shill bid and reserve price for each auction1. as each of the m sellers can have different production costs affecting the optimal values  a strategy contains separate reserve prices and shill bids for each seller in the game  thus the number of sellers m affects the size of the strategies  but not the size of the seller population  which is independent of m . a buyer strategy determines the cut-off points for selecting one of the sellers as described in section 1. the buyer and seller strategies are encoded using real values within the range  1 .
모the strategies are evaluated as follows. at each generation  m seller and n buyer strategies are randomly selected from the populations and compete against one another in a number of games. although each strategy in the seller population contains the reserve price and shill bid for all sellers in the game  it is important that they are evaluated by competing against different strategies. otherwise  a strategy would maximise the payoff in self-play  and would not be encouraged to reach the nash equilibrium solution. when a game is played  each of the m selected strategies takes on the role of one of the sellers in the game. in order to evaluate each strategy as a whole  the game is played several times with the same strategies but with different roles for the seller strategies. the average payoff in these games then determines the strategies' fitness. this process is repeated until all strategies are evaluated and the fittest strategies are then selected for the next generation. furthermore  new strategies are explored by slightly modifyingexisting individuals using a mutation operator. the evolutionary process is repeated for a fixed number of generations.
모it is important to note that  as explained earlier  we assume that buyers are unaware that sellers shill bid  i.e.  the sellers in the game have private information . thus  we are not simply finding the nash equilibriumof one largegame  but we are effectively finding equilibria in two interrelated games; a buyer game in which buyers select sellers based on the announced reserve prices of the sellers  and a seller game  where sellers seek to attract buyers by announcing attractive reserve prices whilst simultaneously using shill bids to increase their revenue. to achieve this within the evolutionary algorithm  we simultaneously co-evolve the populations of buyer and seller strategies  but determine the payoffs of the buyer and seller strategies separately  i.e.  the buyer payoffs are determined as though sellers do not shill bid  whilst the seller payoffs are determined by the 'real' game .
모the results in this paper are based on the following ea settings. each population contains 1 strategies and the evolutionary results are obtained after 1 generations. each strategy is evaluated by playing 1 competing sellers games with randomly generated buyer valuations. these valuations are selected from a uniform distribution with support  1 .
1 validation
in order to validate our evolutionary simulation we compare it to the analytical results for two sellers from section 1. figure 1 shows a comparison for all four cases whereby the two bidders either announce a non-zero reserve price  or alternatively  announce a zero reserve price and then submit a shill bid. in these experiments  seller 1 and 1's productioncosts are set to 1 and 1 respectively. these settings were chosen to illustrate representative outcomes when both sellers have non-zero and asymmetric production costs. however  similar results are obtained for other combinations of production costs  such results are not shown due to space limitations . as can be seen  the results show an extremely good match. in addition  we find that  although analytical results are not available for more than two auctions  even with more sellers the simulation results converge and are consistent across runs with different initial random seeds.
1 auction fees and market efficiency
in this section we consider how the mediating institution can deter shill bidding by applying appropriate auction fees. to this end  we apply the evolutionary simulation to compare two types of auction fees. in addition  we investigate to what extent the market is efficient and how auction fees and shill bidding affect this efficiency. efficiency is a desirable property since an efficient market extracts the maximum surplus that is available  and thus  it is important to take efficiency into consideration when setting the auction fees.
1 auction fees

	 a 	 b 	 c 
figure 1: evolutionary simulation results demonstrating  a  the shill effect   b  the relative efficiency 붾  and  c  the sellers costs for various levels of commission rates  for closing-price  cp  fees  solid lines  and reserve-difference  rd  fees  dashed lines . results are averaged over 1 runs with randomly set production costs and the error-bars denote 1% confidence intervals.we consider two types of fees:  i  the closing-price  cp  fee that is a fraction  붹  of the selling price  where 붹 is the cp commission rate  and  ii  the reserve-difference  rd  fee that is calculated as a fraction  붻  of the difference between the selling price and the seller's declared reserve price  where 붻 is the rd commission rate . the first type of fee is the most common in online auctions such as ebay  yahoo!  and amazon  as well as in traditional auctions such as sotheby's and christie's. the second type of fee is less common and was first introducedby wang et al. where it was shown to prevent shilling for particular bidder valuation distributions in an isolated auction1. similarly  our aim is to apply auction fees in order to reduce the incentive of a seller to shill bid  but we are considering a setting with competing sellers  and  in addition  we are concerned with the efficiency of the market.
모another popular type of auction fee is the buyer's premium  which is paid by the winner of the auction and is a fraction of the closing price. although this fee is typically not applied to online auctions  it is still very common in traditional auctions. surprisingly  however  we find that this fee is equivalent to the closing-price fee  provided that bidders are rational  space limitations preclude a formal analysis here . to see this  note that a bidder with a given valuation will correct his/her bid in the second-price auction such that the bid plus the fee in case the bid is accepted is equal to the bidder's valuation. interestingly  since all buyers thus lower their bids  the seller ends up paying for the fee even though the fee is originally charged to the buyers. the same holds in case of other auctions such as the first-price auction.
1 market efficiency
a market is efficient when the items are awarded to the buyers with the highest valuations. here  we measure the relative efficiency 붾 of an allocation k  where 붾 is given by:
		 1 
where k  = argmax is an efficient allocation  k is the set of all possible allocations  n is the number of bidders  m is the number of sellers  vi k  is bidder i's utility for an allocation k 뫍 k  and xi k  is seller i's production costs for a given allocation  in order to prevent a negative value we add production costs xi in both the denominator and the numerator .
모now  a certain amount of inefficiency is inherent to the competing sellers game as a result of the buyers randomising over sellers. for example  if two buyers with the highest valuation both happen to choose seller 1  only one of them is allocated the item and efficiency is not reached. however  shill bidding further reduces this efficiency. firstly  this occurs because shill bidding enables a seller to hide its production costs and therefore attract buyers that have no chance of winning. a second source of inefficiency arises because a declared reserve price is usually low due to competition. an optimal shill bid  on the other hand  is higher than a declared reserve price  and higher than production costs   resulting in less sales  and therefore a lower efficiency.
1 results
we now compare auction fees by considering:  1  the shill effect  which is measured as the difference that a buyer pays on average with and without shill bids   1  the relative efficiency 붾 as described in section 1  and  1  the seller costs  which is the average that a seller pays to the mediator  i.e.  the auctioneer . the experimental results are shown in figure 1 for different commission rates and number of sellers. in these experiments  each seller's production costs are randomly selected from a uniform distribution with support  1.1  at the beginning of each run. in addition  the number of bidders is set to an average of 1 per auction1.
모as shown in figure 1 a   the rd fee is consistently better at reducing the shill effect  irrespective of the number of sellers. this is because the fee provides an incentive for lowering the shill bid as well as increasing the reserve price  since this reduces the difference between the closing price and reserve price . the cp fee  on the other hand  is neutral with regards to the reserve price.
모by increasing the reserve price buyers can make a more informed decision about which seller to choose. this is espe-

figure 1: evolutionary simulation results of the buyer utility.
cially important if sellers have different production costs. on the other hand  a higher reserve price may cause inefficiencies if this results in less items being sold. figure 1 b   however  shows that both fees increase the market efficiency because of the reduced shill bid  and that the rd fees are more effective  if the rd fees are increased even further  however  the market becomes less efficient due to the high reserve prices  and cp fees perform better . the latter occurs because  with rd fees  the sellers' reserve prices better reflect their production costs. this is also confirmed by other experiments showing that the efficiency increase is similar for both fees if sellers have no production costs  not shown due to space limitation . we also consider the amount that sellers pay to the auctioneer. these seller costs are important when mediators are competing for sellers  and sellers may thus choose a different mediator with lower fees. as shown in figure 1 c   the rd fee results in much lower costs on average. therefore  the rd fees are much more effective given the same costs.
모finally  we consider whether buyers actually benefit from the reduced shill effect. the results  depicted in figure 1  show a steady increase in buyer utility on average as the commission rates increase  this increase is not significantly different for rd and cp fees  however . interestingly  these results imply that buyer utility increases even in case of a buyer's premium  since this fee is essentially equivalent to the cp fee  see section 1 .
모to conclude  the experiments show that the rd fee is more effective in deterring shill bidding and increasing market efficiency. these results generalise beyond the two-seller case  where the increased competition among sellers lowers the reserve prices and provides additional incentive to shill bid. this is consistent with earlier results showing that rd auction fees can deter shill bidding for isolated auctions  wang et al.  1 . however  our results show  for the first time  that these fees are also effective for a setting where sellers compete. moreover  we see that  when using the rd fee  sellers pay much less to the mediator overall compared to cp fees. the latter is especially important in a larger setting where multiple mediating institutions compete to attract sellers.
1 conclusions
traditionally  competition among sellers has been ignored when designing auctions and setting auction parameters.
however  in this paper  we have shown that auction parameters  such as a reserve price  play an important role in determining the number and type of buyers that are attracted to an auction when faced with competition. we have also shown that such competition provides an incentive for sellers to shill bid  but this can be avoided by a mediator that applies appropriate auction fees. these results become particularly relevant for online markets where competition is high due to the ease with which a buyer can search for particular goods. thus  in these settings  our results can be used by sellers seeking to maximise their profit  or by the auction institution itself  seeking to use appropriateauction fees to deter shill bidding and thus increase the efficiency of the market.
모research on competing sellers is a relatively young field and there are still a large number of challenges remaining. in future work  we intend to investigate the case where buyers require multiple items and can participate in multiple concurrent auctions. ultimately  we would like to extend the concept of competition to the institutions themselves  and consider a modelin which the actual institutions attempt to attract both sellers and buyers  whilst seeking to maximise revenue through their auction fees.
