
in this paper we investigate the face recognition problem via the overlapping energy histogram of the dct coefficients. particularly  we investigate some important issues relating to the recognition performance  such as the issue of selecting threshold and the number of bins. these selection methods utilise information obtained from the training dataset. experimentation is conducted on the yale face database and results indicate that the proposed parameter selection methods perform well in selecting the threshold and number of bins. furthermore  we show that the proposed overlapping energy histogram approach outperforms the eigenfaces  1dpca and energy histogram significantly.
1 introduction
face recognition has many potential applications in security and surveillance. over many years  several different techniques have been proposed to mimic the inherent human ability to recognize faces using computers and some of these techniques have been successfully deployed in numerous surveillance systems  e-commerce application and computer login systems  zhao et al.  1 .
모one successful approach to face recognition is to use the principal componentanalysis  pca   originally proposedby sivorich and kirby  kirby and sivorich  1 . pca is an optimal signal representation that extracts the eigenvectors from a covariancematrix constructedfrom an image database. this technique reduces the number of dimensions to represent images in the database. in 1  turk and pentland  turk and pentland  1  incorporated pca into a face recognition system known as eigenfaces  demonstrating promising results in recognizing frontal images of individuals. experimentation with a database of 1 images of 1 individuals generated 1% correct classification over various light conditions  1% with orientation variations and 1% with size variations.
모pca is an optimal signal representation however this technique suffers from high computational cost in determining the eigenspace for a large number of images  kirby and sivorich  1 . in addition  the computational cost for pca increases when new images are added into the facial image database as the eigenspace in pca requires recompilation due to its data dependent characteristic  turk and pentland  1 . recently  the two dimensional pca is proposed and it has proven to be much better than eigenfaces in terms of performance and computational cost  yang et al.  1 . in order to reduce the computational cost  fast transforms such as discrete cosine transform  dct  has been used as an alternative. the dct has been used for feature extraction and has been demonstrated to be superior to pca in terms of computation cost since recompilation is not required when adding or removing new images into or from the facial image database  hafed and levine  1 . some face recognition algorithms incorporating dct can be found in  zhao et al.  1  and most of them incorporate the dct coefficients directly into hidden markov model and neural networks.
모this paper is an extension of paper  tjahyadi et al.  1 . compared to the previous paper  first  we use the overlapping method to extract the dct coefficients in orderto enhance the performance. second  we introduce automatic threshold and number of bins selection to the proposed overlapping energy histogram. finally  we do more comparisons with other techniques  such as eigenfaces  1dpca and energy histogram.
모the overlapping energy histogram is based on the dct and it measures the distribution of the dct coefficients of an image. the performance of energy histogram with varying numbers of bins is investigated using six datasets constructed from the yale face database. in addition  a systematic threshold selection method is proposed which utilises the distance information obtained from the training dataset. the information gathered from the threshold selection procedureis further used to select a suitable number of bins. the performance of overlapping energy histogram face recognition is analyzed and discussed. to illustrate the effectiveness of the technique  comparisons are made with the eigenfaces  1dpca and energy histogram techniques.
1 preliminaries
1 the discrete cosine transform
dct is a popular technique in imaging and video compression and was first applied in 1 by ahmed et al.  ahmed et al.  1  to transform image signals from a spatial representation into a frequency representation. in 1  the first international standard for image compression  jpeg  was established with the dct as the encoder and decoder and it uses the dct to remove the redundancies from images. each image frame is divided into 1 blocks  where each block is transformed independently using the two-dimensional dct  1d-dct .
모figure 1 shows the zigzag pattern used to process the 1 dct coefficients blocks by jpeg compression. although the total energy remains the same in the 1 blocks  the energy distribution changes with most energy being present in the low frequency dct coefficients. the dc coefficient  which is located at the upper left corner  holds most of the image energy and represents the proportional average of the 1 blocks. the remaining 1 coefficients denote the intensity changes among the block images and are referred to as ac coefficients.

figure 1: the dct coefficients
모the dct was reported to be the second most optimal transformation after pca with an energy compaction. although pca is the optimal transform in an energy packing sense  most practical transform coding systems still apply the dct as it offers numerous advantages over pca including good computational efficiency whilst producing good quality images at suitable compression ratios.
1 energy histogram
histograms are commonly used in computer vision. the advantages of color histograms are described in  swain and ballard  1  and include invariance to image manipulations such as rotations  translations and scale  angle of view or occlusions. despite these advantages  the histogram approach performs poorly under different lighting conditions. it is also ineffective in distinguishing different images that have similar color distributions and suffers from inefficient computation due to its high dimensionality.
모an energy histogram is similar to color histogram but instead of counting pixel color  an energy histogram accumulates the dct coefficients in corresponding bins. in comparison  energy histogram incurs less computational cost when compared to the color histogram as its dimensions are greatly reduced by the dct. lay and guan  lay and guan  1  investigated the energy histogram in image retrieval and proposed feature sets identifying similarities of the images. the feature set was obtained by applying the dct to an individual subset of each facial image and it consisted of 1 feature blocks  denoted f1  f1a  f1b  f1a  f1b  and f1 in figure
1.
f1 =  dc  
f1a =  ac1 ac1 ac1  
f1b =  dc ac1 ac1 ac1  
f1a =  ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 
ac1 ac1  
f1b =  dc ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 
ac1 ac1 ac1  
f1 =  dc ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1
ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 ac1 
figure 1: the feature sets for energy histogram
모lay and guan  lay and guan  1 reported that the combination of the dc and ac coefficients  f1b  f1b and f1  yield the best performance results in image retrieval. the feature sets f1b and f1b were shown to be more ideal than the f1 feature set  due to the fact that as the feature block grows  more coefficients are involved in creating the energy histogram  thus possibly  introducing more errors. the f1 feature set was observed to perform well when retrieving images that have high color similarity  whilst the f1a and f1a feature sets were shown to have adequate retrieval performance due to the contribution of the ac coefficients which carry the texture and edge information. however  they did not investigate the threshold selection issue.
1 face recognition system design
1 face recognition system with the overlapping energy histogram
research on face recognition has been conducted to solve three distinct scenarios: face verification  face identification and the watch list  lu  1 . the aim of face verification is to verify that an individual is who he or she claims to be  whereas the face identification attempts to identify an individual in a database with the assumption that the individual is known. the watch list scenario is similar to face identification  except that the individual to be identified may not be in the database. of these scenarios  the watch list is generally considered to be the most difficult  as face recognition under this scenario confronts a large number of false alarms  phillips et al.  1 .
모in this section we will use the overlapping energy histogram to design a face recognition system for the watch list scenario  figure 1 . it consists of feature extraction using the energyhistogramalgorithm  and a classifier which recognizes images based on their feature vectors. in the training stage  we will obtain all the dct coefficients for each training image with overlap blocks and then select the number of bins and threshold as outlined in the next section. in the recognition stage  we will only use the selected number of bins to extract features from the testing images and classify the testing images based on the selected threshold and generated feature set.
모in feature extraction  each facial image is divided into 1 blocks with 1% overlapping  1 column pixels overlapped  and the dct is then computed on each block. the 1% overlapping was reported to perform better recognition rates com-

figure 1: the overlapping energy histogram face recognition system
pared to others  kohir and desai  1 . in this paper  we only use the f1 feature set  figure 1 . preliminary investigations have shown that the f1 feature sets achieve better recognition rates in comparison to other feature sets  f1  f1 and f1   tjahyadi  1 . the energy histogram is built by counting the number of times each dct coefficient occurs in the domain of the corresponding bin. this energy histogram is then used as the feature vector  붲 . the threshold and bin number selection approaches are outlined in the next section.
f1 =  dc ac1 ac1 ac1 
figure 1: the f1 feature set for overlappingenergy histogram
모to recognize a face image  the system compares the image's feature vector  붲  to each of the feature vectors in the database. a straightforward pattern classification approach to recognition is to find a face image n that minimises the corresponding euclidean distance. in experimentation  tjahyadi  1   it is discovered that the euclidian distance performs better than neural networks on the original energy histogram. further  the euclidean distance has been used in many face recognition techniques  turk and pentland  1; yang et al.
 1 
where 붲n is a feature vector describing the nth face image.
모if n is below some chosen classification threshold  붿   then the new image is classified as belonging to a face image n  and classified as  unknown  otherwise.
1 threshold selection
the proposed threshold selection is computed via intra and inter class information gathered from the training dataset. the intra-class  d  is a set where the distances between the images of the same individual are calculated as shown in algorithm 1. this class gives an indication of how similar the images of the same individual are. the inter-class  p  is a set where the distances between the images of an individual are measured against the images of other individuals in the training dataset as described algorithm 1. this class indicates how different each image of an individual is when compared to images of other individuals in the training dataset. the classification threshold  붿  is then calculated from intraand inter-class information  and described in algorithm 1. the training dataset requires a suitable number of images per individual in order to obtain sufficient distance information. from  tjahyadi  1   every individual should have at least 1 images for training. a large training dataset should result in better estimation of thresholds. the proposed algorithm for threshold selection is as follows:
denote
= number of individuals
= number of images per individual
algorithm 1: finding the intra and inter classes

for each image mik where i 뫍 i and k 뫍 k do
   compute hik for kth image of the ith individual  where hik is the feature vector obtained with the selected feature set and histogram bin size.
compute the intra distances
 where
and the inter distances  where
end
get the intra class  
get the inter class   and sort the d and p in ascending order
compute 
dmax is a measure of generalization among images for
all individuals
compute 
   pmin is a measure of differences between one individual against others.
algorithm 1: finding the classification threshold

the classification threshold  붿  can be defined through
dmax and pmin. if dmax   pmin  thenrates defined below can reach 1% and 1% respectively. thus  붿 is directly defined as:
		 1 
if dmax   pmin  then one needs to find the 붿 that maximizes the and minimizes the with the following steps:
모now  we have obtained d and p from the training dataset which will be used to calculate true positive  and false positive . the andmeasure the percentage of correct classification and misclassification respectively and are defined as follows:
1%
모1% where q is the number of elements in d that are less than a given threshold.is the numberof elements in d which is calculated by is the number of elements in p that are less than a given threshold.  is the number of elements in p which is calculated by.
모next  we will select a threshold to balance the correct classification and misclassification ratio. the idea is to separate
d as n parts evenly and draw a curve ofwith different thresholds. we intend to find the balanced point on this curve. the detail is as below.
모from	the algorithm 1 	we	have	obtained d	= where. then we need to find the index x1 x1 ... xn such that d is grouped into d = {dx1 dx1 ... dxn} where dxj = {dxj 1 ... dxj} for j = 1 ... n with 
                    	  x1 = 1. further  xj =  xj  where xj satisfies
	 	 
and  xj  refers to rounding the number  xj  to the nearest integer. this process is to divide d into n groups where n is chosen subjectively depending on the database. in the experiments of this paper  n is chosen as 1  which gives us very good performance.
	now 	we	have	obtained	the	threshold	 붿j 	=
{dx1 dx1 ... dxn}  and we can compute the  and with each element in  붿j . then  the derivative  tj  is calculated as:
		 1 
 is the maximum value of;
모; and ;
are the values respectively when
we choose the threshold 붿j with j = 1 ... n;
if  then we define tj = 1.
모to find the classification threshold  붿   we have to search for a j1 뫍 {1 ... n   1} such that tj1   1 and tj1   1. the threshold 붿 is chosen as the value in d붿j1. if none of the tj values is less than 1  then 붿 is set as dn. mathematically  we intend to find a point on the curve    with tj = 1  which can balance the rates of correct classification and misclassification. the above algorithm gives us a rough approximation for this selection due to the nature of discrete discontinuity.
1 selection of the number of bins
lay and guan  lay and guan  1  empirically discussed the performance of six feature sets in retrieving images and identified that the f1b and f1b feature sets yielded the best performance. however  the effect of varying the number of bins was not investigated. the effectiveness of histogram indexing depends on the number of bins used. brunelli and mich  brunelli and mich  1  suggested that an image retrieval system can rely on small numbers of bins without severe degradation of retrieval performance and showed that a bin number of 1 was sufficient for image retrieval using the city-block  l1  distance.
모in this section we present a systematic approach in selecting a suitable feature set and number of bins for face recognition. we explore the number of bins ranging from 1 to 1 with an increment of 1. the selection algorithm for feature set and number of bins is as follows:
let
w = {1}
fi is the feature set where i 뫍 w
   b = number of bins ranging from 1 to 1 with increment of 1: {1 ... 1}
for each histogram fij with feature set fi and j 뫍 b do
   compute the classification threshold  붿ij  with the algorithm defined in algorithm 1. end
 now  we have obtained the following information  with 붿ij these values
are the balanced correct classification and misclassification ratios with the chosen threshold.
for each histogram fij with i 뫍 w and j 뫍 b do
//get number of bins that maximize the for each
 for
each end
the above procedure is to choose the bin size which maximizes the correct classification ratio while minimizing the misclassification ratio. alternatively  we can also minimize
 first and then maximize.
1 experimental results
experimentation was carried out on six datasets created from yale database  database  1 . this database contains 1 individuals   mostly male   with 1 images each  since face images in the original database with strong light configurations were excluded as the excessive light cast shadow on the background requires to be preprocessed in practice. the total number of images used in this experiment is 1. in all the dataset  the number of individuals for training is set to be 1 and the number of individuals for testing is set to be 1. table 1 shows a brief description of all datasets. for each dataset we created 1 subsets via randomly selecting the training images per individual. the remaining images  not included in each training subset  were used to construct the corresponding testing subsets.
모these datasets were used to evaluate the proposed face recognition algorithm in two scenarios. in the first scenario  the experiments were carried out on four datasets with fixed threshold value. the results were then compared to the eigenfaces  turk and pentland  1   1dpca  yang et al.  1  and energy histogram  tjahyadi et al.  1 . in the other scenario  we investigated the performanceof the proposed automatic threshold and number of bins selection algorithms on the remaining datasets. the query effectiveness is evaluated using precision and recall statistics.
# of# of# ofscenariodatasettraining imagestrainingtestingper individualimagesimages11111111111111table 1: training and testing datasets
1 evaluation on the overlapping energy histogram face recognition system
in this subsection we compare the overlapping energy histogram with the eigenface  1dpca and energy histogram with all datasets in scenario 1 where each dataset consists of 1 subsets. the threshold for each dataset  table 1  was selected via trial and error method such that precision and recall rates are balanced. the average results in table 1 indicate that the overlapping energy histogram outperforms the eigenface  1dpca and energy histogram in all datasets with higher precision and recall rates. in dataset 1  the recall rate of energy histogram is slightly higher than the overlapping method  however  the precision rates are much lower. significant performance of the overlapping energy histogram can be seen in dataset 1 where only 1 image per individual was used as a training image while the remaining images were used as testing images.
data seteigenfaces1dpcaehoverlapping
eh * 1  * 1  * 1  * 1 1.1.1.1.111111.1.1.1.11111table 1: classification thresholds for datasets on scenario 1
data
seteigenfaces1dpcaehprec.recallprec.recallprec.recall %  %  %  %  %  % 1.1.1.1.1.1.11111111.1.1.1.1.1.1111111table 1: performance comparisons  average rates 
datasetoverlapping ehprec. %recall %1.1.1111.1.111table 1: overlapping energy histogram performance comparisons  average rates 
1 evaluation on automatic threshold and number of bins selection algorithms
in this subsection we will examinethe proposedthreshold and number of bins selection algorithms with 1 datasets in scenario 1 where each dataset consists of 1 subsets. we select 1 subsets from dataset 1 and 1 to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed number of bins selection algorithm. table 1 shows the selected number of bins and their corresponding accuracies for the subsets. from figure 1  one can see that the proposed number of bins selection performs well in selecting number of bins where the precision and recall are balanced with high rates.
selectedprecisionrecalldatasetsubsetnumber of bins%%11.1.111table 1: numbers of bins selected via proposed bin selection algorithm

	 a  dataset 1  subset 1 	 b  dataset 1  subset 1 
figure 1: performance over various numbers of bins
모the selected classification thresholds and their corresponding accuracies are shown in figures 1 and 1 respectively. the numbers of bins and classification thresholds are calculated from the proposed approaches. from these figures one can see that the threshold selection approach performs more stable with dataset 1. this is due to the fact that dataset 1 has more training images  hence  it provides more intra and inter distances for selecting the threshold. overall  these results indicate that the selected classification thresholds are very stable with regard to the subsets.

	 a  dataset 1	 b  dataset 1
figure 1: selected classification thresholds via the proposed threshold approach

figure 1: performance of overlapping energy histogram with automatic parameters selection algorithms on dataset 1 and 1
1 conclusions
in this paper we proposed a new approach to feature extraction with the overlapping energy histogram of the dct coefficients for face recognition. some important issues related to the recognition performance were investigated  in particular  the issue of selection of threshold and number of bins. experimentation was conducted on yale face database. results have shown that the threshold selection provides a balance in precision and recall rates. the number of bins selection approach has producedconvincing results. in addition  the overlapping energy histogram approach has shown to outperform the eigenfaces  1dpca and energy histogram in all selected datasets.
