
strong planning under full or partial observability has been addressed in the literature. but this research line is carried out under the hypothesis that the set of observationvariables is fixed and compulsory. in most real world domains  however  observation variables are optional and many of them are useless in the execution of a plan; on the other side  information acquisition may require some kind of cost. so it is significant to find a minimal set of observation variables which are necessary for the execution of a plan  and to best of our knowledge  it is still an open problem. in this paper we present a first attempt to solve the problem  namely  we define an algorithmthat finds an approximateminimal set of observation variables which are necessary for the execution of a strong plan under full observability  i.e. a state-action table ; and transforms the plan into a strong plan under partial observability  i.e. a conditional plan branching on the observations built on these observation variables .
1	introduction
in recent years  increasing interest has been devoted to planning in non-deterministic domains. strong planning  i.e. finding automatically a plan which is guaranteed to achieve the goal regardless of nondeterminism  is an important problem in this research field. under full observability or partial observability  this problem has been addressed in the literature: in the frame for full observability proposed in  cimatti et al.  1b; 1   a plan is a state-action table; in the frame for partial observability proposed in  bertoli et al.  1; 1   a plan is a conditional plan branching on the values of observation variables.
모the cases of full observability  see e.g.   cimatti et al.  1b; 1   where the whole status of the domain is observed at every step  and the cases of partial observability  see e.g.   boutilier  1; eiter et al.  1; herzig et al.  1; bertoli et al.  1; 1   where the plan executor cannot access the whole status of the domain  are both under the assumption that the set of observation variables is fixed and compulsory. in real world domains  e.g.  many robotics  control  and schedulingdomains  however observationvariables are optional and many of them are useless in the executions of the plans; on the other side  information acquisition may require some kind of cost  e.g. time  money  and power etc. . so it is significant to find a minimal set of observation variables that are necessary for the execution of a plan  and to best of our knowledge  it is still an open problem.
모in this paperwe present a first attempt to solve the problem. under the hypothesis that any two distinct states of the domain can be distinguished by an observation variable at least  we define an algorithm that finds an approximate minimal set  written as vobs  of observation variables that are necessary for the execution of a strong plan under full observability  i.e. a state-actiontable   and transformsthe plan into a strongplan under partial observability  i.e. a conditional plan branching on the observations built on vobs . this algorithm first exploits the belief state  bonet and geffner  1   i.e. the set of possible current states  at every step to computevobs; then  it transforms the given state-action table into a conditional plan branching on the observations built on vobs. the algorithm is based on the frameworks for strong planning under full observability proposed in  cimatti et al.  1  and partial observability proposed in  bertoli et al.  1 .
모the paper is organizedas follows. we first recap the frameworks proposed in  cimatti et al.  1  and  bertoli et al.  1   section 1 ; then  we introduce the key notions of the algorithm and describe the algorithm in detail  section 1 ; finally  section 1 draws some conclusions and discusses future research directions.
1	domains  observations  plans  and problems
in this section  we briefly review some definitions of strong planning in non-deterministic domains under full observability and partial observability that are relevant to our work. further details and examples of these definitions can be found in  cimatti et al.  1; bertoli et al.  1 .
모a planning domain is a model of a generic system with its own dynamics.
definition 1 a planning domain is a tuple   where s is a finite set of states  a is a finite set of actions  and r : s 뫄 a 뫸 1s is the transition function. the transition function associates to each state s 뫍 s and to each action a 뫍 a the set r s a    s of next states.
the set of actions that are applicable in state s is act s  =
.
모in practice  a domain may have many observation variables  whose value can be observed at run-time.
definition 1 let be a planning domain. let v be a finite set of observation variables. an observation function over s and v is a function.
모from definition 1  for each state  there is a corresponding complete set of assignments to observation variables.
모plans can control the evolutions of the domain by triggering actions. a plan under full observability is a set of state- action pairs.
definition 1 a plan 뷇f for  is a set of pairs  i.e. a state-action table   where: s 뫍 s  a 뫍 act s   and there is at most one action a such that for any state s.
모the execution of a state-action table 뷇f in  can be represented as execution structure  i.e. a directed graph in which the nodes are all of the states of the domain that can be reached by executing actions in the state-action table  and the arcs represent possible state transitions caused by actions in 뷇f.
definition 1 let 뷇f be a state-action table for . the execution structure induced by 뷇f from the set of initial states
i   s is a tuple  where q   s and t   s 뫄s are the minimal sets satisfying the following rules:
1. if s 뫍 i  then s 뫍 q  and
1. if s 뫍 q and there exists a state-action pair such that  then.
a state s 뫍 q is a terminal state of k if there is no s 뫍 q such that is a possibly infinite sequence s1 s1 ... of states in q such that  for every state si in the sequence  either si is the last state of the sequence  in which case si is a terminal state of k  or t  si si+1  holds.
모a planning problem for a given domain is described by a set of possible initial states  and a set of goal states.
definition 1 let  be a planning domain. a planning problem for  is a triple  where i   s and g   s.
모in the following discussion  represent a planning domain  a finite set of observation variables  an observation function over s and v  a planning problem for   a state-action table for   and the execution structure induced by 뷇f from i  respectively.
모in many cases  we are interested in strong solutions to p  i.e. plans that are guaranteed to achieve the goal in spite of nondeterminism.
definition 1 뷇f is a strong solution to p if k is acyclic and all terminal states of k are in g.
모in fact  any state-action table 뷇f for  is a strong solution to some planning problems for   if its execution structure k is acyclic and all terminal states of k are in g. so in the following discussion  we use interchangeably the terms strong solution and strong plan.
			


figure 1: a simple domain and the execution structure induced by 뷇f from i
모in the followingexample we illustrate the definitions given in this section.
example 1 a simple robot navigation domain  is shown on the left of figure 1. the robot can be in nine positions of a room  corresponding to the states of the domain: s = {s1 ... s1}. it can move in the four directions  corresponding to actions a = {gonorth  gosouth  goeast gowest}. an action is applicable only if there is no wall in the direction of motion  e.g. r s1 gosouth  =  . all the actions are deterministic  e.g.  r s1 gowest  = {s1}   except for action goeast when on s1  or s1   where the robot may slip and end up either in s1 or s1  or in s1  s1  or s1   i.e. r s1 goeast  = {s1 s1} and r s1 goeast  = {s1 s1 s1}. let i = {s1 s1} and g = {s1}. then goeast gosouth goeast 
 gosouth gowest} is a strong plan to p =
  and its execution structure k is shown on the right of figure 1.
모suppose that the sensors of the robot can detect walls in the current position. this can be formalized with four observation variables  i.e. walln  walls  wallw and walle. in addition  there are six responders  i.e. x1  x1  x1  y1  y1  and y1  located at the north or west border of the room. they work as the x-axis and y-axis of the nine positions  let
1 뫞 n 뫞 1 :
1. the robot sends n pulses north  or west  via the ground.
1. if the responder xn 1  or yn 1  receives n pulses then it sends a responsive pulse south  or east   else it does nothing.
1. the robot can detect whether its x-coordinate  or ycoordinate  is n by receiving a responsive pulse or not in a appointed time.
 this	can	be	formalized	with	six	observation variables 	i.e.	x1 	x1 	x1 	y 1 	y 1	and y 1.	so	the	set	of	observation	variables	v	is {walln walls wallw walle x1 x1 x1 y1 y 1  y 1};	and	the	observation	function x	is	such	that   and so on.
1	observation reduction for strong plans
in most real world domains  observation variables are optional and many of them are useless in the execution of a plan  e.g. consider the situation represented in example 1  the responder x1 can be turned off before the execution of 뷇f ; on the other side  information acquisition may require some kind of cost  e.g. time  money  and power etc. . so it is significant to find a minimal set of observation variables which are necessary for the execution of a plan.
모in this paper  it is assumed that any two distinct states of the domain can be distinguished by an observation variable at least. so state-action tables are acceptable at execution level. in the execution of a state-action table 뷇f  the executor is required to observe the values of all the observation variables; consequently  it can know what the current state is and execute the appropriate action at every step. but in many cases  there is much observation information that is useless in the execution of a plan. for example  it makes no sense to observe the value of an observation variable v  where
  for any possible current state
s  hereafter  b denotes the set of possible current states  i.e. the current belief state ; and there is no need to do any detection if there exists a 뫍 a such that  for any s 뫍 b.
모in this section  we define an algorithm that finds an approximate minimal set of observation variables  i.e. vobs  which are necessary for the execution of a strong plan  and transforms the strong plan into a conditional plan branching on the observations built on these observation variables. before explaining the algorithm in detail  we introduce some notions used in it.
모in the execution of 뷇f  the action that should be executed on s is written as action s 뷇f . that is to say  if  then action s 뷇f  = a  else
action s 뷇f  = nop  nop means doing nothing .
모let     vobs   v. for each s 뫍 s  we represent the corresponding set of assignments to the observation variables of vobs with code s vobs x   where:
  if	vobs	=	{v}	and	 	then
code s vobs x  = v.
  if	vobs	=	{v}	and	x s v 	=	뫐 	then
code s vobs x  =  v.
  if |vobs|   1 and v 뫍 vobs  then
	code s vobs x 	=	code s {v} x 	뫇
code s vobs   {v} x .
the aboverepresentationnaturallyextends to any     q   s as follows:
codecode s vobs x 
the set of observations built on v and x is o v x  = {code q vobs x  |     q   s      vobs   v}.
모the definition of conditional plans branching on o v x  is given as follows. in fact  it is an extension of the one proposed in  bertoli et al.  1 .
definition 1 the set of conditional plans 붫 for is the minimal set such that:
  붼 뫍 붫  붼 is the empty plan;
  if a 뫍 a and 뷇 뫍 붫  then a   뷇 뫍 붫;
  if o 뫍 o v x   and 뷇1 뷇1 뫍 붫  then if o then 뷇1 else 뷇1 뫍 붫.
모in general  we are interested in applicable plans  i.e. plans whose execution guarantees that an action is never attempted unless it is applicable  regardless of nondeterminism.
definition 1 a planis applicable in state s iff either
  뷇 is the empty plan 붼; or is applicable in s  and 뷇 is applicable in every; or
  뷇 is if o then 뷇1 else 뷇1  and:
- if the formula code s v x  뫸 o is a tautology  뷇1 is applicable in s; and
- if the formula code s v x  뫸  o is a tautology  뷇1 is applicable in s.
모the execution of a conditional plan is defined in terms of the runs associated to it. intuitively  a run contains the states  observations and actions encountered while executing the plan.
definition 1 a run is a sequence  =  s1 o1  a1  s1 o1   ...   an    sn on   where si 뫍 s  oi 뫍 o v x   and ai 뫍 a. a sequence  is a run of 뷇  뷇 is a conditional plan for  from state s iff either
  뷇 = 붼  and  =  s o  with o = code s v x ; or
  뷇 = a   뷇1 and  =  s o    a   1 with o =
  and 1 is a run for 뷇1 from some s1 뫍
  뷇 = if o then 뷇1 else 뷇1  code s v x  뫸 o is a tautology  and  is a run of 뷇1 starting from  s  code s v x  ; or
  뷇 = if o then 뷇1 else 뷇1  code s v x  뫸  o is a tautology  and  is a run of 뷇1 starting from  s  code s v x  .
모in the following  we write runs s 뷇  to denote the set of runs of 뷇 starting from s. we write finalstates s 뷇  to indicate the set of the final states of the runs of runs s 뷇 .
모the definition of strong plans to is given as follows. in fact  it is similar to the one proposed in  bertoli et al.  1 .
definition 1 a conditional plan is a strong
plan toiff
  뷇 is applicable in every state of i  and
  every run of 뷇 from a state in i ends in g  i.e.  finalstates s 뷇    g.
모now we can introduce the algorithm for observation reduction of strong plans in detail.
모the basic algorithm  i.e. strong-fo-po  is presented in figure 1. given a planning problem p  a strong plan 뷇f to p  a finite set of observation variables v  and an observation function x  the algorithm transforms 뷇f into a strong plan
1. function strong-fo-po p 뷇f v x 
1. dis 뫹 findstatepairs p 뷇f ;
1. vobs 뫹 reduction dis v x ;
1. return transform p 뷇f vobs x ;
	1.	end

figure 1: strong-fo-po algorithm

1.
	// suppose	=    
	1.	parts 뫹 divide i 뷇f ;
1.	if  parts =    then 1.	return  ;
1. fi;
1. dis 뫹  ;
1. for each  a q  뫍 parts
1. inext 뫹 execute  q a ;
1. ;
1. statepairs;
1.
1.
1. ;
1. fi;
1. for any  a1 q1    a1 q1  뫍 parts  where
1. for any s1 뫍 q1  s1 뫍 q1
1. dis 뫹 dis 뫋 { s1 s1 };
1.	endfor; 1.	endfor; 1.	return dis; 1.	end

figure 1: findstatepairs procedure
to  where vobs is an approximate minimal set of observationvariables which are necessary forthe executionof 뷇f. the strong-fo-po algorithm has two main phases:  1  an observation reduction phase  lines 1   in which vobs is computed by applications of findstatepairs and reduction  and  1  a transform phase  line 1   in which 뷇f is transformed into a conditional plan for by an application of transform.
모in order to compute vobs  we calculate dis   s 뫄 s: if  s1 s1  뫍 dis  then {s1 s1}   b  i.e. the set of possible current states  at some step of the execution of 뷇f and
action action s1 뷇f . this task is accomplished by the findstatepairs procedure  which is presented in figure 1.
모now let us introduce the findstatepairs procedure in detail:
  first  line 1   the set of possible current states  i.e. i  are divided into some divisions according to the actions specified by 뷇f. the partition is realized through
	.	formally  d
	 	 	 	iff	f .
  second  lines 1   if parts =    i.e. i   g   then an
1. function reduction dis v x 
// suppose v = {v1 ... vn}
1. for n 뫟 i 뫟 1 do di i  뫹 1;
1. for all  s1 s1  뫍 dis
	1.	for n 뫟 i 뫟 1
	1.	if  x s1 vi  = x s1 vi   then
1.;
	1.	fi;
1.	endfor; 1.	endfor;
	1.	v	뫹  
1.
1. let di i  = max{di k  | n 뫟 k 뫟 1};
1. vobs 뫹 vobs 뫋 {vi};
1. dis
1.
1. delete  s1 s1  from dis;
1. fi;
1.	endfor; 1.	di i  뫹 1; 1.	endwhile; 1.	return vobs; 1.	end

figure 1: reduction procedure.
empty set is returned by findstatepairs.
  third  lines 1   the elements of dis corresponding to the next belief state are computed by simulating the strong plan's execution for one step and an application of findstatepairs itself. the simulation of a plan is realized through the function execute. formally 
execute.
  finally  lines 1  if the actions specified by 뷇f for i are not consistent  i.e. |parts|   1   then any two states  e.g. s1 and s1  from different divisions of i should be distinguished from each other  i.e.  s1 s1  or  s1 s1  should be included in
 a1 q1  뫍 parts  s1 뫍 q1  and s1 뫍 q1.
모figure 1 shows the reduction procedure. given dis   s 뫄s  v  and x as input  the reduction procedure returns an approximate minimal set of observation variables vobs such that. it starts with vobs =   and iteratively adds some v 뫍 v into
vobs until d = dis  where d = { s1 s1  뫍 dis |  v 뫍
.
모the transform procedure is presented in figure 1. its role is to transform 뷇f  i.e. a strong plan to p  into a strong plan 뷇 to.
모now let us introduce the transform procedure in detail. at first  line 1   the belief state  i.e. i  is divided into some divisions according to the actions specified by 뷇f. the partition is realized through the function divide. and then:
1. if i   g  lines 1   then an empty plan 붼 is returned.
1. else if  lines 1   then if o then 붼 else
t is returned  where:

	1.	function t
	// suppose	=    
	1.	parts 뫹 divide i 뷇f ;
1.	if i   g then 1.	return 붼;
1. then
1. o 뫹makecode i 뫌 g i   g vobs x ;
1.;
1.
;
1. = 1
1. inext 뫹execute  q a ;
1. ;
1. return a   transform;
1.	else
1. select an element  a q  from parts;
1. o 뫹makecode q i   q vobs x ;
1. ;
1. return if o then transform
else transform;
1. fi;
1.	end

figure 1: transform procedure.
  o is an observation that can distinguish the states in i 뫌 g from the states in i   g.
.
o is computed by makecode i 뫌 g i   g vobs x . figure 1. shows the makecode subroutine. given
q1   s  q1   s  vobs  and x as input  the make-
code subroutine finds an approximate minimal set of observationvariablesvnow   vobs such that   s1 s1  뫍
  and re-
turns the observation of q1 built on vnow and x  i.e. code q1 vnow x  .
1. else if the actions specified by 뷇f for i are consistent  i.e. |parts| = 1  lines 1   then a   transform is returned  where:
  a is the action specified by 뷇f for all the possible current states.
 is the belief state at next
step  and it is computed by execute  q a .
1. else  lines 1   a q  is selected from parts  and if o then 뷇1 else 뷇1 is returned  where:
  o is an observation that can distinguish the states in q from the states in i   q  and it is computed by makecode q i   q vobs x .
  뷇1 =transform.
  뷇1 =transform.
모from definition 1  definition 1 and the algorithms presented above  we can get theorem 1 and theorem 1.
theorem	1	if	뷇f	is	a	strong	plan	to	p 	then
strong-fo-po p 뷇f v x  terminates.
	1.	function makecode q1 q1 vobs x 
1. dis 뫹  ;
1. for any s1 뫍 q1  s1 뫍 q1
1. dis 뫹 dis 뫋 { s1 s1 };
1. endfor;
1. vnow 뫹 reduction dis vobs x ;
1.	return code q1 vnow x ; 1.	end

figure 1: makecode subroutine.
모in fact  theorem 1 can be proved by showing that all the paths of the execution structure k induced by 뷇f from i are finite. according to definition 1  all the paths of k are finite  i.e. k is acyclic  because 뷇f is a strong plan to p.
theorem 1 let 뷇f be a strong plan to p. let qt be the set of terminal states of k  i.e. the execution structure induced by 뷇f from i . suppose 뷇 is the conditional plan returned by strong-fo-po p 뷇f v x . then:
  뷇 is a strong plan to
 finalstates s 뷇  = qt   g.
모in the following example  we illustrate the algorithms described in this section.
example 1 consider the situation depicted in example 1. we apply strong-fo-po to  p 뷇f v x .
firstly  dis is computed by findstatepairs p 뷇f   and it is { s1 s1   s1 s1 }; and then  vobs is computed by reduction dis v x   and it is {walls}; lastly  뷇 is returned by transform p 뷇f vobs x   where:
  뷇 = 뷇1 = goeast   뷇1  and
  뷇1 = if walls then  gowest   붼  else 뷇1  and
  뷇1 = gosouth   뷇1  and   뷇1 = if walls then  gowest   붼  else 뷇1  and
  뷇1 = gosouth   gowest   붼.
it is easy to find that 뷇 is a strong plan to
 finalstates s 뷇  = {s1}  i.e. the set of terminal states of the execution structure induced by 뷇f from i .
모in fact  the observation variables of v vobs are useless in the whole executions of 뷇 and 뷇f. so the sensors and the responders that correspond to these observation variables  i.e.
walln  wallw  walle  x1  x1  x1  y 1  y 1  and y 1  can be turned off before executing 뷇. furthermore  it is not necessary to observe all the values of observation variables of vobs at every step: for instance  뷇 requires the plan executor to execute goeast at first  regardless of the observation information about the current state.
1	conclusions
this paper presents an algorithm  i.e. strong-fo-po  for observation reduction of strong plans under full observability  which take the form of state-action tables. to the best of our knowledge  no other work has discussed and tackled this problem.
모given a planning problem  a strong plan 뷇f to p  a finite set of observation variables v  and an observation function x as input  the strong-fo-po algorithm finds vobs  i.e. an approximate minimal set of observation variables which are necessary for the execution of 뷇f  and transforms 뷇f into a conditional plan 뷇 branching on the observations built on vobs and x  such that:
  뷇 is a strong plan to
finalstates s 뷇  = qt   g  where qt is the set of terminal states of the execution structure induced by 뷇f from i.
the strong-fo-po algorithm always terminates.
모in the strong-fo-po algorithm  there are two levels of the meaning of observation reduction:
1. the observation variables which are useless in the wholeexecution of a plan 뷇f  are discarded as more as possible. that is to say  the algorithm computes vobs and discards the observation variables of v   vobs.
1. at every step of the execution of 뷇f  values of the observation variables that are useless in choosing the appropriate action  are discarded as more as possible. that is to say  the algorithm computes vnow  see figure 1  line 1  for every step of the execution of 뷇f  and discards the values of observation variables of vobs  vnow temporarily.
모in the future  we plan to extend this work along the following directions.
  we will investigate the problem under the situation that:
- observation variables may relate to different data types  symbolic  numeric  ordinal  etc.   and
- noisy observations or missing values may be allowed.
  considering the costs correspondingto observation variables may be different  we will investigate the problem of observation reduction for some plans  in which some preferences should be taken into account.
  we will investigate observation reduction for plans to other kinds of planning problems  in particular strong cyclic planning problems  cimatti et al.  1a; daniele et al.  1   and planing problems for temporally extended goals  pistore and traverso  1; lago et al.  1 .
