multiple antenna array signal collecting and processing 
b. boverie and wm. d   gregg 
department of electrical engineering and 
electronics research center* 
the university of texas at austin 
austin  texas 1 

summary 
　　　this paper analyzes an optimal data collection and processing system for detecting a random signal field in a random noise field employing multiple antennas. the statistical model consists of a gaussian random signal field and an independent gaussian noise field. the time optimal data processing system to be analyzed is specified in terms of array deployment and signal/noise space time correlation structure. an exact expression for the characteristic function of the test statistic computed by the space-time signal processor is derived under the assumptions of stationarity and a long observation time. analytical difficulties involved in evaluating and inverse transforming the characteristic function are considered through case studies. the test statistic is analytically shown to reduce to a gaussian random variable in the threshold case for the array situation. the dependence of receiver performance on the spacetime correlation structure of the signal and noise fields  the antenna deployment  and the optimal performance criteria  outage rate  pre-detection signal-to-noise ratio  etc.  is considered. optimal antenna deployment is considered  for the threshold case  in terms of several physically realistic signal and noise field space-time correlation structure models. 
introduction 
　　　the problem of detecting a random signal field in the presence of a random noise field has received various treatments in the literature. despite certain limited analytical treatment this is an important problem that occurs in many areas  such as fading on long range communication and radar links  sonar  radio astronomy  etc. the treatment addressed to this problem thus far consists almost exclusively of the derivation of the optimal receiver structure. the early work was done for the scalar  one antenna  case by price* who only considered white noise and middleton1 who considered colored noise. in these cases the derivations were performed 
*this research was supported in part by the joint services electronics program under grant afosr 1e. 
using sampling point analysis rather than the more rigorous and useful karhunen-loeve expansion1 approach employed herein. middleton1 
also considered system performance with results presented in sampling point notation. 
　　　an approach for enhancing detectability in this problem area is the employment of an antenna array. the antenna array collects spatial samples of the signal and noise fields. 
key issues are  1  optimal spatial coupling  antenna deployment    1  optimal time processing  receiver structure   and  1  the performance improvement resulting from use of antenna array collection. the time optimal processing issue for the general case of detecting a random signal in random noise with an array receiver has been resolved by middleton and groginsky1 and by vantrees.1 however  efforts toward determining exact receiver performance and optimal coupling have been less successful for both array and 
single antenna coupling. this paper analytically 
develops the relationships essential for an exact 
performance evaluation for the antenna array case. 
problem formulation 
statistical model 
　　　the incident signal coupled by the n elements of the antenna array is represented by a column vectorx t   and is assumed to contain a signal component and a noise component under the indicated hypothesis structure. 
		 1  
the restriction to the  on-off  case is made to render the mathematics less cumbersome  and its removal is a straightforward extension of the results contained herein. the amplitude time structure of the signal s. t  to be detected can be 
a narrow band  complex stochastic process y  t  which has been modulated with some deterministic and possibly complex narrow band function f t  1 if the carrier frequency is w   then 
		 1  
the orthogonal components of y. t  are assumed to be gaussian distributed and independent. this model can be used to represent situations such as multiplicative rayleigh fading with a uniformly 
-1-


-1-







optimal antenna dimensions 
     in order to maximize system performance it is necessary to simultaneously make pf as small and pd as large as possible. this is done by maximizing the difference between the arguments in  1   or equivalently  by maximizing the square of the difference which is 
negllcted  i.e.   if all the noise is assumed to be received through the antennas. singular detection occurs when the sn w  matrix becomes singular 1 and two such cases need to be distinguished. 
       in the first case y is maximized for zero antenna spacings  i.e.   when the antennas are  ideally  located at the same point. 1 	later in 

singular detection 
       at this point the phenomena of spatial singular detection can arise in the maximization of y. this phenomenon arises if receiver noise is 
this report it is shown that the sn matrix becomes singular for zero spacings so that y appears to become unbounded. 	the physical significance of 
this phenomenon is that for zero spacings the 
noises in the antennas are identical and the optimum receiver structure phases and sums the antenna voltages in such a way as to completely eliminate the noise. unfortunately the desired 
signals in the antennas are also identical and are also completely eliminated by the optimum receiver. 
       the second case involves plane wave noise yielding noises in the antennas as delayed versions of each other. thus it is theoretically 
possible to completely eliminate the external 
noise without eliminating the signal provided the signal is not received from the same direction as the noise. in this case the performance is theoretically the same for all non-zero antenna spacings. the plane wave noise is therefore not considered further in regard to optimal antenna spacing. 
       the zero spacings solution is invalid as is also evident from the fact that for singular detection the threshold assumption no longer holds since the inequality in equation  1  is reversed. if the threshold assumption does not hold  then equation  1  for y is invalid and it is no longer evident that the optimum procedure is to maximize y. 
       in order to obtain physically meaningful results it is necessary to avoid the spatially singular detection situation. this is done by including an additive receiver noise whose statistical properties are independent of the antenna spacings. the receiver noise need not be white but may reasonably be assumed uncorreleted. this is the approach taken by gaarder1 ' 1 in maximizing the antenna gain function and challenges the conclusion of martel and mathews who indicate that near zero spacings are optimal. 
problem simplification 
       the insertion of receiver noise increases the complexity of the integrand in  1 . even in the most simple cases the exact evaluation of y 
becomes so cumbersome as to render a direct 
-1-

approach practically useless. it is therefore deslrable to simplify the analytical task by finding some simpler expression which is maximal for the same antenna deployment that maximizes y. the 
cases under which this is possible will now be developed. 
　　　a considerable simplification results if maximizing the integrand is the same as maximizing the integral. the development which maximizes the integrand will be a function of w unless the integrand can be factored into the product of a function of only the deployment and a function of frequency alone. with physically realistic antenna cross correlation spectra such a factorization is not possible. thus the two maximizations coincide only if the optimal deployment for the integral equals that for the integrand evaluated at a particular frequency; w   perhaps the carrier frequency. this in turn occurs only when the integrand contains  as a factor  1 w- w 1 . if the signal covarlance matrix contains a common spectral term  s  w =s  w  p  w    then 
	s 	s 

it would be much simpler to maximize 	♀  { 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　1 l instead  but the two maximizations do not in general coincide. there are two obvious cases in which the maximizations do coincide  these being  1  when all the x's are equal and  1  when all the x's except one are zero. 
if all the x's are equal  then  assuming a 
is normal  a is similar to a scalar multiple of the identity matrix and hence is itself a scalar multiple of the identity matrix. this in turn would require sn to be a scalar function of ps   which is not possible here because of the assumed additive receiver noise. thus the case in which the x's are all equal is physically unrealistic. 
　　　if all but one of the x's are zero  then a must have rank 1 and hence ps must have rank 1. 

is sometimes called the array gain function since it represents the snr gain effected by the antenna array. 	the maximization of the antenna gain function by gaarder1 is valid only for narrow band plane wave signals  requiring that s1 w  approximate a delta function . 
　　　the integrand can also be simplified by further selection of the sn and p matrices. that 
	~n 	-s 
this is the case might be suspected because these matrices have the often convenient properties of being hermltlan and positive definite. the product snts is hermltlan only if s!  and ps commute. s  and p  will commute if and only if they have the same eigenvectors  or equlvalently if sn is a scalar function of ♀ s   or vice versa. 
 note that these statements are true only because s n and ps are hermltlan.  for the physically realizable cross covarlance spectra considered in this report  the restriction that s.n be a scalar function of ps requires that the additive receiver noise be uncorrelated and that the external noise and signal sources be of the same type. case study 
　　　at this point it is desirable to investigate  1  specific functional forms for the signal and noise statistics and  1  the plane wave signal case without the benefit of the threshold assumption. these will be considered as the case studies. 
physically relevant space-time correlation and 
power spectra models 
　　　if physically meaningful conclusions are to be obtained  physically realistic space-time covarlance functions must be employed. the system designer must first model the physical noise field environment and then use the model to obtains;  w  and hence ♀n w . the procedures involved  and some representative results will now be considered. 
-1-　　　a treatment of this aspect has been given by chlldersl1ln terms of a vector antenna height function h a ;1 cp  of the antennas used  which is useful when the coupling elements are dlpoles. the voltage coupled in by an antenna is the dot 
                hence is singular for z = 1  illustrating the singular detection phenomenon. 
       it is readily apparent that various possible functional forms for sn1 exist. unfortunately except for a few special cases the resulting analytical forms of s n . 1   d  in terms of field  environment  and coupling element variables  are usually very complex and lead to unwieldy mathematical complications. however  a number of special cases have been developed in the l i t e r a t u r e 1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 1 which result in reasonably simple analytical forms for sn1w  . four such physical cases are now considered. 
the assumption that the noise is homogeneous  sna is independent of r  is common to all these cases and will not be separately stated for each case. 
       the first case is one considered by chllders and reed1 in which dlpole antennas and isotropic 
 s n 	is independent of 1 and cp   unpolarized 
s s	 = s	=s	 a n d 	s	=	=
	ne1	ncpcp	n	n 1	s n 1 ＜  noise are 
assumed. 	the resulting expression for skno w   is 
　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　n1 then 
s	 = 	s	s l n 1	 	s i n 1	 	c o s   n1 w 	n a  	i	1	  1  
this is the case most frequently found in the l i t e r a t u r e . 1 ' 1 ' 1 ' 1 the isotropic assumption is equivalent to the assumption that the random incident field is the result of a large number of independent random sources uniformly disturbed in a sphere centered around the antennas  see figure 1 . such a situation is encountered whenever the antennas are enclosed in a large volume of random scattering elements  any elements whose size approaches operating wavelengths  and where there are no nearby  in terms of wavelengths  boundary s u r f a c e s . 1 ' 1 
       the third case is also frequently found in the l i t e r a t u r e 1 / 1 / 1 and involves non-isotropic noise such as obtained when the noise is generated by a large number of independent noise sources uniformly distributed on a large circular area of any plane passed through the array volume  see figure 1 . such a situation is encountered when the random field is due to scattering from a  distant  plane s u r f a c e . 1 ' 1 1the cross antenna  power spectrum then has the form 

 note that the summations are a result of the multiple antennas and have nothing 
is obtained. the 1 db lobewldth of the noise field is determined by b and is 
- al i n 1  :
	1 db lobewldth = 1 sin	  -	  . 	 1  to do with the karhunen-loeve expansion approach used earlier in the report.  the evaluation of  1  is greatly simplified if the additive noise is assumed to be white and uncorrelated from antenna to antenna  so that this spectrum agrees well with available experimental data for point sources in multlpath environment.  for example see the data given by kurlchara. 1   
       the limiting case of  1  in which b becomes unbounded corresponds to the plane wave noise field in which the noise comes from one particular angle. in this case the noises in the different antennas are identical  spatial coherence  except possibly for a delay. also  unless the signal field is of an identical space-time correlation nature  the noise can be completely eliminated by properly phasing  weighting and combining 
the signals  leaving only the system noise 
introduced in the receiver front end. 	however if the signal field is exactly of this space-time 
form  no advantage can be obtained from space diversity since the spatial filtering of both signal and noise is identical. 
plane wave  point to point spatially coherent  signal case 
       the trace operation in finding h  w u  can be performed exactly without the threshold assumption in the special case in which the signal in the various antennas is the same 


r = 1k /n being a measure of the slgnai-to-nolse ratio  s n r ＜ln this case. neither of these characteristic functions can be inverse transformed in closed form. it is observed that the effect of the multiple antennas  in this case  is to increase the snr by a factor of n. this is a direct consequence of the assumptions of uncorrelated noise from antenna to antenna and plane wave  spatially coherent  signal. 
       other assumptions which allow an exact evaluation of the trace in  1  are possible but usually lead to characteristic functions which cannot be inverse transformed in closed form. numerical inversion can be used in these cases but the results are necessarily valid only for the specific case postulated and cannot be conveniently extrapolated to other cases or used to form broad  quantatlve conclusions. the exact performance analysis approach was therefore discontinued by the authors in favor of the more productive threshold case assumption  which allows simpler interpretations of steps to take in enhancing detectablllty by specific antenna deployment. 
critique 
       the contribution of this paper consists of  1  an analytical development of the exact characteristic functions for the test statistic computed 
by a time optimum data processing system employing multiple antennas for a random signal and noise field in terms of the space-time structure of the signal and noise fields and the antenna array configuration   1  a simple  concise analytical demonstration that  in the threshold case the test statistic distributions for the array case become asymptotically gaussian  and  1  analytical treatment in terms of physically realistic space-time correlation models of signal and noise field structures. the assumptions include gaussian noise  statlonarlty  and  long  observation times. 
       unfortunately the characteristic function form derived herein cannot be inverse transformed in closed form in the general case. numerical solutions may be of value in specific instances but cannot be expected to provide broad quantitative information. thus the only route leading to quantitative results appears to be the threshold case for which closed form inversion is possible. 
       in the threshold case the test statistic is gaussian distributed and hence its p.d.f. is uniquely determined by its first two moments. even in non-threshold situations the accuracy to which the signal and noise fields can be statistically characterized may preclude a more accurate representation of the test statistic p.d.f. thus the threshold assumption will probably yield 
results which are as meaningful as can be obtained even in non-threshold situations unless an unusually accurate statistical formulation is possible. 
       it is of interest to note the general effects of the array upon reception capability for specific classes of random noise fields and fading signal fields in terms of their space-time correlation structure and array deployment. 	these aspects are currently being pursued through a detailed investigation of a number of special situations 
by the authors and will be presented in a later report. a thorough discussion of anticipated results is at this time premature but a number of speculations can be projected: 
        1  performance capacity can increase with the number of antennas  n  but the extent of any improvement  as well as incremental gain  is greatly dependent upon the space-time correlation of the signal and noise fields and the antenna geometry employed. 
        1  deploying antennas so as to increase the noise cross-correlation between antennas increases the performance capability  assuming that the deployment does not render a similar effect upon signal cross-correlation between antennas. for example  for fully correlated  spatially coherent  noise between antennas  the interesting case of singular detection is obtained in which theoretically the noise can be completely 

eliminated if that noise is the only source of interference and the antenna's front end can be ignored. 
        1  the effect of signal cross-correlation between antennas  correlated fading  is such that increasing this correlation  by appropriate antenna deployment  will increase the combined signal to noise level  but will also increase the  outage rate  due to spatially correlated fading. thus deploying antennas to increase signal cross-correlation under these conditions increases performance capacity if snr gain is the criteria and decreases performance capacity if signal loss or outage rate is the criteria. 
　　　it should be emphasized that physically realistic space time correlation models are used in the preceding analysis. the set of crosspower spectra cited in .his paper should realistically model a number of situations of engineering interest. 
