properties and organizing capability of statistical organizer 
shoichi noguchi and juro oizumi 
research institute of electrical communication 
tohoku univ.  sendai japan 

summary 
this paper presents some fundamental properties of a statistical organizer that are considered f r o m the view point of system organization and organizing capability. the system performance is evaluated by means of the concept of the information processing capacity under the assumption that the pattern is distributed according to the multivariate normal distribution. 
in the two-category problem   the typical statistical organizer  the bayes organizer and the r e gression organizer show the same organizing capability in the first-stage approximation and the information processing capacity becomes 1 for each case. 
the organizing capability of the organizer depends upon the information which is uthzed for the 
system organization. 
the relationships among them are analyzed theoretically  and if the system is organized by the combination of subcovarlance matrices of rank 
n  1 = l s   obtained by the samples  the information processing capacity is reduced to max   n 1 / n     i - l s   . 
the relation of the organizing capability between the linear organizer and the nonlinear organizer is obtained theoretically for some cases. the same considerations are also applied to the typical r category organizers and the information processing capacity becomes r if r times weighting elements arc adopted. 	several kinds of the computer simulations are obtained to check the theoretical results. 	these results coincide well with the theoretical ones. 
introduction 
in the self-organizing system  there are two typical organizers: the non-statistical and statistical. the non-statistical organizer is r e presented by perceptron type procedure. the properties of this organizer  such as the capability of the information processing and the concrete method for the organization are reported in several papers. although this system shows high capability in information processing  it has some disadvantages as follows: 
 a  if the input patterns are not linearly separable  the organizing procedure does not converge and 
to check the linear separability  numerous trials are sometimes required. 
 b  even though the patterns are linearly separable  numerous trials and large memories are also sometimes required. 
in contrast to the disadvantages of non-statistical method  the statistical method has many merits from the practical point of view. these merits are summarized as follows: the system can be organized in an optimal way even when the input patterns are not linearly separable   b  the organization of the system can 
be made quickly by the analogue technique. several kinds of the statistical organizers have been developed. 
however  the capability of the organizer to process information should be further investigated. f r o m this standpoint  we took the theoretical evaluation of the statistical organizer into consideration. we introduced some new concepts of 
the information processing capacity and the percent information processing capacity  as in the case of the nonstatistical organizers. the organizing capability of each organizer is evaluated by these concepts. 
the problems which are taken into considerations are  1  the organizing capability of the typical organizers   1  the relation between the organizing capability and the information which is utlized for the system organization   1  the relation of the organizing capability between the linear organizer and the nonlinear one  and  1  the properties of multi-category organizer. 
1. the properties of the typical statistical organizers!*  
in this section  two typical organizers  the bayesian organizer and the regression organizer are taken into consideration in order to make clear the general behaviors of the statistical organizer. 	our basic assumptions are as follows:  a  the patterns are classified into two categories  i and ii. 
 b  both categories have a member of-jf- sample patterns  respectively   we can also extend our analysis with slight modification to the various cases of different sample patterns in each category.   
 c  each pattern is represented by an n dimen-

-1-















 1  t. w. anderson and r. p. bahadur 
 classification into two multivariate normal distributions with different covariance 
	matrices  ann. of math. stat. 	vol. 1. 1 
 1  m. sato  	s. noguchi and j. oizumi 
 classification capability of statistical linear 
	recognition function  i   	the record of 
electrical and communication engineering 
conversazione  tohoku univ.   sendai  japan 
vol. 1  no. 1  1 
-1-





