a statistical study of visual resolution thresholds 
by 
b. l. h i l l s   r. l. beurle & m. v. daniels  
department of electrical and electronic engineering  university of nottingham  england. 

summary 
　　　measurements of threshold contrast required for various resolution tasks at various background light levels are reported. the predictions of a simple s t a t i s t i c a l model based on 
photon-noise limited detection are compared with the empirical observations. correspondence is encouraging provided care is taken to account for the variation of a l l important parameters such as spatial and temporal integration  pupil area  etc. 
introduction 
　　　since the early work of konig in 1  it has been known that visual acuity  i.e. the a b i l i t y to discriminate fine detail in an object  progressively deteriorates as the level of i l l u m i -
nation f a l l s . 	shlaer1 has shown that this f a l l 
in visual acuity is dependent on the type of acuity pattern used. thus at background luminances above 1 trolands  the gap in a 'landolt c' pattern is easier to see than bars of a similar width in a parallel bar resolution 
pattern. at lower luminances  the reverse is true. the ultimate l i m i t of acuity under optimum viewing conditions depends c r i t i c a l l y on the nature of the task. for vernier acuity  a displacement of 1 seconds of arc between the top and bottom halves of a thin vertical black line has been detected. for the landolt 'c' and the parallel bar pattern  gaps and bar widths of the order of 1' are the best that have been resolved. 
　　　it is generally agreed that the f a l l in visual acuity at low levels of illumination is connected with the changeover from using the small cone summation areas of the fovea at high adaptation levels  to using the larger rod summation areas of the periphery at low levels. also  these summation areas are known to increase in size with decrease in the background level  to 
which the eye is adapted. 	this w i l l also reduce acuity. 
　　　this account is concerned with the recogn i t i o n of simple patterns of varying contrast at relatively low light levels and is an extension of work on detection previously described by the authors 1 . the empirical observations of detection threshold described in this reference have 
been compared with the predictions of a simple s t a t i s t i c a l model for a photon-noise limited detector. this work  which is to be published elsewhere  showed an encouraging correspondence  and the present paper describes the application of the same technique to resolution thresholds. 
the ideal detector 
     the original idea of comparing the actual performance of the human visual system with an 'ideal detector' is due to rose1  although similar theories were developed independently by de vries and also pirenne. an ideal detector  or ideal picture pickup device  is one whose 
performance is limited only by the statistical fluctuations in the number of incident photons picked up by the device. presented with the task of detecting a pattern distinguished by a small luminance  ai  superimposed on a uniform background of luminance i  this detector can do no better than count the photons arriving within the area where the pattern is anticipated  and compare this with the mean density of arrival of photons in the background i. background photons are considered indistinguishable from target photons  and all these incident photons are given equal weight in the output of the device  i.e.  it is linear   so that every effectively absorbed quantum is taken into account in the final decision. 
     in adapting this concept  the ideal detector has been assumed to be subject to certain limitation analogous to those of the eye. for example  it is taken to have the ability to integrate temporally for a period which is assumed to vary as empirical observation suggests it does for the eye. then again it is assumed that there is spatial integration over an area the extent of which depends on the background light level. some assumptions must be made about the method of determining i. for example  it may be assumed that the background can be sampled on a sufficient number of occasions or over a sufficient area by the ideal detector for the background luminance i to be known precisely. alternatively  it may be assumed that the measurement of i is subject to error in the same way as the measurement of 
     now  it is generally accepted that the numbers of absorbed quanta fluctuate according to a poisson distribution  the deviations from an average absorption of ft quanta thus having a root mean square value of n＜   thus if i quanta are absorbed from the background  it is these fluctuations that interfere with the detection of a small change ai in illumination. if this small change in illumination  or 'signal'  yields an absorbed quanta then  for a given reliability  the threshold of detection is given by 

-1-where k is a constant called the threshold signalto-noise r a t i o   i t s exact value depending on the required degree of certainty in detection. equation  1  is the basic equation of the fluctuation theory of rose. it i s   however  an approximation  for it ignores the fluctuations in the signal. thus  a more rigorous form of the 
equation is 

for a l l except the lowest background levels  this equation approximates to  1   since an    n  but at very low background levels when this condition does not apply  equation  1  must be used. 
　　　in the experiments on detection  it was shown desirable to assume that in what has been called a primary recipient unit 1 the sensitivity varies radially over the effective summation area over 
which spatial integration takes place  a fact which has been recognised in the l i t e r a t u r e 1   1 . the assumed variation is shown in figure 1   1   1 this curve representing a radial variation of the form 

where rm is a function of the background luminance  
as shown in figure 1. the adoption of this expression has been j u s t i f i e d merely for convenience in calculation. it gives a good f i t to the range of empirical results which it represents  
but there is no reason to think that it has any biological significance. the summation time t and pupil area  ap  were assumed to vary with background luminance in accordance with the curve shown in figure 1 and the data given in table i. 
　　　with this knowledge of the spatial and temporal summation characteristics of the retina  it now becomes possible to calculate the number of photons an in a single sample taken by the eye from a pattern illuminated by ai. the mean number of quanta n from the background i may similarly be calculated. substitution of these in equation  1  now gives an equation for ai in terms of background luminance i. as a rough approximation this is of the form 

but the precise relationship is appreciably affected by the variation with light level of rm  t and a p . since the technique of calculation is summarised in more detail in a companion paper1  it is not proposed to elaborate further on the 
details here. 
　　　it was found that for large objects at higher light levels the primary recipient detector was inadequate to explain the results  and it was essential also to assume the existence of elongated linear  edge  detectors 1 . the evidence suggested that these had a transverse variation of sensitivity similar to the variation across the diameter of the units already referred to. this could be the result of combining the output of a linear array of primary summation units. there 
was also evidence for a drop off in sensitivity towards the ends of these long summation areas and a law similar to equation  1  was assumed  replacing rm with a length constant 1  which was also found to be a similar function of background level. 	values assumed for a l l these parameters are given in table i which also gives ap the area of the natural pupil assumed in these calculations. 
　　　since the detailed results of these experiments are to be published elsewhere  it w i l l suffice here merely to say that for the patterns tested  discs  annuli and parallel bars  the correspondence between empirical thresholds and predicted thresholds was encouraging  discrepancies being typically less than 1 in logarithmic units to the base 1. 
resolution measurements 
　　　the experiments reported here were designed to compare the threshold contrast for resolution at various light levels of the following pattern shapes: 
r a r a l l e l bars the  foucault fan  pattern 
the double disc pattern 
the 'landolt c' 
a square equal to the gap in the 'landolt c' a vernier acuity pattern 
the shapes of these patterns are shown in figure 1. three different sizes of each pattern were used  and the object was to see whether the variations between resolution thresholds for different patterns could to any extent be accounted for by the application of the photon noise theory outlined above. 
　　　in these experiments the subjects were given adequate time to adapt to an evenly illuminated background  and the resolution pattern was superimposed on t h i s   the colour temperatures being 
 respectively. 	the resolution 
thresholds were determined by the subject  who had control of the illumination of the pattern. he 
was asked to straddle the point at which the 
resolution feature of the pattern was just visible. it is thus possible to make a distinction between the  detection  threshold at which it is possible to see the pattern as a whole  and the recognition threshold at which is is possible to see the resolution feature  e.g. the bars in the parallel bar resolution pattern. with the exception of the square a l l the patterns have such a feature  e.g. the gap in the  landolt c   the existence of two separate discs and the discontinuity in the v e r t i cal l i n e . the square was included for comparison 
with the landolt c where the task might be described as  seeing  the  missing square  where the gap is present. 
the results 
-1-　　　the averaged increment thresholds for the three subjects are given in table i i . for simplicity  the thresholds for the patterns w i l l 
be compared two at a time. 
　　　one simplifying feature of the results is that the corresponding bar and fan patterns  as defined in figure a  have v i r t u a l l y identical increment thresholds. this is true for a l l three sizes and a l l background luminances. this is because the pointers indicating where ' z ! is 
measured are centrally placed on the fan pattern. it has been found that if the pointers are used too near the top  the increment threshold for the fan is higher than for the bars. thus  with the proviso that the pointers are used in the central region  the comparisons of performance that w i l l 
be made with the parallel bar pattern would be the same if the comparisons had been made with the fan pattern. 
　　　in figure 1  the f i r s t comparison is made between the increment thresholds for resolution of the landolt 'c' and the parallel bar patterns. it is f i r s t noted that the increment thresholds for the bar patterns are considerably lower than the equivalent landolt 'c' as defined in terms of z in figure 1. there are major differences between the thresholds for these two patterns. for the large and medium sizes of both patterns  the increment threshold progressively decreases as the background level is lowered  but for the small patterns  the increment threshold is constant for background luminances of 1 ml and 
below. 
　　　it w i l l be seen that vertical displacement of the curves for the bar pattern by 1 log units gives reasonably close f i t s to the curves for the landolt c. 	this is true to some extent for a l l the patterns  excluding the squares  and might suggest that once some allowance has been made for the overall inefficiency factor of each pattern  they would a l l give much the same results. 	this i s   however  believed to be an oversimplification  and indeed is only a rough approxi-
mation. compared directly  there is l i t t l e similarity between the results. for example  the large landolt c and the small bar pattern require the same contrast threshold for resolution at a background level of -1 log ml. below this adaptation level  the threshold of the large landolt c becomes progressively lower relative to that of the small bar pattern  while above this level  the reverse is true. also for the 
highest background level  a contrast can be found for which a l l the bar patterns but none of the landolt c's can be resolved  whereas at the lowest background luminances a contrast level which just allows a l l the bars patterns to be resolved  only leaves the small landolt c unresolved. this again shows that the bar pattern becomes more visible in relation to this 'white' landolt c if the background level is raised  at least for the range of background luminances used here. it w i l l be suggested later that this is because the landolt c is resolved using primary recipient units  while the bar pattern is resolved by line/edge detectors. 
　　　in figure 1  the increment thresholds for the resolution of the 'double disc' and bar patterns are compared. the comparison shows some features similar to that between the landolt c's and parallel bars. the double disc in general has a higher threshold  and the threshold increases relative to the bar pattern as the background level is raised. at the lowest background levels the thresholds for the double disc are much closer to the thresholds of the parallel bars than to those of the landolt c. thus  if we attribute the behaviour of the double disc to primary recipient units and that of the bar patterns to line/edge detectors  we must also explain the difference between landolt c and double disc. 
　　　the increment thresholds for the resolution of the landolt c and the detection of the squares are compared in figure 1. for background luminances of 1 ml and above  the two sets of curves follow each other very closely. this suggests that in this region  resolution of the gap in these white landolt c's is determined by the detectability of a square decrement of light 
equal in area to the gap  viewed against a similar background. 	this presupposes that increment and decrement thresholds for detection of a square are very similar. 	below 1 ml  the increment 
thresholds for the squares f a l l progressively 
below those of the landolt c. the curves for the squares are the steepest of a l l the patterns at the very low background levels. 
　　　in figure 1  the increment thresholds for the resolution of the broken line are compared with those for the detection of the square. for 
background luminances above lo- 1 ml  the curves are sufficiently close to suggest that the resolution of the broken line under these conditions is limited by the detectability of a square patch of l i g h t of side equal to the d i s placement between the top and bottom halves of the l i n e . an interesting experiment might therefore be to compare the l i m i t of vernier acuity as it is normally determined with the size of the smallest detectable black square  for a wide range of background luminances. 
　　　for background luminances above 1  1 ml  it w i l l be seen from table ii that the increment thresholds for resolution of the medium double disc pattern and detection of the large square are very close. the same is true for the small double disc and medium sized square at background luminances above 1 ml. 
　　　during the experiment  the subjects were asked whether they could s t i l l detect the presence of a pattern when i t s increment in luminance had been lowered so that it could no longer be resolved. their verbal reports i n d i cate that at high background levels  they could at best only detect the patterns very f a i n t l y in this non-resolving condition. particularly with the large and medium sizes of pattern  resolution came with detection. at the very low background luminances  most of the large patterns were s t i l l only f a i n t l y detectable  but the large landolt c was bright enough to be readily detectable. 

-1-

the medium sizes of pattern were a l l readily detectable  and the small sizes were very bright indeed compared with the background  and yet not resolved. 
extension of the detection 
model to resolution 
　　　thus far  the results have only been discussed in qualitative terms. in this section  a more quantitative approach is taken by extending the model of detection referred to earlier  to cover the calculation of resolution thresholds. theoretical curves of increment threshold for resolution  ai r   against background luminance  i  are derived for the parallel bars  landolt c and 'discs' patterns  and the effect of different assumptions is examined. 
　　　for detection of an increment in luminance a i   on a background luminance i the response of a detector optimally positioned with respect to the stimulus so as to sample 1+ai  was compared with the response of a detector sampling the background  i  alone. it was argued that the difference between the means of these two responses was the 'signal 1   and that this signal must exceed the combined fluctuations in these two responses by a constant ratio in order for the signal to be detected. 
　　　for resolution  it is proposed that the responses to be compared should be from two identical detectors  x and y  which are centred over different regions of the resolution pattern. for the p a r a l l e l bar pattern  one is centred over a bar  and the other is centred over an adjacent space between the bars. for the landolt c  one is centred over the gap  and the other over a segment of the ring. in the case of the double disc pattern  one is centred on one of the discs  the other over or near the gap between the two discs. again  the difference between the mean responses of the two detectors is taken as the 'signal' and it is argued that this must exceed the combined fluctuations of the two responses by a constant ratio in order for the pattern to be resolved. 
predicted resolution of parallel bar pattern 
　　　for reasons discussed in the last section  the resolution of the bars in the parallel bar 
patterns w i l l be assumed to be performed by line detectors. figure 1 a  represents a line detector  x  centred on a bar and a line detector  y  centred on an adjacent space between bar1. the response of each detector to each point of the bar pattern is proportional to the product of the light intensity and the sensitivity of the detector at that point. thus the effective areas  o'e x  and o'e y  of the bar 
pattern in causing a response in the detectors x and y respectively  may be found by integration. the 'signal' now becomes 

where c is a constant embodying geometrical factors and the number of quanta per unit of l i g h t . the integrated background which contributes to noise becomes 

where id representing an  eigengrau  is unimportant except near absolute threshold. thus from equation  1   by putting ck - k' 

at a l l but the lowest background luminances  the terms in id and ai r on the right hand side of this equation are negligible. 
　　　the values of rm  lm  t and ap were f i r s t a l l considered to be set by the background luminance alone. the theoretical curves thus derived are compared with the empirical data in figure 1. the values of k' and id used were -1 and 1~1 ml respectively. it w i l l be seen that the theoretical curves f i t the empirical points well for the whole range of backgrounds. however  this good f i t is thought to be misleading for reasons explained later. 
　　　in the section 'results'  it was noted that at low background luminances  the small bar pattern had to be very bright compared with the surrounding background  for it to be resolved. therefore  in figure 1  the theoretically f i t t e d curves have been calculated assuming rm  lm  t and ap are set by  i+al/1   the mean luminance 
within the bar pattern. the f i t for the medium and large patterns is hardly affected  but for the small pattern at low background luminances  the theoretical prediction is s l i g h t l y optimistic. 
　　　in table i i i   the absolute threshold values calculated from equation  1  assuming rm  l   t and  xp are set by ai/1 are compared with the 
measured values. again  the f i t is good for the large and medium patterns  and the prediction a l i t t l e optimistic for the small bar pattern at low background luminances. this w i l l be referred to later. 
resolution of the landolt c pattern 
　　　for reasons discussed in the last section  we shall take it that the position of the gap in the landolt c is discovered by l i g h t integrated in primary recipient units with radial symmetry as in equation  1 . figure 1 b  indicates the positions of the centres of the two units whose responses are compared in order to resolve the pattern. unit y was centred over the gap of the c. in the f i r s t case  unit x was considered to be diagonally opposite y  since this would give the maximum difference in response. the effective areas ae x  and ae y  of the pattern 

causing responses in the units x and y respectively were calculated by numerical integration. 
　　　by adapting equation  1   the increment threshold for resolution  
at a l l but the lowest background levels  the terms in id and air on the right hand side of the equation are again negligible. 
　　figure 1 compares the empirical data with the theoretical curves assuming that r     	t and oip are functions of i alone or of the values of k and ip used were -1 log units and .    	ml respectively. 	for both sets of assumptions  the theory predicts thresholds considerably lower than were in fact measured. 
　　　it was therefore a r b i t r a r i l y decided to derive the theoretical curves assuming that the comparison u n i t   x  was located only one gap's 
width away from the unit  y  on the landolt c ring  see figure 1 b  . in figure 1  the resulting theoretical curves are compared with the experimental data. the same values of k and id were used. rm  lm  t and a were considered functions of i only. the f i t is s t i l l not good  
but is considerably better than that found when the unit x is diagonally opposite y. the truth probably lies somewhere between  and it may be possible to improve this theory of the resolution 
threshold of the landolt c by more refined 
positioning of the unit x. the unit should perhaps be positioned a fixed distance from y rather than a distance related to the gap width. 
resolution of double pise pattern 
　　　resolution is again assumed to be performed by primary recipient units. figure 1 c  represents the two cases considered. in both conditions  unit x was located at the centre of a disc   see figure 1 . unit y was located  i  at the centre of the gap between the two discs  or   i i   at a distance of 1 times the disc radius from the centres of both discs. the effective areas ae x  and ae y  of the discs in causing a response in the units x and y respectively  were calculated by numerical integration. theoretical increment thresholds for resolution were calculated for case  i  and case   i i   by 
substitution in equation  1 . 
　　　case   i i   provides the larger signal difference between the x and y units and thus predicts the higher sensitivity. in figure 1  the case   i i   predictions are compared with the empirical data for a value of k of -1 log units. the f i t is reasonable at background luminances below 1 ml  but above this adaptation level  the experimentally determined increment thresholds are lower than those predicted. it is possible that part of the discrepancy at high background luminances may be due to edge detection superseding area detection. however  if k had been taken as 1  as in figures 1  1 and 1  the agreement would have been close at high light levels  but the predicted thresholds would have been 1 log units too low at low l i g h t levels. a possible reason for this w i l l be discussed later. 
　　　the theoretical values derived for case  i  with the unit y positioned centrally between the two discs have not been plotted because the results showed no improvement. 
detection of squares 
　　　increment thresholds for the area detection of squares were calculated using equation  1   simplifying integration by assuming that a square is as detectable as an equal area disc for this type of detection. it can be shown numerically that the error in the calculated increment threshold in making this assumption is less than 1%. the theoretical increment thresholds thus derived are compared with those obtained experimentally in figure 1. the values of k and in used were -1 log units and 1  1 respectively. the former was chosen to give the best approximation at low light levels and for background 
luminances below 1 ml the predicted values are in good agreement with the empirical measurements  but above this background level we find that the predicted thresholds are about 1 log units higher than those measured. to test whether or not this discrepancy is due to edge detection predominating at these light levels  theoretical edge detection curves were derived using equation  1   with the value of k' made equal to that of k used in the case of area detection. the theoretical area detection. the theoretical area and edge detection curves for the squares are shown in figure 1. it w i l l be seen that edge detection only supersedes area detection for the large square at the highest background luminance. thus  the simple edge detection so far developed cannot explain the discrepancies at high background luminances. summation of the four border effects is a possible factor. 
　　　a feature of the theoretical curve f i t t i n g to the data of this experiment is that the value of k which has been chosen for the squares  -1 log units  is considerably lower than the value of k' used for the resolution of the bar pattern  -1 log units . indeed  if the value k = -1 log units had been taken  the f i t would have been good at high levels of background luminance  at the expense of the f i t at the lowest light level  which would then be optimistic by 1 log units. 
general comments 
　　　we have seen that depending on the choice of k  it is possible to f i t theoretical curves either at the upper end or at the lower end of the background luminance range covered in these experiments. 

1-

if k is chosen for a good f i t at the lower end  the theory is a l i t t l e pessimistic at the upper end. if k is taken as -1 log units for the best compromise at the upper end  the theory is s l i g h t l y optimistic at the lower end. 
　　　the discrepancy of up to 1 log units is in fact a very small one  considering that we are concerned with a range of five orders of background luminance  but it i s   nevertheless  of interest to consider possible reasons for i t . there is f i r s t l y the possibility that the inherent sensitivity or photon detecting efficiency changes with l i g h t levels. there is in fact a change from the use of rods at the lower end of the range used in these experiments  to the predominant use of cones at the upper end. this could readily alter the balance between the receptor sensitivity at the lower and upper ends of the range  by the small amount in question. 
　　　secondly  there is some evidence that the inverse cubic law adopted for convenience in describing the distribution of sensitivity across a primary recipient unit may be unduly sharp in the centre. moreover  the use of the same law to describe the transverse variation of sensitivity across each component of a boundary detector may also be unjustified  because almost any means by which the outputs from primary recipient units were combined to form linear detectors would introduce at least some rounding of the peak. 
　　　the data which originally j u s t i f i e d the use of the inverse cubic law is not very sensitive to the sharpness of the central peak  but resolution threshold data  such as that for parallel bars  is very sensitive to the peak when the width of the bar is small compared with rm. this could account for the discrepancy between the predicted and observed thresholds for the small parallel bar patterns at low l i g h t levels in figure 1. the modification to the peak of the inverse cubic curve necessary to allow for this is indicated by the dotted curve in figure 1. some comparisons have also been made with published data on contrast sensitivity functions 1 which support the idea of a slightly more rounded peak than the pure inverse cubic curve employed  and the question is being investigated further. at high l i g h t levels the rounding may be partly due to the influence of the optical system of the eye 1 . 
　　　thirdly  there is the question of boundary detection taking over from the radially symmetrical primary recipient units. this has 
been considered earlier in relation to the square pattern  but there is some uncertainty regarding 
the relative sensitivity of the two processes and this can influence the balance between recognition thresholds at the two ends of the scale. 
discussion 
　　　the outstanding fact about the results reported here is that  within the limits of the slight discrepancies which have just been discussed  it is possible to work on the assumption of such a uniform sensitivity of photon detection. thus  once one has recognised the limitations of temporal and spatial summation in the retina  the efficiency of u t i l i s a t i o n of the information in the incoming photon flux 
appears to be very nearly uniform over a very wide range of light levels. considering the variety of visual tasks included in these experiments the uniformity of behaviour is surprising. thus the theory gives some insight into the reasons for the 
characteristic differences in observed thresholds between the different forms of resolution test pattern. 
　　　the theory and i t s application to the experimental data is aimed at discovering how e f f i c i e n t l y the eye uses the light in the retinal image. it has not primarily been concerned with the detailed nature of the mechanism by which the eye performs the operation. thus  there is no attempt to identify the cause of the variation of rm  lm  etc. as a function of light level. nor 
has there been any attempt to explain what neural mechanism would provide such uniform efficiency of extraction of information from the incoming l i g h t . this is an interesting f i e l d for conjecture  but there are many alternative possib i l i t i e s to choose from  and a proper discussion of these must await a later occasion. 
　　　it is encouraging to find in the need to invoke line/edge or 'boundary' detectors some 
measure of correspondence with recent physiological findings 1 . 	for the present  whatever 
may be the biological significance of the summa-
tion areas and edge detectors  their practical significance as parameters determining the performance of the eye is a real one. they indicate clearly the nature of the limitations under which the eye operates when detecting patterns under conditions of poor v i s i b i l i t y . moreover  the concept of a photon noise limited threshold is supported by further experiments reported separately 1 in which a r t i f i c i a l noise  deliberately introduced into retinal images  appears to have an analogous effect on detection. 
　　　the work reported here has been on relatively simple patterns and  perhaps in consequence  f a i r l y simple detecting mechanisms have come to l i g h t . the situation may well be complicated when one considers more complex patterns  especially if these are seen against an inhomogenious background. it may well be that there exist more specialised detectors for 
particular patterns or features of patterns. indeed  recent physiological evidence suggests there may be  but their existence cannot be deduced from these experiments. then again  both types of detector discussed here are taken to represent the mean performance averaged over a l l the detectors which take part in the recog-
n i t i o n of different patterns on different occasions. it i s   however  clear from physio-
logical evidence that there is appreciable 
variation between the response of different 
-1-
ganglion cells and this may make the concept of an  average  detector shape of less value when 
more complex patterns are considered. the problem may resolve itself round the question of connectivity between less and more complex detectors. if the more complex detectors are formed by combining the outputs if simpler detectors then the former may be expected to be subject to the inherent limitations of the latter. if  on the other hand  more complex detectors can obtain their information directly from receptor cells  these limitations may not apply. the facts will only become apparent 
with further work. 
