 
　　　this paper gives an overview of the present status and future plans of a research project aimed at communicating in natural language with an intelligent automaton. the automaton in question is a computer-controlled mobile robot capable of autonomously acquiring information about i t s environment and performing tasks normally requiring human supervision. by natural language communication is meant the a b i l i t y of a human to successfully engage the robot in a dialog using simple english declarative  interrogative  and imperative sentences. communication is accomplished by means of a natural language interpretive question-answering system  engrob  consisting of six distinct components: a syntax analyser  a semantic interpreter  a model of the robot's environment  a deductive  automatic theoremproving system  an english output generator  and a repertoire of basic robot capabilities for sensing and manipulating the environment. an example is given that illustrates the type of processing done by each component  and the nature of component interactions. 
descriptive terms: natural language  english  systems  robots  intelligent automata. 
x  introduction 
　　　the advent of computer-controlled robots capable of autonomously sensing a real-world laboratory environment  constructing a dynamic model of such an environment  and manipulating various objects in that environment has provided a unique opportunity for research in computational linguistics. the question of how one might apply current linguistic theory in the design of a conversational  natural language robot communication system is certainly an interesting problem in its own r i g h t . it is the author's contention  however  that some aspects of linguistic theory i t s e l f could be significantly influenced by research in this area. we w i l l examine the argument for this position in the conclusion. 
　　　there are at least three projects throughout the country attempting to design integrated a r t i f i c i a l intelligence systems that include a 
the research reported here was supported by the rome air development center under contract no. af1 -1  by the rome air development center and the advanced research projects agency under contract no  p1-c-1  and by the air force office of scientific research under contract no. af1 -1. 
computer-controlled automaton of the type described above. 	intelligent hand-eye machines are being investigated in two separate programs  one under professors m. l. minsky and s. papert at mit  and the other under prof. j. mccarthy at stanford university. 	at stanford research institute we are endeavoring to build a mobile automaton capable of exploring a real-world laboratory environment. 	a more general discussion of the goals of the sri 	+ robot project may be found in a paper by nilsson; 1 
while details of robot problem-solving capabilities may be found in green.1 
　　　the present paper is based on work in progress on a system called engrob  a natural-language  interpretive  question-answering system used to communicate with the sri robot in simple english sentences. because engrob is not yet f u l l y implemented  some of what follows should be considered to be speculation. however  simple examples based on running programs w i l l be used to illustrate the nature of the problems encountered in naturallanguage communication with the sri robot. the appendix gives a representative l i s t of english sentences that can be processed by engrob  together 
with their translations. the l i s t is perhaps the simplest way for the reader to obtain an intuitive feel for engrob*s current level of performance. 
　　　the basic paradigm that has guided the development of engrob is  1  translate english statements  questions  and commands into a formal language based on the first-order predicate calculus;  1  perform any necessary deductive inferences based on the current set of operational axioms and the current state of the robot's model of the environment; and  1  generate as appropriate an english output sentence and/or a sequence of primative functions within the set of basic robot capabilities for sensing and manipulating the environment. the i n i t i a l translation to the predicate calculus is accomplished by means of syntactic and semantic analyses based on a large collection of productions or pattern-operation rules  while deductions are carried out by means of a resolution-based automatic theorem prover. english output sentences are produced by translating answer expressions in the predicate calculus into their english equivalents  again by means of a set of productions. for 
-1-* 