 
　　this paper describes the structure and operation of the hearsay speech understanding system by the use of a specific example illustrating the various stages of recognition. the system consists of a set of cooperating independent processes  each representing a source of knowledge. the knowledge is used either to predict what may appear in a given context or to verify hypotheses resulting from a prediction. the structure of the system is illustrated by considering its operation in a particular task situation: voice-chess. the representation and use of various sources 
of knowledge are outlined. preliminary results of the reduction in search resulting 
from the use of various sources of knowledge are given. 
keywords: speech recognition  understanding  hypothesize-and-test 
　　
　　the factors influencing the structure and operation of a 
　　speech understanding system are many and complex. the report of newell et al.  1  discusses these issues in detail. our own goals and efforts in this area have been described in several earlier papers  reddy et al.  1 . the goals for our present effort were outlined in reddy  erman  and neely  1 . the initial structural description of the hearsay system was given in reddy  1 . the model and the system that evolved after several design iterations were described in reddy  erman  and neely  1a .* the main additions to the initial proposed system were in the specification of the interactions among various sources of knowledge. in this paper  we describe the structure and operation of the hearsay system from a different point of view  i.e.  by considering a specific example to illustrate the various stages of the recognition process. 
　　machine perception of speech differs from many other problems in artificial intelligence in that it is characterized by high data rates  large amounts of data  and the availability of many sources of knowledge. thus  the techniques that must be 
* the general framework that evolved for the model is different from some previously proposed models by liba man et al.  1  and halle and stevens  1  which imply that perception takes place through the active mediation of motor centers. our efforts tend to support  sensory  theories advanced by fant  1  and others. if one modifies the  synthesis  part of analysis-by-synthesis  then our model is most similar to that of halle and stevens. 
employed differ from other problem-solving systems in which weaker and weaker methods are used to solve a problem using less and less information about the actual task. in addition  there is a marked difference in the expectations for system performance. in tasks such as chess and theorem-proving  the human has sufficient trouble himself so as to make reasonably crude programs of interest. but humans perform effortlessly  and with only modest error  in speech or visual perception tasks  and they demand comparable performance from a machine. thus  it is important that the structure and organization of a system be such that it is not a dead-end effort  i.e.  it should be capable of approaching human performance without major reformulation of the problem solution. the hearsay system effort represents an attempt to produce one such system. the main distinguishing characteristic of this system is that diverse sources of knowledge can be represented as cooperating independent parallel processes which help in the decoding of the utterances using the hypothesize-and-test paradigm. 
  present address: xerox palo alto research center  palo alto  ca. 1. 
** this research was supported in part by the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense under contract no. f1-c-1 and monitored by the air force office of scientific research. 
1 　　the system is designed for the recognition of connected speech  from several speakers  with graceful error recovery  performing the recognition in close to real-time. the structure and implementation of the system are to a large extent dictated by these concerns. one feature that characterizes a speech understanding system is the existence of errors at every level of analysis. the errorful nature of processing implies that every source of knowledge has to be invoked to resolve ambiguities and errors at every stage of the processing. one way to accomplish this is through the use of the hypothesize-and-test peradjgm  where each source of knowledge can accept  reject  or re-order the hypotheses produced by other sources of knowledge. for example  in the voice-chess task  if the word  captures  appears in a partially-recognized utterance  the semantic source of knowledge can reject all the hypotheses that do not lead to a capture move. 
　　the hearsay system is not restricted to any particular recognition task. given the syntax and the vocabulary of a language and the semantics of the task  it attempts recognition of utterances in that language. it is designed to serve as a 
　　research tool in which the contributions of various sources of knowledge towards recognition can be clearly evaluated. since each source of knowledge is represented as an independent process  it can be removed without crippling the system. 
　　figure 1 gives an overview of the hearsay system. the ear module accepts speech input  extracts parameters  and performs some preliminary segmentation  feature extraction and labeling  generating a  partial symbolic utterance description.  rover  recognition overiord  controls the recognition process and coordinates the hypothesis generation and verification  testing  phases of the various cooperating knowledge processes. the task provides the interface between the task being performed and the speech recognition and generation  speak-easy  parts of the system. sol  the system over lord  provides the message communication facilities for the system. 

an example of recognition 
　　here we will illustrate the operation of the hearsay system by considering in detail the recognition process of an utterance within a specific task environment; voice-chess. the task is to recognize a spoken chess move in a given board position and respond with the counter-move. 
　　figure 1 gives the board position and a list of legal moves in that position at the time the move is spoken. the speaker  playing white  wishes to move his bishop on queen's bishop one to king knight five. this is one of 1 different legal moves. these moves have been ordered on the basis of their goodness in the given board position. this judgment was based on a taskdependent source of knowledge available to the program  giltogly  1 . note that the move chosen by the speaker was only the fourth best move in that situation. 
　　having chosen the move  there are many possible ways of uttering the move. the syntax of the language permits many variations  usually of the form  piece   action   posltion . the piece can have qualifiers to indicate the location. the action may be of the form:  to    moves-to    goes-to    takes    captures   and ao on. the position can be of the form:  king three    king bishop four   or  queen's knight five   and so on. the actual move spoken in this context was  bishop moves-to king knight five . note that  queen bishop on queen bishop one  can be specified as just  bishop  because there is no ambiguity in this case. 
　　figure 1 shows the speech waveform of the utterance with manual segmentation  showing the beginning and ending of each word and each phoneme within the word.  the menal 

figure 1: the chess board position and the ordered list of legal moves for white. 
segmentation and labeling indicated in this and succeeding figures is for our benefit only - it is not available to the system while it is attempting recognition.  the utterance was about 1 seconds in duration and the waveform is displayed on ten consecutive rows  each row containing 1 milliseconds of the utterance. the first line of text under each row contains the word being articulated. the word label is repeated for the duration of the word. thus  the word  bishop  was articulated for 1 milliseconds and occupies the first two rows of the waveform. the second line of text under each row contains the intended phoneme being articulated. the phoneme  represented in 1pa notation  is repeated for the duration of the phoneme. 
　　several interesting problems of speech recognition arise in the context of recognition of this utterance. the end of row 1 of figure 1 shows the juncture between  bishop  and  moves . 
note that the ending /p/ in  bishop  and the beginning nasal /m/ in  moves  are homorganic  i.e.  they both have the same articulatory position. this results in the absence of the release and the aspiration that normally characterizes the sound /p/. row 1 of figure 1 illustrates a word boundary problem. the ending nasal of  king  and the beginning nasal of  knight  tend to be articulated from the same tongue position even though in isolation they would have been articulated from two different positions. this results in a single segment representing two different phonemes in two adjacent words. further  it is impossible to specify the exact location of the word boundary. in the manual segmentation  the boundary was placed at an arbitrary position. another type of juncture problem appears on row 1 of figure 1 at the boundary of  knight five . the release and aspiration of the phoneme /t/ are assimilated into the /f/ of  five . 
feature. extraction and sementation 
　　the speech input from the microphone is passed through five band-pass filters  spanning the range 1 hz  and through an unfiltered band. within each band the maximum intensity is measured for every 1 milliseconds  the zero crossings are also measured in each of the bands but they do not play an important role in the recognition process at present . this results in a vector of 1 amplitude parameters every 1 milliseconds. these parameters are smoothed and log-transformed. figure 1 shows a 
　　plot of these parameters as a function of time for part of the utterance of figure 1. the top line shows the utterance spoken. the second line of text indicates where the word boundaries were marked during the manual segmentation process  this will permit manual verification of the accuracy of the mechine recognition process in the later stages . 
　　this vector of parameters  labeled 1  1  1  1  1  and u in figure 1  is  for each centisecond  compared with a standard set of parameter vectors to obtain a minimum distance classification 
　　
1 
　　

　　
using a modified nearest-neighbor classification technique. the purpose of this operation is to assign a  single character  label to each centisecond of speech using a compact pseudo-phonetic notation representing the actual local characteristics of the speech signal. the line of text labeled p in figure 1 gives the classification for every 1-millisecond unit. 
　　the classification of labels for each centisecond obtained by this match procedure  row p in figure 1  is then used to specify a list of features  such as voicing and frication  which are then used in the segmentation of the utterance  shown in figure 1. the boundaries of segments are indicated by vertical lines through the parameters  and the letter at the center of each segment  following the row p in figure 1  indicates the type of segment that is present. the  a  indicates a sonorant segment  i.e.  all the voiced unfricated segments; the  s  indicates a fricated segment  and the period { .   indicates a silence segment. the first use of an acoustic-phonetic source of knowledge can be seen in the handling of the  king knight  word boundary problem mentioned earlier. a long sonorant segment is subdivided into two segments to indicate the presence of two different syllables. the syllable juncture is determined in this case by the presence of a significant local minimum in an overall intensity plot  line labeled u on figure 1 . 
the recognition process 
　　the hearsay system  at present  has three cooperating independent processes which help in the decoding of the utterances. these represent acoustic  syntactic  and semantic sources of knowledge: 
1. the acoustic-phonetic domain  which we refer to as just acoustics  deals with the sounds of the language and how they relate to the speech signal produced by the speaker. this domain of knowledge has traditionally been the only one used in most previous attempts at speech recognition. 
1. the syntax domain deals with the ordering of words in the utterance according to the grammar of the input language. 
1. the semantic domain considers the meaning of the utterances of the language  in the context of the task. 
the actual number and nature of these sources of knowledge is somewhat arbitrary. what is important to notice is that there can be several cooperating independent processes. 
　　these processes cooperate by means of a hypothesize-endtest paradigm. this paradigm consists of one or more sources of knowledge looking at the unrecognized portion of the utterance and generating an ordered list of hypotheses. these hypotheses may then be verified by one or more of the sources of knowledge; the verification may accept  reject  or re-order the hypotheses. the same source of knowledge may be used in different ways both to generate hypotheses and to verify  or reject  hypotheses. 
　　we will illustrate this recognition process by following through various stages of recognition for the utterance given in figures 1 and 1. figures 1 through 1 illustrate several of these stages of the recognition. in each figure  we have four kinds of information in addition to what was shown in figure 1: the current sentence hypothesis  immediately below the p and segmentation rows   the processes acting on the current sentence hypothesis and their effect  e.g.  syn hypothesized...  ago rejected...   the acceptable option words with their ratings and word boundaries  e.g.  i...i 1 rook's   and the four best sentence hypotheses which result by adding the possible option words to the current best sentence hypothesis. when there are more than eight option words  only the best eight are shown. when there are more than four sentence hypotheses  only the best four are shown. the symbol  uv  within the current sentence hypothesis gives the location of the set of new words being hypothesized and verified. the  t...t  arrows indicate the possible beginning and ending for each option word. 
　　figure 1 shows the first cycle of the recognition process. at this point none oi the words in the sentence have been recognized and the processing begins left to right. the syntax module chooses to hypothesize and generates 1 possible words  implying that the sentence can begin with  rook's    rook    queen's   etc. of these  the acoustics module absolutely rejects the word  bishop's  as being severely inconsistent with the acoustic-phonetic evidence. the semantics module rejects  castle  and  castles  as being illegal in this board position. the remaining 1 words are rated by each of the sources of knowledge. the composite rating and the word beginning and ending markers for the eight best words are shown in figure 1. the words  rook    rook's    queen's  and  queen  all get a rating of 1.  bishop   the correct word  gets a rating of 1. these words are then used to form the beginning sentence hypotheses  the top four of which are shown at the bottom of figure 1. 
　　figure 1 shows the second cycle of the recognition process. the top sentence hypothesis is  bishop - . an attempt is being made to recognize the word following  bishop . again syntax generates the hypotheses. given that  bishop  is the preceding word  the syntactic source of knowledge proposes only 1 options out of the possible 1 words in the lexicon - a reduction in search space by a factor of 1. of these possible 1 words  acoustics rejects  captures  and semantics rejects none. the remaining six words are rated by each of the sources of knowledge and a composite rating along with word boundaries is shown in figure 1 for each of the acceptable words   to  has a rating of 1  etc. . the correct word   moves-to   happens to get the highest rating of 1. the new top sentence hypothesis is  bishop moves-to -   with a composite sentence rating of s1. 
figure 1 shows the third cycle of the recognition process. 
　　
1 
　　


　　
given the top sentence hypothesis  bishop moves-to -   the syntax module hypothesizes 1 option words. none of these ware rejected by acoustics or semantics.  king  and  king's  both get the highest score of 1. the first error in the recognition process occurs at this point. as new sentence hypotheses are created based on the ratings of individual words  both  bishop moves-to king's -  and  bishop moves-to king -  have the seme rating  with the former appearing at the top of the list. at this point it is instructive to see why the error was made in the first place. the phonemic description of  king's  causes a search for ＊ stop followed by a vowel-like segment followed by a stop and fricative. this sequence of segments occurs in  king knight five  as can be seen from figure 1  improvements currently being made to the system will result in  king's  getting a much lower score . the important thing to observe is how the system recovers from errors of this type. 
　　figure s shows the system attempting to associate a meaningful word to the unverified part of the utterance  i.e.  the /alv/ part of the word  five  in the original utterance. syntax proposes 1 possible option words  out of a possible 1  giving a factor of 1 reduction . one is rejected and the other two get very low ratings. the corresponding sentence hypotheses also get low composite ratings and end up at the bottom of the stack  not visible in figure 1 . 
　　now we see an interesting feature of the system. in the preceding cycle  figure 1  syntax generated the hypotheses. it is possible that that source of knowledge is incomplete and did not generate the correct word as a possible hypothesis. therefore  in this cycle  figure 1   the semantic module is given a chance to hypothesize. it hypothesizes 1 option words  a reduction of search by a factor of 1  all of which are rejected by syntax and acoustics. when both attempts to make a meaningful completion of the utterance fail  this particular sentence hypothesis   bishop moves to king's--   is removed from the candidate list. 
　　now the top sentence hypothesis is  bishop moves-to king-   figure 1 . syntax hypothesizes 1 option words. acoustics rejects six of them and semantics rejects two. of the remaining words  the correct word   knight   gets the second best rating after  bishop . again there is an errorful path  because the top sentence hypothesis now happens to be  bishop moves-to king bishop - . this sentence hypothesis is rejected immediately in the next cycle because there is no more utterance to be recognized and  bishop moves-to king bishop  is not a legal move. note that the correct sentence hypothesis is not at the top of the stack. its rating of 1 is not as good as  bishop moves-to king -   see figure 1 . 
　　the processing in the next cycle is illustrated in figure 1. note that in figure 1  this same sentence hypothesis was used when the syntax module hypothesized. now semantics is given an option to hypothesize and proposes 1 words. all of these are rejected by syntax and acoustics. 
　　finally  the correct partial sentence hypothesis   bishop moves-to king knight -   gets to the top  figure 1 . syntax hypothesizes 1 option words. of these semantics rejects 1 as being incorrect  leaving only  five  as a possibility. this results in the correct complete sentence hypothesis of  bishop moves-to king knight five . but the composite rating for this sentence is only 1 and there are other partial sentence hypotheses with higher ratings. at this point  the system cycles eight more times before rejecting all of them and accepting the correct sentence hypothesis. 
　　figure 1 shows the accuracy of the system in recognizing some typical sentences. an attempt was made to estimate the effect of syntax and semantics. using syntax only  the average number of words analyzed was reduced to 1 out of the possible 1 words in the lexicon -- a reduction in search space by a factor of 1. using semantics only  the reduction of search space was about the same. using both knowledge sources results in a 
　　reduction in the search space by a factor of 1. 

sources of knowledge: 
their representation and use in the hearsay system 
　　several sources of knowledge are used in the hearsay system at present: speaker- and environment-dependent knowledge  acoustic-phonetic rules  vocabulary restrictions  and syntactic and semantic knowledge. the knowledge used at present represents only a small part of all the available knowledge. we expect to be adding to the knowledge base of the system for many years to come. the difficulties in representation and use of knowledge within the system are manifold. even when rules exist which express pertinent knowledge  their applicability seems very limited and the effort involved to make effective use of them within the system is very large. rules that exist are scattered in the literature. many have not been written down and exist only in the heads of some scientists  and many are yet to be discovered. in this section  we will restrict ourselves to the discussion of the knowledge that is incorporated into the present hearsay system. 
speaker and environment dependent knowledge 
　　the characteristics of speech vary  depending on the speaker  age  sex  and physical condition. in addition  the 
1 
characteristics of the environment  such as background noise  and the characteristics of the transducer  such as the frequency response characteristics of the microphone  also cause variability in speech characteristics. 
　　in the hearsay system an attempt is made to correct for these variables through the use of a ♀e table. this table contains a standard set of parameters for various phones uttered by the speaker in a neutral phonetic context. this set of parameters also accounts for the characteristics of the room noise and the characteristics of the microphone in that the neutral phones were uttered in the very same environment. a complete list of the clusters used and the details of the speaker and environment normalization are given in erman  1 . 
acoustic-phonetic 	knowlege 
　　this knowledge is used in several places within the system to perform different functions. knowledge related to syllabic structure is used in the segmentation. for each segment  knowledge related to voicing  frication  and syllable junction  a local minimum of energy  is used to assign labels to each segment. an example of segmentation and labeling obtained by this type of knowledge is given in figure 1. 
　　the acoustic-phonetic knowledge is used in the recognition process in two ways: to generate hypotheses about possible words that may be present in the incoming utterance; and to reject  accept  or re-order the hypotheses generated by other sources of knowledge. 
　　the hypothesization is based on the fact that certain sounds within an utterance  e.g.  stressed vowels  sibilants  and unvoiced stops  can usually be uniquely recognized. these features of the incoming utterance can then be used as an acoustic-phonetic filter on the lexicon to hypothesize only those words that are appropriate in this acoustic context. 
　　when the acoustic-phonetic knowledge is used to verify hypotheses  it performs a more thorough analysis. given a hypothesized word  its phonetic description is located in the lexicon. this description is used to guide the search for the word by means of phoneme procedures. that is  the expected characteristics of a given phoneme in various contexts are represented as a procedure; this procedure is activated to see if the expected features are present  and to provide a confidence rating based on the acoustic evidence. there are several increasingly more sophisticated verification procedures that can be used to verify proposed hypotheses. these sophisticated procedures are only invoked if word ambiguity exists at the preceding level. 
syntactic and semantic knowledge 
　　conventional parsing techniques are not very useful to direct the search within a speech understanding system. the recognizer must be capable of processing errorful strings containing spurious and repeated words. this implies that the parser must be capable of starting in the middle of the utterance where a word might be recognized uniquely and parse both forwards and backwards. the goal of parsing is not so much to generate a parse tree  but to predict what terminal symbol might appear to the left or to the right of a given context. 
　　the predictive parsing for hypothesization is achieved in the hearsay system by the use of anti-productions. anti-productions act as a concordance for the grammar giving all the contexts for every symbol appearing in the grammar} they are generated from a bnf description of the language to be recognized. the antiproductions are used to predict words that are likely to occur following or preceding a word using only a limited context. examples of anti-productions and their use are given by neely 
 1 . the role of the syntactic verifier is to accept or discard hypotheses by using syntactic consistency checks based on the partial parse of the utterance. while the knowledge used for hypothesization and verification are the same  the representation and the mechanisms used in the hypothesization and verification are different. figures 1 and 1 give examples of constraints provided by the syntactic knowledge during hypothesizatidn. figure 1 illustrates its use in verification. 
　　the semantic source of knowledge for voice-chess is based on the semantics of the task  the current board position  and the likelihood of ihe move. this knowledge is used to predict likely legal moves; these moves are then used in conjunction with the partially-recognized utterance to predict a word that might appear in the utterance. the same knowledge is also used to verify hypotheses generated by other sources of knowledge. figure 1 illustrates the use of semantic knowledge to generate hypotheses. in the context of  bishop moves-to king   semantics hypothesizes nine possible words. it hypothesizes all the words that might appear in the utterance in positions allowed by the semantic knowledge  given the partial recognition. figure 1 shows the use of semantics in the verification. syntax hypothesizes 1 possible words. the semantic knowledge  given the partially recognized utterance  bishop moves to king knight   indicates that only  five  is legal in that context by rejecting all others. 
summary 
　　this paper reports on research in progress on the hearsay speech understanding system. the system has been operational since june  1. at present we are attempting to improve the accuracy and performance of the system by adding to and improving the knowledge base. this is being done by an analysis of errors made by the system on seven sets of data from five male speakers in four different task domains. this process of modification and improvement is expected to continue for several years  using increasingly complex vocabularies  syntax  and task environments. the hearsay system will be used primarily as a research tool to evaluate the contributions of various sources of knowledge  as well as serving as an information processing model of speech perception  
acknowledge 
　　we wish particularly to acknowledge the efforts of bruce lowerre who has increased the acoustic-phonetic knowledge base in hearsay  thereby greatly improving the system's performance. 
　　
1 bibliography 
1. erman  ld. {1  in preparation   an environment and system for machine recognition of connected speech  ph.d. thesis  comp. sci. dept.  stanford univ.  to appear as a tech. rep.  comp. sci. dept.  carnegie-melion univ.  pittsburgh  pa. 
1. fant  g.  1   auditory patterns of speech   in w. wathendunn  ed   models for the perception of speech and visual form  mit press. 
1. gillogly  	j.j. 	 1   	the 	technology 	chess 	program  
artificial intelligence  1  1. 
1. halle  m.  and k. stevens  1    speech recognition: a model and a program for research   ire trans. inform. theory  it-1  1. 
1. liberman  a.m.  f.s. cooper  k.s. harris  and p.f. macnetilage 
{1    a motor theory of speech perception   proc. of speech comm. seminar  1  kth  stockholm. 
1. neely  r.b.  1   on the use of syntax and semantics in a speech understanding system  ph.d. thesis  stanford 
univ.  to appear as a tech. rep.  comp. sci. dept.  carnegie-mellon univ.  pittsburgh  pa. 
1. newell  a.  j. barnett  j. forgie  c. green  d. klatt  j.c.r. licklider  j. munson  r. reddy  and w. woods  1   final report of a study group on speech understanding systems  north holland  1 . 
1. reddy  d.r.  l.d. erman  and r.b. neely  1   the c-mu speech recognition project  proc. ieee system sciences and cybernetics conf.  pittsburgh  pa. 
1. reddy  d.r.  1   speech recognition: prospects for the seventies  proc. ifip 1  ljubljana  yugoslavia  invited paper section  pp. 1 to 1. 
1. reddy  d.r.  l.d. erman  and r.1. neely  et al.  1   working papers in speech recognition  tech. rep.  comp. sci. dept.  carnegie-mellon univ.  pittsburgh  pa. 
1. reddy  d.r.  l.d. erman  and r.b. neely  1a   a model and a system for machine recognition of speech   to be published in ieee trans  on audio and electro-acoustics  1 . 
1 
