session 1 	natural language: 
semantics and parsing 
some frills for the modal tic-tag-toe of davies and isard; semantics of predicate complement constructions 
# 
	aravind k. joshi 	and ralph m. weiechedel 
university of pennsylvania 
philadelphia  pennsylvania 

1 

 1  b i l l prevented mary from leaving. 
	 1a  	mary did not leave. 

 1  john realized that mary stayed home. 
	 1a  	john did not realize that mary stayed home. 
asserting  1  or  1a  requires the speaker to presuppose the truth of  1   
 1  mary stayed home. 
it should be clear now what is meant by a counterfactive verb. 	an example of a counterfactive verb is 
pretend. 
　　　it appears worthwhile exploring in some detail implementations of these constructions in the tac-tactoe game playing setting of davies and isard  1 . admittedly  many of these constructions receive sterile interpretations in this context  but many others  together with the modal constructions of davies and isard  raise some interesting problems concerning their implementati on. 
     we w i l l illustrate these problems by several examples and t r y to draw some general conclusions about implementation of these constructions in the type of settings mentioned above. 
1. modal tic-tac-toe of davies and isard and the semantics of some pc-verbs: 
　　　1 davies and isard  1  have chosen the setting of a game of tic-tac-toe in order to explore 
the semantics of modal verbs  might  can  w i l l   etc.  and hypotheticals   i f you had ........ . this is a simple enough  yet nontrivial  setting. it provides them a universe of discourse in which they can discuss the notion of possible courses of events - what might happen in the future as well as what might have happened  but did not. their program plays tic-tactoe against a human opponent and can answer questions about the course of the game. 
　　　we w i l l use this setting to explore the semantics of some pc-verbs. in particular  we w i l l be interested in constructions in which both a modal and a pc-verb occur. some pc-verbs w i l l require consideration of the possible courses of events even without the presence of a modal verb. 
　　　there appear to be at least four different factors we have to consider. these are as follows.  let r and m denote the human opponent and the machine respectivel y .   
　　　a. instead of just one possible course of events  we w i l l be concerned with a set or sets of possible courses of events. 
　　　b. m w i l l be concerned with possible courses of events not only with respect to i t s own play but also with respect to h's play because m is required to act as i f i t is h. 
　　　c  whether or not certain presuppositions hold has to be checked by m not only with respect to one possible course of events but also with respect to a set of possible courses of events. 
     d. m has to deal with possible courses of events because m has to act as if its own goal is changed. 
　　　it was not clear from davies and isard  1  whether a l l these factors were considered by them. a referee has pointed out to us that their program does cope to some extent with these factors. 
　　　1 we shall see the effect of these factors in a nissber of example situations. 
notation: h: human opponent; mt machine; m n . . . : position of square on the tic-tac-toe board. the 
squares are numbered 1  1  1 .   .   1 from left to right and from top to bottom. y  z:. number of move; y w i l l range over m's moves and z over h's moves. 
prevent  not in the sense of forbid   negatlve-if verb : 
 1  h: could i have prevented you from taking m on the yth move  
　　　in order to answer affirmatively  m has to check that there is at least one possible course of events up to the  y-l th move such that if this course of events had actually occurred it would not have been wise for m to take m on the yth move. thus m is required to construct a set of possible courses of events and check 
whether at least one of them satisfies a certain property. 
     m also has to check the presupposition that the actual course of events was such that indeed on the yth 
move m took m; otherwise the question about preventing m does not arise. the presuppositions of prevent are not always completely clear. for example  consider  not only could i have prevented you from winning  i could even have prevented you from drawing the game.  there appears to be no presupposition for the second prevent.  this example is due to a referee.  of course  here we have a composition of prevent and not only - but also. in general  whenever we have a composition of two pc-verbs or a pc-verb and a connective  the presuppositions become less obvious. we w i l l come across this phenomenon several times in the following. 
 1  	h: 	on the zth move  could i have prevented you from winning  
　　　m has to start with the actual state of affairs as of the  z-l th move and check whether  on the zth move  there was a nonlosing strategy for h. 	alternatively  it has to check whether  for any zth move of h  m has a 
winning strategy. 	if so  the reply is affirmative; 
otherwise  it is negative. 
     again we see that m has to verify a certain property for a set of possible courses of events rather than a specified course of events. 
1 　　　the presupposition here is that m did win; otherwise  the question of preventing m from winning is unnatural. again if we have a composition such as   i t was s t i l l possible for you to win as late as the 1th move  but i could have prevented you from winning as early as the 1rd move   the presuppositions axe less obvious  example is due to a referee . 
     we can also consider the possibility of m reflecting on i t s performance by asking questions as in  1  to i t s e l f and coning out with uninvited responses such as the following. 
 1  m: on the yth move  i could have prevented you from winning. 
 1  m: i realize that  on the yth move  i could have prevented you from winning. 
 note that we have here a composition of pe-verbs: realize and prevent. realize in our context is semantically almost vacuous.  
parallel to  1  and  1  we could also have 
 1'  m: on the zth move  you could have prevented me from winning. 
　　　 1'  m: i realize that  on the zth move  i could have prevented you from winning. force   i f verb : 
 1  m: on the zth move  could i have forced you to lose  
　　　starting with the state of affairs as of the  z-l th move  h checks to see whether there was a winning strategy for h. 
　　　the presupposition is either   i   at least after the zth move  m was s t i l l not forced to lose  or   i i   h did not lose  the second presupposition seems more natural  at least for the rather t r i v i a l game under consideration. 
have the opportunity  be in a position  etc.  only-lf verbs : 
 1  m: on the yth move  were you in a position  did you have the opportunity  to win  
we have two interpretations here: m checks whether 
  i   	on the yth move  there is a winning strategy for m. 
 1  	on the yth move  there is no winning strategy tor 
h. 
there is a third possibility  unnatural in such a t r i v i a l game as tic-tac-toe  which is as follows. yth 
move could have finished the game with m winning  but somehow m missed the opportunity. 
the presupposition is either   i   m did not win or 
  i i   n won  but h is asking the question because h wants to know when m's win was guaranteed. the f i r s t presupposition is consistent with be in a position being an only-if verb; however  the second one is not. 
we can compose force and have the opportunity as follows. 
 1  h: on the yth move  were you in a position to force a win  
　　　the answer is affirmative i f   on the yth move  there was a winning strategy available to m; otherwise  it is negative. 
　　　the presupposition seems to be that m did not force a win on or before the yth move. 
 1  h: on the yth move  could you have forced a win  
　　　the interpretation and the presuppositions are the same as in  1  above. 
help  if-verb : 
　　　assume that it is h's turn. prior to making his move h asks m the following question. 
 1  h: 	can you help me  
　　　the understood complement is either to win or not to lose. let us assume that it is to win. h has to see whether there is a winning strategy for h. one way is by switching turns i . e .   by acting as if it is its own turn and checking to see whether it has a winning strategy. if there is such a strategy  m tells h the next move. 
　　　if the understood complement is not to lose  we replace  winning strategy  by  nonloslng strategy  in 
the above interpretation. 
h can put the question not as in  1  but as in 
 1  below where no pc-verb occurs. 
	 1  h: 	what would be your move  if you were me  
     m would interpret  1  in exactly the same way as it did  1 . there is a difference  however. in  1   h is explicitly asking m to switch turns and thereby indirectly helping h. in  1   m has to switch turns if it wants to help h. if it didn't switch turns  h wouldn't really be helping h. as a matter of fact  this is exactly the way m would have to behave if it 
has to respond to the following question. 
 1  h: what would be your move  if you were pretending to help me  to win   
rote that pretend is a pc-verb  counter*active 
1 
verb . 	we have here a composite pc-verb - pretendhelp. 
　　　thus the set of possible courses of events considered by m depends on whose turn h is taking; i t s own or h's. of course  there remains the possibility of m responding to  1  as if it is responding to  1  i . e .   it w i l l not switch turns when it ought to have.' 
　　　there is yet another way h can ask m'a help. assume that it is m's turn. h is about to make i t s move and h asks m the fallowing question. 
	 1  h: 	can you help me  
assume that the understood complement is to win. 
m has to check whether there is a winning strategy for h. this can be done by m by switching i t s normal goal of not losing to losing. hence  m must have the a b i l i t y to play the game with i t s goal being either not losing or losing. 
     the possible courses of events m has to consider  therefore  depend on whether m switches turns or goals. 
	1. 	conclusions 
　　　1. the examples in the previous section clearly show that the implementations of the predicate complement constructions are not t r i v i a l in the setting considered. 
　　　1. pc-verbs can be composed  although not a l l 
　　　1. 	the last comment is somewhat paradoxical. 	our restricted setting  which appears to be clearly defined  
may not be so well defined after a l l ; we have some difficulty in deciding on the correct interpretation for some of our examples. 
