session 1 	general problem solving 
ok a local approach to representation in problem solving 
v.l.stefanuk 
i n s t i t u t e for information transmission problems academy of sciences u.s.s.r. 
u l . aviamotoraaya 1  a 
moscow e-1 
   
u.s.s.r. 
feature of a l l of the problems 
discussed in this paper is that  in their i n i t i a l formulation  they have a large number of elements with different names  and for this reason the problems seem to be difficult. however  the f i r s t attempts to solve the problems give the necessary heuristic information for simplification of the problem description and a reduction in the number of different names for the ele-
ments. we could say that the desire to cut down the number of names is a  global idea'  but the choice of names and the algorithm of naming are contained in the f i r s t 
attempts. 
   it is important to stress that the reduced description obtained is not always useful for the solution of the original problem  but it turns out to be useful for some of such problems. 

   this paper shows that local attempts to begin to solve a problem can be very useful  as sometimes they let one simplify the problem description and thus facilitate the solution of the original problem. 
   we feel that each time some heuristic is formulated  for instance   try to occupy and to keep the center  in chess   it is formulated not because we know how to solve the total problem  how to win in chess   but as a result of studing some local subproblems. of course  as this heuristic is formulated on the basis of some local consideration  i t s usefulness for the whole problem should be separately proved  theoretically or experimentally . 

   one of the most interesting problems showing the importance of a good representation is the  tough but  problem.1 the 
problem  briefly  is to prove the impossibil i t y of fully covering a chessboard  with two diagonally opposite squares removed  using domino pieces. the black/white coloring of the board leads to the simple solution. 
   one could reason that the successful coloring of the board in this case is simply an  insight  which is a rather natural thing for a person familiar with the chessqoaro. from hie childhood. 
　　here we w i l l try  however  to look at this matter from a different point of view and to show how one could  make a guess  about the board coloring  without appeal to purely human experience. 
   the difficulty of the tough nut problem in its i n i t i a l formulation lies in the fact that one is given with the board description simply as a two-dimensional field || c i j  |   i j = 1  of square cells  with c1   c1 removed   and the right decision about placing the f i r s t pieces is completely unclear because the end result is not easily 
seen. 
   indeed  the only way to describe our actions  positioning of the pieces on the board  is to display the names   c.＊   of covered cells. in the original formulation of the problem a l l of the cells have different names. such a naming allows only the strategy of solving the problem using a complete search and does not serve as a base 
for pruning the search tree. 
   from this point of view  the idea of somehow reducing the number of different names seems to be very reasonable  as it could bring out some information about  identical  positionings. in other words  we see that the only way to achieve a more or less uniform description of our actions is to reduce the number of names used. 
   the extreme case: one name is used for a l l of the cells. this gives ua a highly uniform description because our different actions  positionings  differ only in the number of covered cells. this naming obviously could help one only in solution of the simplest problems. 
   using two names one could get a less t r i vial but nevertheless a very uniform description of the following situation:  a domino is put somewhere on the board.  it is easy to see that it could be achieved only for a certain assignment of the two names to cells-namely chess assignment. then we 
indeed 	come 	t	o	f 	the board. 
   to clarify these ideas and to display the limitations inherent in this approach we consider a number of other similar problems. 

   in a l l the problems below we w i l l follow our chain of reasoning-using a small number of different names for elements of a problem and then getting a certain assignment of the names to different elements in a way which w i l l give us an invariant description of our actions. we'll see that the procedure of assignment has a very simple  algorithmic  
character. 
1. let us decide to present a certain 
array of square cells as a sum of elements not of the  domino  form 

as in the tough hut problem  but of the form 

   here the chessboard consideration can not be directly applied. however  using two names 1  one could achieve  for instance  the following invariant description: 

with this description it is easy to show the impossibility of building the array 

using a combination of  enlarged cells  
   obviously  we could not get an invariant description in this case using more than three names tor the cells. .for three names 
1 1 one can get the following invariant 
 coloring  

which also indicates that a combination of such cells could not be used to construct the following array 

   it can be easily seen that to get a suitable coloring in this case  it is necessary and sufficient to get a corresponding coloring of the following 	1 x 1 array: 

   1  in the same manner it can be shown that in case of hexagonal cells it is impossible  using the blocks 

 to build  from them the following array of such cells  both using two or three names: 

   1. suppose we are to prove that:  a 1 x 1 x 1 cube cannot be constructed 
from bricks that are uniformly 1 x 1 x 1 in size.  
   obviously we need not consider bricks so that they are not parallel to the aides of the cube. similarily  a brick should be positioned only in an n-unit distance from the sides  n = 1 1 . taking this into account we can consider an assertion equivalent to the previous one: 
 a 1 x 1 x 1 	cube  composed from 	1 x 1 x 1 subcubes cannot be presented as a sum of 
blocks of the subcubes which are 1 x 1 x 1 in size.  
   using two names   black  and  white   for subcubes we easily come  for instance  to the following invariant descriptions  again  


it is sufficient to consider a 1 x 1 x 1 	enlarged elements system of the subcubes  - 	the latter description obviously does prove the assertion  as the number of black and 
white subcubes are not equal. 
   an approach to this problem in  is one that we call  insight.  indeed  the solution of the problem there is introduced with the phrase:  imagine the cube to be made up of 1x1 cubes. give each such cube the coordinates i j k  1 i j k 1   in the usual way. color black the cubes whose coordinates add up to be an odd number; color the remaining cubes white.   it is interesting to note that quite similarly the  tough nut problem  in  from the very beginning is referred to as  the checkerboard -domino problem.   
   1. we saw that the received description does not always help one in decision making. moreover  does not always exists even one such invariant  simplified  description. as an example  consider the problem of building an array of squared cells as a sum of 
it is obvious that with such blocks one could not find a non-trivial invariant description of the array 

so in this way we unable to show that the array 

could not be presented as a sum of such blocks. 
   the last example is a case when local considerations do not permit one to get the  global answer.  bote  that in a l l examples used in this paper we used the idea of getting an invariant description in the btage of assignment of small number of names to different elements. of course  some other considerations like simmetry  could be used too. though these considerations are beyond of the scope of present paper  and w i l l be given somewhere else. 
   1. anticipating one of the possible questions concerning the last case  we w i l l give one example more* considering the following enlarged blocks 

with the same local approach we could achieve as an invariant description the chessboard coloring that shows that it is impossible to build from such blocks either of the two f o l lowing arrays; 

note on the  chessboard coloring  
   the following discussion is based mainly on the author's intuition  and is not vital to the rest of the paper. 
   previously we have mentioned that it is natural to think that it is the chessboard that gave us a hint of how to solve the tough nut problem1. we tried above to show that one could come to the idea of proper coloring from the purely local consideration in writing down the results of our actions 
while problem solving. 
   maybe it would be interesting to think a l i t t l e about why the chessboard was painted in the usual manner. 
   one can think that this coloring is not very necessary. indeed  in a l l modern chess playing computer programs 1 this black-and -white coloring usually appears only on a computer display for the convenience of human beings and it is not taken into account in the computer program itself  even though in chess theory there exists notions of  for example  the black-field bishop and white-field bishop. however  the black-field bishop always w i l l keep track of the black field even if it doesn't see the color! 
   below we w i l l give one of the possible considerations  explaining how such a coloring could follow again from the local consideration of reducing the number of different names used for the chessboard fields.  in computer programs we have 1 names for the cells. in common chess notation  used  for instance  in the ussr  each row is numbered  1 ... 1   and each column has a letter name  a b c d e f g h .  
   note f i r s t that the white player in chess has an advantage of one movei however  it would not be true to say that white usually wins. 
   we think that the reason for it lies in the fact that the first-move-advantage is partially compensated for by the i n i t i a l positioning of chess pieces  which is not perfectly symmetrical. the i n i t i a l position is only mirror simmetrical  the kings are opposite each other . the author discussed that hypothesis with an experienced chess player  who noticed that he felt that in a central symmetrical chess game the move of the white king pawn could almost surely lead to a win. unfortunately  at this time  we 
haven't any experimental verification of 
this supposition.  
   so  we beleive that we gave an unswer why in chess there is only mirror symmetry. 
   note  now that this mirror symmetry requires a certain convention on how each player should put his pieces on the chessboard. it is not difficult to see that for black-and-white boards this convention has the most simple form  allowing partners to put their pieces on the board independently  otherwise  we have to use more than two nameb for board cells    

   we are now going to consider the representation problem for quite a different area- that of traffic in the city. we w i l l see that the idea of using a small number of names for elements is applicable here too and that concrete assignment of the names could 
be again founded from local attemta to solve the problem  like positioning of a piece in tough nut  and a desire to get uniform description of our actions. the main difference from the previous problems we see in the fact that here  names  have quite an obvious physical interpretation. this makes the traffic problem more related to other problems of local control.1 
   in the last paragraph we will give a table of correspondence between the two classes of problems. 
   1. imagine a city with cars of two kinds- taxis and others  a taxicab that knows apri-
ori the exact location of demands  therefore for him there is no problem of search for a demand   will be considered to be a non-taxi. that is  in accordance with our definition  a free taxicab must bearch for demands and be ignorant of demand locations. we will consider below only this idealistic taxi problem. 
   the most detailed description for thib problem  analogous to that for the tough nut problem  is the case where all the carb in the city  taxi and non-taxi  have individual 
names  for instance   their registration numbers . 
   in the other extreme case  trivial description   all the cars are indistinguishable. limiting them to two to three names  let us think about their appropriate assignment. the action here is the choice of direction for a free taxi when it approaches a street crossing. let us consider one croee-street. locally  it is obvious that if one of the taxis has just left the place where it received a passenger and it comes across a free taxi  it is very important for the latter to learn  that the car he has just 
met is a taxi  and  that the taxi is occupied. so from this local consideration  it follows that for the choice of actions  direction  one might use the following names: 
* = non-taxi 
1 = free taxi 
1 = occupied taxi 
   taking into account these names  we could hope that the taxi might find a demand quicker than in a case of a blind search. it is only a heuristic idea  gained from purely local considerations  and it is not clear now whether it would work for the problem 
as a whole. 
   1. this problem was simulated on a sigma 1 computer of the university of washington. we will not present here the details of the program. as an example   downtown seattle was used  with appropriate   natural   locations of demand  figures near street crossings at the picture at the end of present paper . 
   the number of demands was i n i t i a l l y fixed and the total time for their f u l l satisfaction was computed  no new demands allowed . 
   the total time up to the moment of picking up the last passenger was calculated for different cases: 
a  all the cars in the city have the same name  *   each taxi moves in a purely random way . 
b  there are non-taxis  *  and taxis  each taxi moves in a direction from where it sees the minimal number of taxis . 
c. there are two namea: cars  *  and non-occupied taxis  1 .  taxis move in the direction from where they see the minimal number of free taxis.  
d. there three names: *  1  and 1.  taxi moves as in case c  but if there are ties  it goes in the direction of the maximum number of occupied taxis.  
i n i t i a l l y all the taxis were placed in a certain location in the city  marked 1 at the picture . in the following table we give the total time  in a fixed measuring system  for different numbers of taxicabs in the city. 
k a b c d 1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 
1 
1 thus we can see from the table that it is reasonable to use the names that we have gotten from purely local considerations  having in mind the global problem of minimization of total time required for fulfillment of a l l demands. 
　　1. perhaps it is appropriate to make several general remarks concerning this taxi problem itself. we are making use of the names of cars for local control of their movement around the city  but the very same names are convenient for passengers waiting for taxis. for this reason we have special signs on the care- taxi  free/occupied. such signs are different for different countries and even for different cities and companies. 
   in london  a taxi has a very special  ancient  shape  quite different from the shapes of other cars. in new york a taxi ie a bright yellow color. in seattle  washington  the color and means of showing whether or not e given taxi is free depends to a certain degree on the company  and there is no standart rule. how we can see that these signs could be important for taxi drivers themselves and therefore it may be desirable to standardise them. 
conclusion 
   the distinction between two classes of problems  considered in f i r s t and the third paragraphs of this paper  is an obvious one. the f i r s t covers exclusively problems of mathematics of combinatorial nature; the second-a  real-life problem.  below we give the correspondence between them. 
elements 
squares of a board 	cars 
 cubes hexagonals  
elementary actions 
positioning of choice of the direca piece tion for a car to go 
at a street crossing 
　　one name-trivial description it is of interest the only possible only for the simplest decision-a random problems  i.e. to pro- choice of the direc ve the impossibility tion-case a  the of covering with two largest total time . square dominos a board containing an odd 
number of squares . 
two or more karnes 
the local considerati- the thoughtful consions of positioning for deration of local a piece is used for situations and  phyassignment of the names sical hints  let us there are no  physical achieve a good assighints  for how to do nment for the names. i t   instead we have a we need not consider desire to get a uniform any  stupid  assigndescription of an ele- ment. though  in mentary action  inde- automatical problem pendent of the place solving considering on the board  invari- several possible lo-
ant . 	cal situations and 
requiring the uniform description for them  
we could automatically see that a l l of the busy cars should have the same name  which is different from names of free taxis.  eventually  
we have come to a uniform description in the sence that locally equivalent situations in different points of the city have the same description and the same choice of direction.  
acknowledgement 
   we wish to express our thanks to professor a.d.c.holden and professor m.damborg  university of washington  and to the members of electrical engineering and computer science 
departments. they were always ready to help during my research visit to the university. 
